%%%POLITICAL CONDITIONS|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|METOHIJA (SERBIA)|YUGOSLAVIA|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/646 5 June 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH LETTER DATED 5 JUNE 1999 FROM THE CHARGÉ D'AFFAIRES A.I. OF THE PERMANENT MISSION OF YUGOSLAVIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL I have the honour to forward, enclosed herewith, the letter of H.E. Zivadin Jovanovic, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, of 4 June 1999 (see annex) relative to the acceptance by the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Assembly of the Republic of Serbia of the Peace Plan presented by Martti Ahtisaari and Viktor Chernomyrdin addressed to you. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Vladislav JOVANOVIC Chargé d'affaires a.i. English Page Annex Letter dated 4 June 1999 from the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia addressed to the Secretary-General I wish to inform you that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Assembly of the Republic of Serbia accepted on 3 June 1999 the Peace Plan (principles) presented by Martti Ahtisaari, President of the Finnish Republic, representing the European Union and the United Nations, and Viktor Chernomyrdin, personal envoy of Boris Yeltsin, President of the Russian Federation. In doing so, the competent authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of the Republic of Serbia were guided by the goals of peace, putting an end to aggression, the plight of the civilian population and the destruction of natural resources, guaranteeing the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country, preventing terrorism and separatism and creating conditions for a safe return of refugees and displaced persons, as well as for a political solution in the Serbian province of Kosovo and Metohija on the basis of broad autonomy and equality of all citizens and national minorities. The Yugoslav constitutional authorities have been strongly motivated by the fact that the competence of the Security Council is being established by the acceptance of the Peace Plan, including the setting up of a United Nations mission in accordance with the Charter of the world Organization. This decision is yet another confirmation of the lasting commitment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia towards peace, stability and resolution of all problems by political means. I wish to express my conviction that this has created conditions and a need for regular contacts and cooperation between the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is fully open to this cooperation. The concretization of the principles of the just accepted Peace Plan calls, no doubt, for the participation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in these activities as well, in view of the fact that the process of the implementation of the United Nations Security Council resolution will take place in a part of its sovereign territory. We expect that in that sense our representatives will be enabled to present their views on the draft resolution, and that an appropriate agreement will be concluded later on between the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations, i.e., you, distinguished Mr. Secretary-General. I wish to reiterate also on this occasion that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as one of the founding Members of the United Nations, remains fully committed to the principles and universal values of the world Organization. (Signed) Zivadin JOVANOVIC 