%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|IRAQ|TERRORISM|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/673 12 June 1999 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: ARABIC LETTER DATED 12 JUNE 1999 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF IRAQ TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL On the instructions of my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of a letter dated 12 June 1999 addressed to you by Mr. Mohammad Saïd al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq, on the subject of the actions of the Iranian regime, which fired three long-range ground-to-ground missiles at the Khaless camp, where the Moujahidi Khalq organization is based, and which is situated in Iraqi territory (Diyali governorate). This aggression is the latest in a series of acts of terrorism which agents of the Iraqi regime have committed in Iraq, the most recent of which took place on 9 June 1999, when a car bomb exploded, killing several Iraqis and six members of the Moujahidi Khalq organization. In view of these incidents, Iraq calls on you to fulfil your responsibilities with regard to the attacks suffered by Iraq. I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a Security Council document. (Signed) Saïd H. HASAN Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page Annex Letter dated 12 June 1999 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to inform you that on 10 June 1999, at 8.46 p.m., the Iranian regime fired three long-range ground-to-ground missiles at the Khaless camp, where the Moujahidi Khalq organization is based, and which is situated in Iraqi territory (Diyali governorate). This cowardly and perfidious aggression is the latest in a series of acts of criminal terrorism which agents of the Iranian regime have committed in Iraq, the most recent of which took place on 9 June 1999, when a car bomb exploded, killing several innocent Iraqis and six members of the Moujahidi Khalq organization. This aggression shows that there has been an aggravation of the situation which is a threat to the sincere efforts being made by Iraq to establish good-neighbourly relations based on mutual respect for sovereignty. This act is not unlike the ill-advised actions regularly carried out by the Iranian regime 19 years ago which led to the outbreak of war between the two countries. Moreover, it reveals the lies put out by Tehran, which pretends to want dialogue and peace with Iraq. In reality, the Iranian regime prefers to resort to aggression rather than following up Iraq's friendly initiatives aimed at establishing good-neighbourly relations between the two neighbouring countries and their peoples. This new act of Iranian aggression seriously undermines the position of the Security Council which, according to its resolutions, is supposed to safeguard the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. It also reveals the attitude of the Council, which is seeking to deprive Iraq of all means of defence which would enable it to protect its security and sovereignty against the aggressors which are threatening it. Iraq therefore calls on the United Nations to fulfil its obligations under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, failing which it will be deemed that the Council has not respected its commitments. I call on you to fulfil your responsibilities by condemning the Iranian aggression, and then by putting pressure on Iran to stop its aggression against Iraq and respect the rules of good neighbourliness and the principles of international law. I wish to reaffirm that Iraq, despite the iniquitous embargo and the no-fly zones illegally imposed in the north and south of the country, reserves the right to use its own means of defence throughout its territory, including its air space, in order to protect its sovereignty and its security against any violation or aggression. Iraq also reserves the legitimate right to demand compensation for all the damage it has suffered because of the brutal aggression referred to above. I should be grateful if you would arrange to have the text of this letter circulated as a Security Council document. (Signed) Mohammad Saïd al-Sahaf Minister for Foreign Affairs Republic of Iraq 