%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|ARMED INCIDENTS|CIVILIAN PERSONS|SERBS|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|METOHIJA (SERBIA)|YUGOSLAVIA|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/729 28 June 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH LETTER DATED 28 JUNE 1999 FROM THE CHARGÉ D'AFFAIRES A.I. OF THE PERMANENT MISSION OF YUGOSLAVIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL I have the honour to forward herewith a letter dated 28 June 1999 from Zivadin Jovanovic, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, relative to the most recent developments in the situation in Kosovo and Metohija, the autonomous province of the Yugoslav constituent Republic of Serbia (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Vladislav JOVANOVIC Chargé d'affaires a.i. English Page Annex Letter dated 28 June 1999 from the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security Council The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has, in good faith and in accordance with the established timetable, implemented consistently all its obligations so far provided by Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the accompanying documents. The representatives of the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Government of the Republic of Serbia have established and maintain regular contacts and daily communication with the highest representatives of the civilian and security presences under United Nations auspices, namely with the Special Representative ad interim of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the KFOR Commander. We wish that cooperation to be further promoted with mutual respect since we are convinced that it is an unavoidable precondition for a successful realization of the goals of the Security Council resolution and for the creation of conditions for a lasting political solution in the province of Kosovo and Metohija on the basis of broad autonomy and equality of all citizens and national communities. According to the said Security Council resolution (S/1999/682, paras. 9 (c) and (d)) and the military-technical agreement (art. 1, para. 2), on the day of the withdrawal of the Yugoslav forces, the responsibility for ensuring safety and protection to all citizens, for maintaining public peace and order and for establishing and maintaining a secure environment in the province was taken by the international security presence under United Nations auspices, namely, KFOR. In the realization of this obligation established in the Security Council resolution, there have occurred, in the period since the taking of the responsibility by KFOR, a serious deterioration of the security situation in the province and a massive violation of the basic human rights of the non-Albanian population, primarily the Serbs, while their safety, life and property have been threatened by the members of the so-called "KLA" and other Albanian criminal groups. Contrary to the agreements reached during the negotiation process and contained in Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) (para. 9 (g)), KFOR has failed to close, and establish full control over, the parts of the international border of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia towards Albania and Macedonia. This has enabled massive uncontrolled inroads by armed terrorists of the so-called "KLA", members of the regular military forces of the Republic of Albania and criminal marauding gangs, as well as a massive influx into the country of persons who are not Yugoslav citizens. This has resulted in an abrupt deterioration of the security situation, daily killings and abductions of peaceful citizens and a dramatic increase in all forms of crime. Security problems and an atmosphere of the non-Albanian population being seriously threatened have continued because of an unnecessary prolongation of direct implementation of the obligations on demilitarization and disarmament of the so-called "KLA" and all "other armed Kosovo Albanian groups", as provided for in paragraphs 9 (b) and 15 of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The uneven, preponderantly tolerant attitude of KFOR towards the members of the so-called "KLA" and a protracted absence of clear political directives to commanders have resulted in practice in encouragement to violence, terrorist acts and massive repression of the non-Albanian population. Dozens of Serbs have been killed and abducted. The number of abducted persons whose fate is unknown continues to rise. Private and State properties are threatened, home and apartment owners are evicted en masse by force and threats, houses and entire villages are burned, cultural and religious monuments are destroyed like the vandal devastation and torching of the Serbian medieval monasteries of St. Trinity of 1315, Devic of 1434 and others. A particularly heavy blow to the efforts to stop negative trends have been the violence against the hospital centre in Pristina and the maltreatment and expulsion of its professional management, doctors and medical staff. In addition to causing a deterioration of the security situation, such violence of the so-called "KLA" threatens the normal provision of health protection to citizens in Kosovo and Metohija. All of this has been confirmed by many eyewitnesses, reports of international humanitarian organizations, as well as many world media. The ultimate goal of the ongoing violence, intimidation and creation of an atmosphere of general threat is to complete the ethnic cleansing of the province from the Serbs and the non-Albanian population in general. This is born out by the fact that over 100,000 Serbs and other non-Albanian citizens were expelled from Kosovo and Metohija in the period from 12 to 27 June. A series of larger cities were completely ethnically cleansed in only a matter of days, notwithstanding the presence of KFOR. Thus, the remaining 5,500 Serbs have been expelled from Djakovica; 17,000 Serbs and about 9,000 Turks and Romas from Prizren; 10,000 Serbs from Urosevac; 10,000 from Suva Reka; 15,000 from Orahovac; 15,000 from Istok; 17,000 from Klina; 1,500 from Decani; 2,000 from Stimlje; 1,800 from Srbica; and so on. Bearing in mind the aforementioned, as well as the chronology of events registered in the annex to the present letter, the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia recalls the primary responsibility of the Security Council for the overall situation in Kosovo and Metohija, guarantees of safety and equality to all citizens, creation of conditions for a peaceful and democratic political solution, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and calls on the Security Council to: (a) Consider urgently the development of the situation in Kosovo and Metohija following the taking over of the responsibility by KFOR and the United Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and condemn, in the strongest terms, terrorism, violence and massive threats to human rights, in particular of the non-Albanian part of the population by the members of the so-called "KLA" and criminal Albanian gangs; (b) Demand that KFOR and UNMIK take energetic and efficient measures forthwith to eliminate all further violence, threats to the security of person and property of citizens, in other words establish full respect for public peace and order with immediate and complete demilitarization and disarmament of the so-called "KLA" and all "other armed Kosovo Albanian groups", as provided for in paragraphs 9 (b), (c) and (d) of Security Council resolution 1244; (c) Order, in the interest of legal security, an immediate restitutio in integrum and the rescission of all cases of illegal usurpations of private and State properties, illegal dismissals and illegal employment by the use of force and intimidation; (d) Emphasize the importance of respect for the essence of the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the further process of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), particularly with respect to the establishment of the interim and transitional administration in Kosovo and Metohija (para. 10), which includes respect for the unity of legal, economic and monetary systems, as well as the right of Yugoslav authorities to control the Yugoslav international borders and the functioning of Yugoslav services at border crossings (visa/passport, immigration, health, anti-drug control); (e) Call for the realization of the agreement on the return of a certain number of members of Yugoslav and Serbian personnel to perform liaison with the civilian and security presences, maintain a presence at Serb patrimonial sites and at border crossings and carry out other tasks in accordance with annex 2, paragraph 6, to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999); (f) Establish, in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Yugoslav authorities, the framework of cooperation and procedures relative to a free and safe return of all refugees and displaced citizens of Kosovo and Metohija irrespective of their nationality and present temporary place of abode. Attaching importance to cooperation with the United Nations and its agencies as an essential precondition both for the solution of the present problems and for a successful implementation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the accompanying documents, we consider that it is necessary to conclude between the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations an appropriate agreement on cooperation and the status of the international presences in Kosovo and Metohija. (Signed) Zivadin JOVANOVIC Enclosure An overview of terrorist and other acts of violence in the provinces of Kosovo and Metohija from 12 to 27 June 1999 