%%%BORDER INCIDENTS|PAKISTAN|AFGHANISTAN|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|AFGHANISTAN SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/838 2 August 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH IDENTICAL LETTERS DATED 1 AUGUST 1999 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF AFGHANISTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL AND TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to forward herewith a letter dated 1 August 1999 from Professor Burhanuddin Rabbani, President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Dr. A. G. Ravan FARHÂDI Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page Annex Identical letters dated 1 August 1999 from the President of Afghanistan addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council The Islamic State of Afghanistan has made it its earnest priority to keep you and the United Nations Security Council and General Assembly constantly informed about the development of the situation in Afghanistan. Despite the widely publicized habit of labelling the battles after the establishment of the Islamic State of Afghanistan as a civil war, it can be attested on clear evidence that these wars were staged by the short-sighted and injudicious leaders of Pakistan, as the prime factors and instigators of instability in both Central and South Asia, who, in collaboration with backward and obscurantist elements, pursued their expansionist objectives in Afghanistan. To our dismay, the international community, throughout this period, with regards to the cessation of foreign aggression in Afghanistan, did not resort to any beneficial or constructive measures, except to call upon the parties to the conflict to show restraint. As is clear to all, interventionist sources did not stop at only supplying funds and military hardware to the quisling groups, but they also engaged in unabated dispatch of their trained fighters into Afghanistan. Members of the so-called "Islamic" extremist groups are continuously recruited, trained, armed and dispatched along with Pakistani military personnel into Afghanistan. The continued assembling, training and arming of these mercenary groups and international terrorists pose paramount threats to regional as well as international peace and stability, concerns which we have continuously conveyed to the United Nations and the international community. Once again, on Wednesday, 28 July 1999, thousands of these fighters assaulted the provinces of Parwan and Kapisa and engaged in murdering local populations and forcing them out of their homes. The latest statements by your Special Envoy to Afghanistan, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to the media about the presence of thousands of Pakistanis, Arabs and other nationals battling the armed forces of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, as well as first-hand accounts by journalists, including those from Pakistan, are crystal clear manifestations of foreign involvement in Afghanistan. One clear omission by the Special Envoy, for some special consideration, may have been the admission of the active involvement of Pakistani military personnel in this war of aggression against Afghanistan. In the past, such aggressions have been attributed to armed Pakistanis "volunteering" to the battlefronts of Afghanistan, but such a misnomer no longer bears credence. How is it that armed Pakistani and Kashmiri fighters, religiously or nationalistically motivated to fight for Kashmir, should, incidentally, upon a decree by the Pakistani Prime Minister asking them to abandon their bases, despite their initial loss of life for the capture of positions in the Kargil area, evacuate their bases and embark upon the battlefronts in Afghanistan? It is our conviction that this incident warrants the truth that such "volunteers" are not members of any array of disorganized groups, but contingents of an organized army, who, under the order of their officers and centres of command, turn whichever way they are directed to. An added dimension to the latest military assault is the humanitarian aspect whose prognosis entails serious predicaments. The inhabitants of the city of Charikar, the town of Qarabagh and other districts of the Provinces of Parwan and Kapisa - still with bitter memories of the forced deportation from their homes by the Taliban during the harsh winter of 1996 - in the face of this attack, with utmost urgency and without carrying with them most vital necessities, are headed towards Panjsher by the thousands to escape brutal treatment by the Taliban and foreign nationals. In this respect, your attention is drawn to the immediate need of relief supplies, tents and food, particularly as the Panjsher Valley itself is in short supply of food. It is our earnest expectation that, in full compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and the accepted principles regarding friendly relations between States, the issue of Pakistani aggression in Afghanistan, based on its relevancy to Chapter VII of the Charter and Articles 39 to 42, shall be immediately addressed by the Security Council, determining Pakistan to be an aggressor and adopting serious measures against it. As has been amply seen from past examples in numerous parts of the world, any appeasement towards such aggression may not only discredit the United Nations, but rather further encourage the aggressor. (Signed) Burhanuddin RABBANI President Islamic State of Afghanistan 