%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|LIBERIA|GUINEA|BORDER INCIDENTS|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/992 20 September 1999 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: FRENCH LETTER DATED 20 SEPTEMBER 1999 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF TOGO TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the Declaration signed in Abuja, Nigeria, on 16 September 1999 at the conclusion of the meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee of Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on the situation prevailing at the border zone between Guinea and Liberia (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Roland Y. KPOTSRA English Page Annex Declaration of the Ad Hoc Committee of Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), signed at Abuja, Nigeria, on 16 September 1999 1. We, the Heads of State and Government, meeting as an Ad Hoc Committee of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at Abuja, on 16 September 1999, under the chairmanship of His Excellency, General Gnassingbe Eyadema, President of the Togolese Republic and current Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States, considered important issues relating to regional peace and security, particularly the situation prevailing at the border zone between Guinea and Liberia. 2. We, Heads of State and Government, after taking note of the report of President Olusegun Obasanjo of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, in which he referred to the outcome of the meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee of Ministers of Foreign Affairs on Liberia which was held in Lomé on 26 August 1999, and after listening to the statements of Their Excellencies, the Heads of State of Guinea and Liberia, exchanged views on relations between the two sister countries. 3. We strongly condemn the attacks on Liberia and Guinea, which threaten the peace and security of both countries and which could destabilize the region as well as mar the relations of good neighbourliness existing between the two ECOWAS Member States. 4. We demand that the armed groups desist forthwith from further criminal activities against Liberia and Guinea. In this regard, we recall the provisions of the ECOWAS Protocol on Mutual Assistance on Defence matters and agree that no ECOWAS Member State should give the armed groups any support. 5. We, Heads of State and Government, express our determination to work towards the immediate establishment of good neighbourliness which is needed for the consolidation of peace, security and trust between Guinea and Liberia. In this respect, we agree as follows: - The three countries of the Mano River Union, namely Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, shall exchange among themselves the list of persons suspected of involvement in subversive activities against their respective countries, with a view to their expulsion in accordance with the Mano River Union Treaty; - The three member countries of the Union shall establish a Joint Security Committee to monitor and ensure the security of their common borders in line with the provisions of the Mano River Union security pact; - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone shall reactivate the Mano River Union with the participation of the ECOWAS secretariat as an observer. In this regard, the three Heads of State agreed to hold their summit in Freetown during the first week of November 1999; - The Heads of State of Guinea and Liberia shall establish early a direct line of communication between them to facilitate regular consultation. 6. We note, with satisfaction, the solemn undertaking by Their Excellencies Lansana Conte and Charles Taylor to embrace good neighbourliness and non-aggression as these will enhance regional peace and security. This conforms with the relevant provisions of the ECOWAS Treaty and the Protocol on Non-Aggression signed in Lagos on 22 April 1978. 7. We express sincere appreciation for the role played by the Republics of Guinea and Liberia in hosting refugees and other displaced persons as a result of the conflicts within the region. We call on the refugees to comply with the laws of their host countries, and to refrain from any subversive activities. We also appeal to the international community to give the Republics of Guinea and Liberia all the necessary assistance to enable it to cope with the problems of the refugees. 8. We appeal to the international community to assist Liberia and Guinea to address the humanitarian crisis created as a result of the attack by the dissidents. 9. We express satisfaction at the adoption of the ECOWAS Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Regional Security during the twenty-first ordinary session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government, held in Abuja on 30 and 31 October 1998, and direct the Executive Secretary to continue the efforts aimed at ensuring its speedy implementation. In this regard, we express gratitude to the European Union for the financial assistance granted to ECOWAS for the implementation of this regional mechanism. 10. We, Heads of State and Government, express our deep gratitude to His Excellency Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, to the Government and people of Nigeria, for the brotherly welcome extended to us and for the excellent facilities made available during our stay in Abuja. We wish His Excellency President Obasanjo a very successful tenure of office. In faith whereof, we Heads of State of the Ad Hoc Committee have signed this Declaration. Done at Abuja, this 16th day of September 1999. (Signed) H.E. Blaise COMPAORÉ President of FASO, President of Burkina Faso Council of Ministers (Signed) H.E. Lansana CONTÉ President of the Republic of Guinea (Signed) H.E. Charles G. TAYLOR President of the Republic of Liberia (Signed) H.E. Olusegun OBASANJO President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (Signed) H.E. Alhaji (Dr.) Ahmad Tejan KABBAH President of the Republic of Sierra Leone (Signed) H.E. Gnassingbe EYADÉMA President of the Togolese Republic (Signed) Hon. Bandana N'GATTA Minister of Defence, representing H.E. Konan BEDIE, President of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (Signed) Hon. Mohammed Ibn CHAMBAS Deputy Minister for Education, representing H.E. Flt. Lt. Jerry John RAWLINGS, President of the Republic of Ghana 