%%%WAR DAMAGE COMPENSATION|IRAQ|CLAIMS|PAYMENTS ARRANGEMENTS|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

S/AC.26/Dec.68 (1999) Page UNITED NATIONS S Security Council Distr. GENERAL 24 June 1999 Original: ENGLISH UNITED NATIONS COMPENSATION COMMISSION GOVERNING COUNCIL Decision Concerning the Third Instalment of Individual Claims for Damages Above US$100,000 (Category “D" Claims) taken by the Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission at its 88th meeting, held on 24 June 1999 at Geneva The Governing Council, Having received, in accordance with article 38 of the Provisional Rules for Claims Procedure, the Report and recommendations made by the Panel of Commissioners concerning the third instalment of individual claims for damages above US$100,000 (category “D” claims), covering four hundred and forty claims, The text of the report appears in document S/AC.26/1999/9. In conformity with the provisions on confidentiality in the Provisional Rules for Claims Procedure (article 30, paragraph 1, and article 40, paragraph 5), a table containing the breakdown of the amounts to be paid to each individual claimant will not be made public, but will be provided to each respective Government and individual organization seperately. GE.99-62845 1. Approves the recommendations made by the Panel of Commissioners, and, accordingly, 2. Decides, pursuant to article 40 of the Rules, to approve the amounts of the recommended awards concerning the claims covered in the report. The aggregate amounts per country or international organization, as noted in the annex to the report, are as follows: Country or international organization Number of claims recommended for payment Number of claims not recommended for payment Amount of compensation claimed (US$) Amount of compensation recommended (US$) Australia Canada Egypt nil France Germany Hungary Iceland Ireland India Israel Italy Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Philippines Pakistan Sudan Sweden Syria United Kingdom United States UNPD (Washington) UNRWA (Gaza) Total 3. Reaffirms that when funds become available payments shall be made in accordance with the decisions of the Governing Council concerning the priority of payment and payment mechanisms, 4. Recalls that when payments are made, Governments and international organizations shall, pursuant to the terms of decision 18 [S/AC.26/Dec.18 (1994)], distribute amounts received to the designated claimants in respect of approved awards within six months of receiving payment, and shall, not later than three months after the expiration of this time limit, provide information on such distribution, 5. Notes that no recommendations have been made at this stage for eight claims referred to in the annex of the report, 6. Requests the Executive Secretary to provide a copy of the report to the Secretary-General, to the Government of the Republic of Iraq and copies of the report and the tables containing the amounts to be paid to each individual claimant to each respective Government and international organization. 