%%%PEACEBUILDING|SPECIAL MISSIONS|ASBESTOS|HEALTH HAZARDS|EXTRABUDGETARY FINANCING|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|SPECIAL ACCOUNTS|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|RESPIRATORY DISEASES|DEVELOPMENT FINANCE|CONFERENCES|COSTS|

Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 121 Programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001 Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Jan Piotr Jaremczuk (Poland) I. Introduction 1. The previous recommendations made by the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly under agenda item 121 appear in the report of the Committee contained in document A/54/691. 2. The Fifth Committee resumed its consideration of the item at its 55th, 56th and 58th meetings, on 27, 28 and 31 March 2000. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.5/54/SR.55, 56 and 58). 3. For its further consideration of the item the Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the review and assessment of the asbestos problem of the United Nations (A/54/7/Add.12); (b) Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the review of resources requirements for the High-Level Intergovernmental Event for Financing for Development and the third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries (A/54/7/Add.13); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on the review assessment and management of the asbestos problem at United Nations Headquarters (A/54/779); (d) Report of the Secretary-General on the review of the resource requirements for the High-Level Intergovernmental Event for Financing for Development and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries (A/C.5/54/50); (e) Report of the Secretary-General on estimates pertaining to matters of which the Security Council is seized (A/C.5/54/52); (f) Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on estimates pertaining to matters of which the Security Council is seized. II. Consideration of proposals 4. At its 55th meeting, on 27 March, the Chairman of the Committee proposed an oral draft decision entitled "Asbestos problem at the United Nations Headquarters building", which the Committee adopted without a vote (see para. 10, draft decision I). 5. At its 56th meeting, on 28 March, the Chairman of the Committee proposed an oral draft decision entitled "Estimates pertaining to matters of which the Security Council is seized", which the Committee adopted without a vote (see para. 10, draft decision II). 6. At its 58th meeting, on 31 March, the representative of Cuba, Vice-Chairman of the Committee and coordinator of informal consultations on this question, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Review of the resource requirements for the High-Level Intergovernmental Event for Financing for Development and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries"(A/C.5/54/L.49). 7. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/54/L.49 without a vote (see para. 9). 8. Following the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of Italy made a statement (see A/C.5/54/SR.58). III. Recommendations of the Fifth Committee 9. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Review of the resource requirements for the High-Level Intergovernmental Event for Financing for Development and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the review of resource requirements for the High-level Intergovernmental Event for Financing for Development and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General2 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;3 2. Reiterates the provisions of section VI of its resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990, in which it reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with the responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters and also reaffirmed the role of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 3. Reaffirms section XIV of its resolution 54/251 of 23 December 1999, in which it decided that the special account would be maintained and the unspent balance retained until all activities and programmes outlined in the report of the Secretary-General of 13 May 1998 and approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 53/3 of 12 October 1998 were completed; 4. Notes with concern that no extrabudgetary resources have been received to date in response to the note verbale addressed to all States members of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on 14 February 2000, inviting them to consider providing, through voluntary contributions, resources to defray the costs of participation of government representatives in the meetings of the preparatory committee and the Conference itself; 5. Decides to request the Secretary-General to explore ways of providing the resource requirements for the High-level Intergovernmental Event for Financing for Development and the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and to report to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed fifty-fourth session. 10. The Fifth Committee also recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decisions: Draft decision I Asbestos problem at the United Nations Headquarters building Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the review assessment and management of the asbestos problem at United Nations Headquarters (A/54/779), and endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraph 8 of its related report (A/54/7/Add.12). Draft decision II Estimates pertaining to matters of which the Security Council is seized (a) Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on estimates pertaining to matters of which the Security Council is seized (A/C.5/54/52) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; (b) Approves the charge of total requirements of $6,154,600 United States dollars for the United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the Central African Republic against the provision for special political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001; (c) Notes that, following this decision, the utilization of the provision for special political missions amounts to $61,517,700 and that an unallocated balance of $28,869,500 remains against the provision of $90,387,200 for special political missions. 