%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|HAITI|HAITI QUESTION|

Fifty-fourth session Agenda items 48 and 121 The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001 Letter dated 31 March 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the General Assembly The International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti (MICAH) was launched on 16 March 2000 in accordance with the decision of the General Assembly last December. This decision was in keeping with the expressed wishes of Member States to continue to assist the Haitian people in their goal of attaining development and democracy. I endorsed this approach in my recent report to the Security Council on the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (S/2000/150 of 25 February 2000). As you are aware, it was decided that MICAH would be funded both from the regular budget ($9.2 million) and from voluntary contributions ($14.7 million). Regular budgetary resources cover MICAH core staff as well as administrative personnel. However, substantive positions in the three pillars -- justice, human rights and police -- were to be covered by voluntary contributions. A Canadian donation of some $600,000 is anticipated shortly. In addition, the United States of America has contributed $1.9 million earmarked for helicopter service. The General Assembly requested me to report should the extrabudgetary resources for the Mission become insufficient. I wish to report that to date, no contribution has been received for the MICAH Trust Fund. As a result, MICAH began its mandate on 16 March 2000 with only core staff in the mission area. Without substantive staff, the mandate entrusted by the General Assembly cannot be fulfilled. In the light of the lack of financial resources for MICAH, the Assembly may wish to consider whether, instead of preserving a presence in Haiti which has only core staff and is unable to carry out the envisaged activities in the areas of justice, human rights and police, the Mission be closed and its substantive activities be transferred to the United Nations Development Programme. More generally, I should like to note the increasing tendency of late for the Organization to be given mandates without the necessary financial resources also being provided. I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the members of the General Assembly. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan 