%%%SUPPORT ACCOUNTS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|STAFFING|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|COSTS|RAPID DEPLOYMENT FORCES|

Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 151 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Support account for peacekeeping operations Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 1. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions has considered the report of the Secretary-General of 15 March 2000 on the financial performance of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999 (A/54/797). The Committee has also considered the report of the Secretary-General of 17 March 2000 on the estimated requirements for the support account for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001 (A/54/800). During its consideration of both reports, the Committee met with the representatives of the Secretary-General, who provided additional information and clarification. A. Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999 2. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolution 52/248 of 26 June 1999, authorized an amount of $34,400,000 million for post (a total staffing establishment of 400 posts) and non-post requirements for the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999. The expenditures for that period amounted to $32,821,600, resulting in an unutilized balance of $1,578,400. As indicated in paragraph 19 of the performance report (A/54/797), the unutilized balance is largely the result of savings under staff costs arising from the higher rate of post vacancy (13 per cent) than budgeted (5 per cent) and from variances between standard costs and actual costs experienced. The Committee was informed that the post vacancy was a result, in part, of the transition from gratis personnel to established posts and of the fact that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had experienced constant turnover of staff to peacekeeping missions. 3. The Advisory Committee notes the improvement in the presentation of the performance report and welcomes the description of the activities, developments and improvements related to the backstopping of peacekeeping operations that took place during the period under review, as contained in paragraphs 3 to 16 of the performance document (A/54/797). The Committee requests, however, that the reasons for the budget variances, provided in annex II to that report, be given in a consistent manner and that, to that end, monitoring of budget performance be refined with a view to identifying more accurately the causes of such budget changes. 4. The Advisory Committee was provided with information with regard to training assistance requested and provided for the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999, as well as that regarding requests that the training unit was unable to carry out (see annex I to the present report). The Committee is of the view that precise information regarding training activities should be included in future performance reports, along with the reasons for not being able to comply positively with Member States' requests. 5. The action to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the performance report (A/54/797) is indicated in paragraph 21 of that report. The Committee recommends that the unencumbered balance of $1,578,400, interest income of $597,000 and miscellaneous income of $4,000, for the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999, be applied to the resources required for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001. B. Cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001 6. The Secretary-General estimates support account resources for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001 at $51,736,600 gross ($44,189,100 net), which would provide for the staffing of 471 temporary posts, reflecting a proposed increase of 4 posts compared with the current staffing table. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolution 53/12 B of 8 June 1999, approved 400 temporary posts funded under the support account for the period 1 July 1999 to 30 June 2000 and that, in its resolution 54/243 of 23 December 1999, it approved an additional 67 posts in view of the increased backstopping requirements resulting from the recent upsurge in peacekeeping activities. 7. The Advisory Committee notes from table 2 of document A/54/800 that the amount proposed, in gross terms, represents an increase of $13,347,900 (an increase of $5,800,400 in net terms) over the amount approved for the period from 1 July 1999 to 30 June 2000 of $38,388,700 gross. Most of the increase is due to the first-time provision for staff assessment, in line with the recommendation made in paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee of 1 April 1999 (A/53/895/Add.8), the 12-month costing of the additional 67 posts approved in General Assembly resolution 54/243, the provision for 4 new posts over the current 467 authorized and provision for general temporary assistance. In this regard, the Committee also notes that of the non-post costs proposed of $4,971,300, an amount of $1,185,500 is estimated for general temporary assistance (see paras. 14-18 below). 8. As indicated in paragraph 51 of the budget document (A/54/800), the level of resources proposed takes into account, among other matters, the two new peacekeeping operations established in June and October 1999, the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET); in addition to the expansion of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) into the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA), as well as the establishment of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). 9. Paragraph 50 indicates a number of administrative and budgetary issues that the Secretariat intends to address related to the backstopping of peacekeeping operations at Headquarters, focusing on a comprehensive review of the Standard Cost Manual for Peacekeeping Operations, development of standardized inventory reports, review of the start-up kit concept of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and review of the distribution of functional responsibilities between Headquarters and the field. The Advisory Committee welcomes this initiative and trusts that its observations and recommendations, contained in its omnibus report on the financing of peacekeeping operations (A/54/841), as they may be approved by the General Assembly, would be taken into account. 10. The Advisory Committee notes that the budget level for all peacekeeping operations increased from an initial estimate of $650 million, at the time of submission of the proposed estimates for the current period (1 July 1999-30 June 2000) in March 1999, to some $1,400 million by December 1999, and that for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001, it is expected to exceed $2,000 million. 11. As indicated in paragraph 6 above, the Secretary-General is proposing 471 posts; 4 posts over and above the 467 authorized for the current period. The four new posts are proposed for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and include one P-5 post and one General Service post for the Rapid Deployment Management Unit and one P-3 post and one General Service post for the Training Unit. The Committee recommends acceptance of the proposal to establish the two new posts in the Training Unit. The comments and observations of the Committee in this regard are contained in paragraph 20 below. As to the two additional posts for the Rapid Deployment Management Unit, the comments and observations of the Committee are contained in paragraph 25 below. 12. The Secretary-General is proposing, in paragraphs 86 and 87 of the budget document (A/54/800), to reclassify the D-1 regular budget post of the Director for the Europe and Latin America Division of the Office of Operations. The Advisory Committee regards this submission as irregular and recommends that it be resubmitted in the context of the next proposed programme budget. 13. The Advisory Committee notes that a vacancy turnover factor of 6.5 per cent for Professional staff and 2.5 per cent for General Service staff has been applied in the costing exercise, similar to the rates applied in the regular budget. As regards current incumbency, the Committee was informed upon enquiry that, at 15 March 2000, the vacancy rate was 20.5 per cent for Professional staff and 3.5 per cent for General Service staff. The Committee requests that future submissions provide information on the number of vacant posts where candidates have been identified and are awaiting recruitment. The Committee recommends that, in view of past experience (see para. 2 above), a more realistic vacancy rate factor of 8 per cent for Professional staff be applied to the costing exercise. As a consequence, the estimates could be reduced by $590,300. 14. The Advisory Committee recalls that it recommended the approval of the additional 67 posts requested by the Secretary-General in December 1999 to provide backstopping capacity in view of the new and expanded missions. However, the Committee notes that in addition to the four new posts requested, the budget proposed for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001 includes a considerable increase in additional staff resources in the form of general temporary assistance without full justification in terms of workload analysis. Under the circumstances, accurate workload data and analysis are essential. In this connection, the Committee notes that the workload data in the budget document is not analysed in terms of resource allocation and proposed resources. The Committee has made reference to this need in past reports, in particular documents A/51/906 and Corr.1 and A/54/661. The Committee remains convinced that there is a need to better analyse the implication of raw workload data to identify bottlenecks and other management issues that need to be addressed either by existing or proposed resources. Such analysis would provide a better basis for the Secretary-General's proposals for the support account. 15. As indicated in paragraph 7 above, an amount of $1,185,500, reflecting an increase of $903,000 over the approved resources for 1999/00, is proposed under general temporary assistance. Of the total request, an amount of $569,400 is for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, reflecting an increase of $469,400 over the approved resources for 1999/00. Justification is provided in paragraphs 115 to 117 of document A/54/800. The Advisory Committee notes, however, that at least some of the tasks to be performed using general temporary assistance in the Personnel Management and Support Service were also covered in paragraphs 40 to 44 of document A/54/648; those to be performed with general temporary assistance in the Logistics and Communication Service, were also covered, at least in part, in paragraphs 32 to 34 of the same document. In view of the above, the Committee is of the opinion that full use should be made of the additional capacity, as recommended in document A/54/661 and approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/243, before requesting such a considerable increase for additional staff resources. 16. The Advisory Committee was provided, in response to its enquiry, with information regarding the status of the 67 additional posts, authorized in General Assembly resolution 54/243 (see annex II to the present report). The Committee notes that of the 60 additional posts authorized for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as of March 2000, 47 posts were encumbered, 5 were under recruitment and 8 were still vacant. 17. Taking into account the information in paragraphs 15 and 16 above, the Advisory Committee recommends an increase of $230,000, instead of $469,400, over the 1999/00 authorized general temporary assistance resources of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Total general temporary assistance resources for the Department would therefore amount to $330,000, instead of $569,400. 18. The proposed resources under general temporary assistance for the Department of Management amount to $616,100, reflecting an increase of $433,600 over the resources authorized for 1999/00. Justification is provided in paragraph 179 of document A/54/800. Of the total proposed, $143,000 would be utilized by the Medical Services Division, to deal with the backlog of claims relating to incidents of death and disability. The Advisory Committee has no objection to this request. However, the Committee notes that $417,100 is requested for the Accounts Division to meet surge requirements in its Peacekeeping Section. The Committee recalls that an amount of $159,000 was provided to the Accounts Division to deal with the backlog on inter-office vouchers and bank reconciliations for 1998/99. Since the backlog was addressed, there was no provision under the current period, 1999/00, yet the Committee was informed that unexpected needs for general temporary assistance were being met through redeployment. The Committee notes that of a total of 153 staff in the Accounts Division, 18 are funded from the support account. The Committee is of the view that the closure of missions should provide some room to accommodate new mission workload and recommends that the provision for general temporary assistance for the Account Division be reduced to $210,000. 19. A provision for $1,752,900 is indicated in paragraph 182 of the document A/54/800, for the rental of premises based on 2000/01 standard common services costs. The additional information requested by the Committee, in this regard, is provided in annex III to the present report. The Advisory Committee requests that an assessment be made of the space requirements (including space allocation) of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, taking into account the additional posts provided pursuant to resolution 54/243, and that remedial action, if necessary, be taken as soon as possible. 20. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in paragraphs 15 and 16 of its resolution 53/12 B, noting with concern the reduction of the level of resources for the Training Unit, which might affect its capacity to perform its functions, requested the Secretary-General to examine further the requirements of the Training Unit and to include the results of that review in the next support account budget proposal. As indicated in paragraph 11 above, an additional P-3 post and a General Service post are requested for the period for 2000/01, increasing total staff of the Unit to eight posts (five Professional posts and three General Service posts). The Committee also notes, as indicated in table 4 of document A/54/800, that an amount of $389,000 is indicated for training and the related activities are further explained in paragraph 121 (a) to (g) of the same document. An amount of $400,000 was allocated for training in 1998/99, indicated as expenditure in table 1 of the performance report (A/54/797). However, there is no performance information included in that regard. For 1999/00, an amount of $337,500 was allocated for this purpose. The Committee recommends acceptance of the amount requested by the Secretary-General for training activities, as well as the additional staff resources proposed, as indicated in paragraph 11 above. The Committee requests that future submissions provide performance information on training activities, as indicated in paragraph 4 above. 21. The Advisory Committee notes that no changes are proposed at the current time for the structure of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The Committee was informed that not enough time had elapsed since the changes indicated in the context of the previous year's budget submission reported by the Committee in paragraphs 11 and 12 of its report (A/53/901). The Committee requested information on the allocation of responsibilities between the Department of Management and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as regards human resource management matters. The information provided to the Committee is contained in annex IV to the present report. The Committee urges cooperation and coordination between the two departments, especially as concerns posts for new or expanding missions. 22. The Advisory Committee recalls the observations made in paragraph 12 of document A/53/901, in which it recommended careful monitoring of the changes concerning military and civilian police functions. In this regard, the Committee was assured that considerable autonomy was exercised in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted to the civilian police unit, which reports to civilian and not military personnel. The Committee recalls that among the additional posts authorized by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/243, four posts (three planning officers at the P-4 level and one General Service post) were provided to the Civilian Police Unit, raising the total staffing of the Unit to 11 posts. The Committee was informed that further measures and initiatives were under consideration in order to increase the capacity and efficiency of the Unit as well as to broaden the base for recruiting police personnel; this is in view of the problem facing the United Nations and Member States on how to cope with the sudden increase in demand for such personnel for service in peacekeeping operations, which has risen from 2,400 in 1995 to nearly 9,000 in 2000. Measures being considered include hiring retired personnel with certain requirements (physical ability, knowledge of weapons and languages, among others), less frequent rotations or longer tours of duty, improvement of selection teams and support from missions in this regard. 23. The Advisory Committee recalls that, in paragraph 14 of document A/53/901, it pointed out that the rapidly deployable mission headquarters was not yet operational and requested that a comprehensive review be undertaken. The General Assembly, in paragraph 20 of its resolution 53/12 B, endorsed that request. In its resolution 53/58, the Assembly also endorsed the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, asking the Secretary-General to further develop the concept. The Advisory Committee notes that the Secretariat has undertaken such a review in the light of the recent evolution of peacekeeping, the changes in the nature and scope of that activity and the need to ensure rapid deployment of a wide variety of expertise, including military, in response to the complex nature of mandates given by the Security Council. Paragraphs 18 to 49 of document A/54/800 elaborate on the revised system, the Rapid Deployment Management Unit. 24. The Advisory Committee notes that the proposals of the Secretary-General on the Rapid Deployment Management Unit have not yet been submitted to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In this connection, the Advisory Committee points out that the non-implementation of the rapidly deployable mission headquarters has not yet been addressed by either the Special Committee or the General Assembly. The Assembly may wish to invite the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to review the concept of the Rapid Deployment Management Unit. Should the Assembly so decide, the Secretariat should clarify the following elements: (a) Efficiency and effectiveness of present procedures for recruiting and deploying civilian police; (b) Feasibility of deployment of personnel in seven days; (c) The need for including certain flexibility as to the 60 to 90 day service, in view of current experience and delays in deployment of personnel; (d) The back-up arrangements to temporarily fill the functions of standby personnel to be rapidly deployed within the Secretariat; (e) Examination of the potential use of both RDMU and the rapidly deployable mission headquarters as a coordinated complementary facility for the management and rapid deployment of peacekeeping personnel; (f) Management of the roster and establishment of the database. 25. Furthermore, should the General Assembly invite the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to review the concept of the Rapid Deployment Management Unit, the Advisory Committee would revert to the related administrative and post proposals once the Assembly has reviewed and taken action on the recommendations of the Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In the meantime, in paragraphs 26 to 32 below, the Advisory Committee submits the following observations. 26. The Advisory Committee notes that the Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 30 of document A/54/800, that the original concept, "which assumed that only one mission at a time would be established and included only a limited range of expertise, clearly does not seem to meet the requirements of today's peacekeeping operations". As indicated in paragraph 24 of the same document, today's peacekeeping operations "contain significant political, military, civilian police and civil administration components, mandated to implement core tasks that must begin upon the establishment of an operation". Moreover, not only has the authorized strength of civilian police increased in recent years, from 2,400 in 1995 to nearly 9,000 in 2000, but its role has also evolved to include other functions, "such as training and assisting in the establishment of local police forces, border policing and, in some cases, executive responsibility for law and order", as indicated in paragraph 25 of the report. Similarly, the number of civilian staff serving peacekeeping operations has increased from 8,400 in 1995 to 12,500 in 2000, requiring a broad range of expertise. 27. Paragraph 31 of document A/54/800 indicates that "the revised system would utilize expertise of the United Nations Secretariat and system of agencies and programmes, Member States and non-governmental organizations". Furthermore, "the modus operandi of the system would be based on arrangements with Member States and relevant organizations for the immediate release, upon the establishment of a peacekeeping operation, of individually pre-selected personnel, who would be deployed for a period of 60 to 90 days", after which they would be "replaced by more permanent personnel as soon as they could be deployed". 28. According to paragraph 41 of the same document, each organization or Member State would be responsible for ensuring that pre-selected staff were kept in a high state of readiness for immediate deployment and, to that end, a binding memorandum of understanding would be concluded with each participating partner to ensure availability and readiness of the personnel on the rapid deployment roster. 29. As further indicated in the report, the objective of ensuring availability of a wide variety of expertise for rapid deployment would include the following personnel ready to be deployed within seven days of establishment of an operation (see paras. 32 to 37): (a) Political personnel: must be deployed quickly to consolidate peace and provide overall leadership and direction to the mission. The political senior leadership and their political staff (including public information and legal personnel), who would come from within the Secretariat and ongoing peacekeeping operations, would be pre-selected and remain from 60 to 90 days. A pool of back-up personnel would be pre-selected to carry out their functions on a temporary basis; (b) Military personnel: personnel on standby for whom the Secretariat would enter into arrangements with a number of Member States, with prior experience in other United Nations peacekeeping operations or at headquarters, whose task would be to establish immediately a military headquarters and translating the broad strategic-level concept of operations into concrete and tactical level orders and instructions; (c) Civilian police: also with prior experience in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The standby roster would include a number of civilian police specialties. The Secretariat would enter into arrangements with a number of Member States, allowing capacity to deploy rapidly to more than one mission at a time; (d) Civilian administration personnel: the roster would include an estimated 30 separate types of skills, based on past experience, in areas which that might not be immediately required. Profiles of expertise required would be developed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, from a pool including Member States, international organizations, non-governmental organizations, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, and the international financial institutions. Arrangements would be worked out with Member States or parent organizations for rapid deployment; (e) Administrative and logistics personnel: as in the case of the political personnel, this pre-selected personnel would come from the Secretariat and ongoing peacekeeping operations. A back-up arrangement would be established to fill out their functions temporarily. 30. The main differences between the rapidly deployable mission headquarters and the Rapid Deployment Management Unit are summarized in annex V to the present report. In paragraph 48 of the Secretary-General's report, it is indicated that the new concept would overcome a number of shortcomings of its predecessor concept. It would, among others, ensure the flexibility necessary to meet the wide range of expertise requirements reflecting the evolution of peacekeeping, and would allow rapid deployment to more than one mission at any given time. 31. The Advisory Committee observes that the Rapid Deployment Management Unit approach borrows heavily from the concept of the standby arrangements with Member States for the provision of military contingents. Moreover, the potential for expansion of these arrangements, to assist in accessing a broad range of skills and expertise, is referred to in paragraphs 69 and 73 of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/54/670). The Secretary-General, in his progress report on standby arrangements for peacekeeping (S/2000/194), indicates that, at 31 December 1999, 87 Member States had indicated their willingness to provide resources to the standby arrangements, totalling some 147,500 personnel, of whom 14,447 had been deployed in 1999. He concludes that the system "has proved its ability to expedite planning by the early identification of possible troop contributors" and that "while the United Nations still does not have a true rapid-reaction capability, the standby arrangements have been a positive step" (paras. 20 and 21). 32. The Advisory Committee was informed that the individuals to be obtained through the Rapid Deployment Management Unit system would be paid by the Organization and that this would not, in any way, constitute a recourse to gratis personnel, for which the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly had to be fully complied with. 33. The Advisory Committee notes the information provided in section V of document A/54/800 with regard to the outstanding tasks remaining for completed and closed peacekeeping operations for 2000/01. In this regard, as indicated in paragraph 34 of its omnibus report on the financing of peacekeeping operations (A/54/841), although the Committee recognizes the progress that has been made by the Secretariat in mission liquidation, it is of the view that capacity for and the efficiency of mission liquidation activities are areas that require sustained improvement on the part of the Secretariat. 34. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of the support account for the 12-month period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001 are set out in section II of document A/54/800. 35. In view of the recommendations made by the Committee in paragraphs 13, 17, 18, and 25 above, the Committee recommends that the General Assembly approve total staffing and non-staffing requirements of $50,699,900 gross ($43,237,900 net) for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001. The Committee also recommends acceptance of the Secretary-General's proposal to apply the unencumbered balance of $2,179,400 from the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999 (inclusive of $601,000 in miscellaneous and interest income), and that the balance be prorated among the individual peacekeeping budgets to meet the resources required for the support account for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001. Training Unit, activities from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999 A. Training assistance requested and provided Bolivia March 1998 Zimbabwe July 1998 Canada October 1998 Chile Norway Sweden November 1998 United States of America December 1998 Turkey January 1999 February 1999 March 1999 South Africa April 1999 April/May 1999 May 1999 B. Training Unit, regular activities Train the trainers November 1998 (Turin, Italy) May 1999 (Turin, Italy) United Nations Training Assistance Teams, Turkey June 1999 (Turkey) C. Requests for peacekeeping training from Member States that the Training Unit was unable to carry out, 1998 Activity Host Civilian police strategic planning workshop Argentina, United States of America Cooperation, command and control in United Nations peace support operations Final phase of African Crisis Response initiative exercises Ghana Ninth Complex Emergency Training Initiative consultation Switzerland United Nations training programme for civil/military cooperation Workshop on information campaigns in peace operations George Mason University, United States of America Second international meeting of the Blue Helmets France Peacemaking and peacekeeping in Africa Ethiopia Peacekeeping training seminar for West African sub-region Nigeria International Seminar on South Asian Peacekeeping Experience Bangladesh D. Requests for peacekeeping training assistance from Member States that Training Unit was unable to carry out, 1999 Support to various North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) School Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe (SHAPE) activities for 1999 Germany Demining training course for African countries Ukraine Interdepartmental working group on human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome Principles and guidelines for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping environment Seminars on small arms NATO School's peace support operations course Chile planning conference for peacekeeping operations seminar Status for the 60 additional posts in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations authorized by the General Assembly in resolution 54/243 Recruitment status Encumbered Under recruitment Vacant Office of Logistics Management and Mine Action P-3, Administrative officer X Logistics and Communications Service P-4, Logistics operations P-3, Logistics operations P-3, Communications officer P-3, Electronic-data processing operations P-4, Contract services officer P-3, General supply officer P-3, Petrol, oil and lubricants supply officer P-3, Property Survey Board P-3, Medical support officer P-3, Air transport/safety officer P-3, Surface transport officer P-3, Movement control officer P-3, Engineer GS, Logistics clerk GS, Clerk Finance Management and Support Service P-4, Finance officer P-3, Finance officer GS, Finance clerk Personnel Management and Support Service P-4, Personnel officer P-4, Recruitment officer P-3, Recruitment officer P-3, Personnel officer P-3, Travel officer GS, Recruitment clerk GS, Personnel clerk GS, Travel clerk Office of the Under-Secretary-General P-2, Associate political affairs officer GS, Secretary Office of Operations P-5, Civil affairs officer P-4, Political affairs officer Military and Civilian Police Division P-4, Military personnel officer P-4, Military mission officer P-4, Planning officer P-4, Civilian police officer Rental of premises Paragraph 182 of document A/54/800 provides for $1,752,900 for the rental of premises. The costs for common services include rental of premises. As indicated in paragraph 182 of the budget document, rental requirements are centrally administered by the Department of Management. The 2000/01 estimate of $1,752,900 for rental of premises was derived on the basis of standard rates for such common services at Headquarters as shown in the table below. These standard rates are identical to those used in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001. Number Standard rate Total Category (in thousands of US dollars) D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2/1 General Service Allocation of responsibilities between the Department of Administration and Management and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations concerning human resource management matters Staffing requirements 1. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall continue to be responsible for determining the staffing requirements and for proposing organizational structures for peacekeeping operations. Similarly, the Department shall be responsible for proposing staffing tables for new field missions. It shall be the responsibility of the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts, in turn, to review and approve the staffing tables, as well as to determine the corresponding costing for submission in budget proposals to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly. 2. In order to assist in the definition of staffing requirements, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall develop standard or generic job descriptions for posts with similar functions and responsibilities, by occupational category. Such generic job descriptions shall be used in the establishment of staffing tables and shall be reviewed by the Office of Human Resources Management for conformity with United Nations common system standards. Recruitment, appointment and assignment of personnel 3. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall be delegated the authority to select, recruit, determine the level and step of and to appoint personnel for mission assignment. It shall also have the authority to extend the appointments of personnel whose service is limited to mission assignment. This authority to extend appointments shall apply to staff for whom there is no parent office responsibility. Extensions of staff at the D-2 level and above shall continue to be subject to the approval of the Secretary-General. 4. In order to assist in the reintegration of staff who have served on mission assignment(s), the Department of Peacekeeping operations shall inform the Office of Human Resources Management of the expected date of release of staff from mission assignments, whenever possible, two months in advance. Likewise, to facilitate continued coverage of posts vacated by staff on mission assignment, the Department of Peacekeeping operations shall inform the Office of Human Resources Management of cases of extension of mission assignment, whenever possible, two months in advance. 5. When a United Nations staff member is selected for mission assignment, or in the case of an extension of mission assignment, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall be responsible for securing from the parent department consent to release the staff member, as well as the parent department's commitment to reabsorb the staff member upon completion of mission assignment. The Department shall inform the parent department of the expected date of release of staff from mission assignment, whenever possible, two months in advance. 6. The Office of Human Resources management shall transfer to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations an active and functional module of the recruitment/placement roster which has been designed to meet the specific staffing needs of peacekeeping operations. The Department shall undertake the responsibility for roster searches and review, as well as for maintaining an up-to-date roster. 7. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall have the authority to reassign personnel from one peacekeeping mission to another, subject to three provisos: the staff member has a satisfactory performance evaluation; the staff member concurs with the reassignment; and the parent department agrees if an extension of the period of assignment is involved. 8. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall retain the responsibility for all arrangements regarding the authorization, scheduling and administration of established entitlements regarding the travel of personnel to and from mission assignments. 9. With regard to the staffing of the posts of chief administrative officer and chief of finance, personnel or General Services in a peacekeeping operation, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall be responsible for the appointment, assignment and reassignment of such personnel, subject to the approval of the Under-Secretary-General for Administration and Management in the case of chief administrative officers and the approval of designated officials of the Department of Administration and Management in the case of the chiefs of personnel, finance and procurement and security. Administration of salaries and allowances 10. As has been the situation since 1 November 1994, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations discharges the responsibility for administration of the totality of established entitlements for all personnel serving in peacekeeping operations. This responsibility includes the administration of all entitlements of United Nations staff members for the duration of their assignment(s) to a field mission(s). The one exception to this delegation is that the Secretary-General shall continue to approve special post allowances for staff at the D-2 level. 11. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall continue to administer the totality of the established entitlements for all personnel serving in the Field Service category (both Field Service officers and local Field Service personnel). 12. The Office of Human Resources Management shall retain the responsibility for reviewing requests for exceptions to the Staff Regulations and the Staff Rules of the United Nations. The Office will continue to provide authoritative interpretation of those Regulations and Rules, upon request, as well as of administrative issuances that bear upon the conditions of service of personnel in peacekeeping operations. 13. The Office of Human Resources Management shall maintain its authority to establish, review and revise the emoluments, allowances and other entitlements applicable to personnel serving in peacekeeping operations, with due regard for the operational exigencies of field missions as defined by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. To this end, the Office will continue to participate in technical survey missions and any other field reviews which are necessary to accurately assess conditions of service. Medical administration 14. The Office of Human Resources Management shall continue to provide the services of medical examination and medical clearance for personnel selected for mission assignment. In this regard, the Office shall perform pre-mission medical examinations for personnel who are located at Headquarters, as well as post-mission examinations upon return if such examinations are not feasible in field locations prior to departure from the mission. The Office shall also continue to review and analyse incoming medical examinations for personnel assigned to missions from non-headquarters duty stations, including military observers and civilian police. 15. The Office of Human Resources Management shall retain responsibility for advising as to the need for immunizations for United Nations staff, military observers, civilian police, monitors and contingents selected for mission assignment. It shall also provide such immunizations for personnel leaving from Headquarters. The Office will continue to discharge the responsibility for decisions on the medical evacuation or repatriation of personnel assigned to peacekeeping operations: this responsibility shall cover United Nations staff on mission assignment, contingent military personnel, military observers, civilian police, and monitors. The Office shall verify medical expenses in all cases where the Organization incurs expenditures. 16. The Office of Human Resources Management shall be responsible for medical advice in respect of service-incurred injury, illness or death of United Nations staff assigned to missions, military observers and civilian police. The Office shall retain its responsibilities regarding disability benefits for mission personnel, under the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, as applicable. Litigation and disciplinary matters 17. The Office of Human Resources Management shall retain the responsibilities of respondent on behalf of the Secretary-General before the Joint Appeals Board in cases arising from staff serving on mission assignment. The Office shall also continue to pursue disciplinary matters referred to it by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as a consequence of preliminary investigation in the field: it shall prepare the necessary submissions in connection with the Joint Disciplinary Committee cases and other disciplinary actions. Monitoring and management audit 18. The Office of Human Resources Management shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with the United Nations Staff Regulations and Staff Rules, as well as other delegated human resources policies, as set out in the relevant administrative issuances. Senior managers of the Office shall conduct sample checks of procedures and human resources management audits: monitoring, on a continuous basis, will utilize such systems as the Integrated Management Information System. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations shall be responsible for providing documentation and records requisite for monitoring, checking and management audit purposes. The Department shall also ensure that the official status files of staff on mission assignment are kept up to date, by forwarding copies of all relevant documentation to the Personnel Data Unit of the Office of Human Resources Management. Comparison of the rapidly deployable mission headquarters and Rapid Deployment Management Unit concepts Rapidly deployable mission headquarters Rapid Deployment Management Unit :: Deploys a single team :: Manages the deployment of multiple teams :: Eight headquarters posts funded under support account :: Four headquarters posts funded under support account, with deployed personnel funded under mission budgets as required (headquarters secretariat, United Nations bodies, Member States) :: Deployment of a limited range of expertise (mainly military) :: Multidisciplinary expertise reflecting the evolution of peacekeeping (military, civilian police, political, civil administration, judicial, customs, humanitarian, human rights, administration and logistics, etc.) :: Questions raised about what rapidly deployable mission headquarters personnel would do when not deployed or preparing to be deployed. Concerns about overlap with the work of the Training Unit and Military Mission Planning :: Members of the Rapid Deployment Management Unit have specific ongoing functions relating to the establishment and maintenance of a dynamic, multifunctional, database of rapidly deployable personnel for mission start up :: Limited number of nationalities affecting the deployment options given the possibilities of political sensitivities :: Wide geographic representation with flexibility for deployment anywhere :: Personnel in the rapidly deployable mission headquarters would only have headquarters experience :: Personnel to be deployed will have previous peacekeeping field experience 