%%%AIRSPACE|NICOSIA (CYPRUS)|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|

General Assembly Security Council Fifty-third session Agenda item 63 Question of Cyprus Fifty-fourth year Letter dated 5 June 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General Upon instructions from my Government and further to our letter dated 27 April 2000 (A/54/852-S/2000/370), I have the honour to draw your attention to new violations of the flight information region (FIR) of Nicosia and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus by military aircraft of the Turkish Air Force, recorded on 27 and 30 April 2000, as well as 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 19 and 26 May 2000. On 27 April, four C-130 Turkish military aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. The aircraft in question violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Mesaoria before landing at the illegal airport of Tymbou in the occupied area of the Republic. Two of the aircraft departed the airport on the same day, while the other two departed on the morning of the next day. On 30 April, 18 Turkish military aircraft (14 F-16, 3 C-160 and 1 CN-235) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus as follows: the 14 F-16 and the 3 C-130 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting in a south-easterly direction. The CN-235 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia (cape of Apostolos Andreas) and patrolling in a search-and-rescue mission before exiting. On 1 May, three Turkish military aircraft (two F-4 and one CN-235) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. The two F-4 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting in a south-easterly direction. The CN-235 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia (cape of Apostolos Andreas) before exiting the Nicosia FIR. On 4 May, two Turkish military aircraft (one C-160 and one F-4) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. The C-160 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia (Apostolos Andreas) before exiting in a south-easterly direction. The F-4 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia (Apostolos Andreas) before returning to the FIR of Ankara. On 5 May, 18 Turkish military aircraft (14 F-16, 3 C-160 and 1 CN-235) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. The F-16 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting towards the FIR of Ankara. The C-160 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia, before exiting in a south-easterly direction. At noon on the same day, the two aircraft, with an extra C-160, violated once more international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus before exiting towards the FIR of Ankara. The CN-235 aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting the Nicosia FIR. On 8 May, one CN-235 and two F-16 Turkish military aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. The CN-235 violated the national airspace of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting towards the FIR of Ankara. The F-16 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus over the area of Karpasia (cape of Apostolos Andreas) before returning to the FIR of Ankara. On 9 May, one C-160 Turkish military aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting in a south-easterly direction. Early in the afternoon of the same day, the same aircraft violated once more international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting towards the FIR of Ankara. On 10 May, one KC-135 Turkish military aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before exiting in a south-easterly direction. On 12 May, one B-200 Turkish military aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. The B-200 violated the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia before landing at 1100 hours at the illegal airport of Tymbou, in the occupied area of the Republic. The said aircraft departed the airport on the same day at 1532 hours. On 16 May, 10 Turkish military aircraft (8 F-16 and 2 F-4) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. On 17 May, eight Turkish military aircraft (four F-16 and four F-4) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. On 18 May, eight Turkish military aircraft (two F-16 and six F-4) entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations. On 25 May, one F-4 Turkish military aircraft entered the Nicosia FIR, violating international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus, flying over the area of Karpasia (cape of Apostolos Andreas) before exiting towards the FIR of Ankara. While strongly protesting these actions, which violate international law as well as the Security Council resolutions on Cyprus, and calling for their cessation, I would like, once more, to express the hope that the necessary positive attitude will be shown by Turkey so that the efforts for finding a just and viable solution of the Cyprus problem, on the basis of United Nations resolutions, will not be adversely affected. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 63, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Sotos Zackheos Ambassador Permanent Representative 