%%%TORTURE AND OTHER CRUEL TREATMENT|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|FUND-RAISING|GUIDELINES|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|TRUST FUNDS|INTERNATIONAL DAYS|EMERGENCY RELIEF|

Fifty-fifth session Item 116 of the provisional agenda* Human rights questions: implementation of human rights instruments United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture * A/55/150 and Corr.1, Corr.2 and Corr.3. ** The footnote requested by the General Assembly in resolution 54/248 was not included in the submission. Report of the Secretary-General** Contents Paragraphs Page Presentation of the Fund Contributions and pledges Payment of contributions Pledges How to make a contribution to the Fund Funds available for allocation at the nineteenth session of the Board of Trustees of the Fund Disbursements approved at the nineteenth session of the Board Nineteenth session of the Board Recommendations of the Board concerning grants Anticipated requirements for the year 2001 Fund-raising United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, 26 June Conclusions I. Joint declaration and message on the occasion of United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, 26 June 2000 II. Procedures and guidelines of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture for the use of organizations 1. The present annual report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, drafted 13 July 2000, was prepared in accordance with the arrangements approved by the Assembly in its resolution 36/151 of 16 December 1981 by which it created the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture (herein referred to as "the Fund"). 2. A description of the mandate and administration of the Fund is contained in a previous report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly (A/52/387, paras. 7-11). A description of the activities of the Fund during the first decade of its operation is contained in a previous report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly (A/48/520). 3. The Secretary-General administers the Fund through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and with the advice of the Fund's Board of Trustees (hereinafter "the Board"; see also A/48/520 on the terms of reference of the Board. The President of the Board is Jaap Walkate (Netherlands) and the other members are Ribor Hatano (Japan), Elizabeth Oio-Bonito (Costa Rica), Ivan Tosevski (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and Amos Mako (Kenya). 4. A brief description of the grant approval cycle will explain how the Fund operates. Grant requests should be submitted each year by 31 December for consideration by the Fund secretariat, which decides whether they are admissible. Admissible grant requests are reviewed by the Board at its annual session in May. The Board's recommendations are examined by the Fund secretariat to ensure that they are in compliance with United Nations rules, then submitted for approval on behalf of the Secretary-General to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. In July all the applicants are informed of the decisions affecting them. Grants are paid out in August. The recipients must submit by 31 December satisfactory narrative and financial reports on the use of the grants. In the absence of a final report by 31 December, a request is made for an interim report by the following 15 February. No new grant requests can be considered as long as previous narrative and financial reports are still due. II. Contributions and pledges 5. The General Assembly has authorized the Fund to receive voluntary contributions from Governments, non-governmental organizations and private individuals. In order to respond to requests for financing received before 31 December each year and to the appeal by the Commission on Human Rights (para. 36 of Commission resolution 2000/43 of 20 April 2000; see also para. 15 of General Assembly resolution 53/139), donors are asked to make their voluntary contributions to the Fund before the Board session, preferably by 1 March, to be duly recorded by the Treasurer of the United Nations and available by the time of the Board's annual session. Contributions which could not be recorded before the first day of the Board's session will be taken into account at the following year's session. Pledges of contributions are not considered. A. Payment of contributions Contributions received since the last Board session 6. Table 1 below shows contributions received that were considered at the nineteenth session of the Board (15-26 May 2000). Contributions were paid between 17 May 1999, the first day of the eighteenth session of the Board (see A/54/177), and 14 May 2000, the day before the nineteenth session. Table 1 Contributions received in time for allocation at the nineteenth session (from 17 May 1999 to 14 May 2000)a Donors Amount (in United States dollars) Year for which the contribution was paid Contribution number Algeria Andorra Argentina Austria Belgium Cyprus Denmark Finland France Germany Holy See Iceland Ireland Japan Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Philippines Poland Portugal Saudi Arabia South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Tunisia United Kingdom United States of America Mrs. Rita Maran Mr. Daniel Prémont a According to the information available at the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 7. Poland contributed to the Fund for the first time. Norway doubled the amount of its contribution. The United States increased its contribution from $3 million in 1999 to $5 million in 2000. The following States also increased their contributions: Argentina, Morocco, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia and Switzerland. Sweden decreased its contribution in 2000 by more than half the amount paid in 1999. 8. Table 2 below indicates contributions received from 15 May to 13 July 2000, the date on which this report was drafted; they will be allocated at the twentieth session of the Board in May 2001. Table 2 Contributions received from 15 May to 13 July 2000 Contributions (in United States dollars) Chile Sri Lanka Staff of United Nations Office at Genevaa a On the initiative of Mr. Sebastien Martinek, the organizers of the year-end gala of the staff of the United Nations Office at Geneva (UNOG) decided in 1998, the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to contribute the entire available balance to the Fund. After closing the books, the said sum was paid by Mrs. Jeanné Serfati, Chairman of the Financial Commission of the UNOG Staff Coordinating Council. B. Pledges 9. Government pledges to the Fund are made directly to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights or at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, held in New York each year during the first week of November, as well as during the annual session of the Commission on Human Rights, held in Geneva in April. Table 3 below shows the pledges still outstanding as at 13 July 2000. Table 3 Pledges still outstanding as at 13 July 2000 US dollars Local currency Pledge date Year Brazil 20 Dec. 1994 2 Nov. 1995 4 Nov. 1979 16 Jun. 2000 10 Apr. 2000 NZ 25 000 19 Apr. 2000 4 Nov. 1998 2 Nov. 1999 26 May 2000 21 Apr. 2000 Turkey Pound130 000 2 Feb. 1999 C. How to make a contribution to the Fund 10. In contributing to the Fund, be sure to specify "For the Fund for Victims of Torture", account CH, and pay: (a) by bank transfer to "United Nations Geneva General Fund" either in US dollars, c/o Chase Manhattan Bank, New York, account number 001-1-508629, UNOG General Fund G/L UN-0503456, US Banking Code 021000021; or in Swiss francs c/o UBS AG, Case postale 2770, CH-1211, Geneva 2, to account number 240-CO-590-160.0 (Swift address: UBSWCHZH12A) or (b) by cheque made out to "the United Nations" and addressed to Trésorerie, ONU, Palais des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 10, or to "UN Cashier's Office, United Nations" New York, NY 10017, United States of America. III. Funds available for allocation at the nineteenth session of the Board of Trustees of the Fund 11. The Board held its nineteenth session at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 15 to 26 May 2000. In accordance with the rules governing the Voluntary Fund, 15 per cent of estimated annual expenditures must be earmarked as a reserve for the following year, and 13 per cent is the rate set for programme support costs. After reserve and support costs were deducted from the contributions received in time for allocation, the amount available on 15 May 2000 came to a little over US$ 7 million. IV. Disbursements approved at the nineteenth session of the Board A. Nineteenth session of the Board l2. In 20 sessions, the Board considered information and documentation prepared by its secretariat on the financial situation of the Fund; narrative and financial reports on more than l50 past grants; new grant project requests amounting to over US$ l0 million (over $2 million more than in l999); information on the activities of the Committee against Torture, the Special Rapporteur on Torture, the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the Rights of the Child. The Board also held closed hearings of representatives of nine organizations, a meeting with staff of the World Health Organization and another with representatives of the donors concerned. The Board and the secretariat of the Fund were asked to make a presentation of the Fund's activities and reply to questions at the meeting organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for all interested Permanent Missions to the United Nations at Geneva. A joint meeting was arranged between the members of the Board and the members of the Committee against Torture, the Special Rapporteur and the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights (the High Commissioner being absent from Geneva). At that meeting, a joint declaration and message was adopted to commemorate 26 June 2000, United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture (see annex I). The Board revised and issued the guidelines of the Fund (see annex II) explaining to the NGOs concerned on how to present a request for financing (criteria for selection, and so on), how to report on grants obtained and the conditions that have to be met. The Board also recommended guidelines on the evaluation of programmes in the field by the bureaux of the High Commissioner and other organizations of the United Nations system. All the Board's recommendations were approved by the High Commissioner for Human Rights acting for the Secretary-General on 15 June 2000. A press release on the question was issued by the UNOG Information Service on 2l June 2000. B. Recommendations of the Board concerning grants l3. The Board recommended that the entire available amount mentioned in paragraph 11 above should be allocated. Priority was given to those organizations providing medical, psychological, economic, social, legal or other forms of direct humanitarian aid to victims of torture and members of their families. A few grants were given to training programmes for health professionals and other professionals to improve their knowledge of specialized assistance to torture victims, and for meetings of such professionals for purposes of exchanging experience in this field. 14. The Board recommended that a portion of the above-mentioned amount be reserved for emergency grants that the secretariat might make if needed before the next annual session of the Board. The first category of emergency grants, totalling US$ 100,000, is available to meet requests for urgent assistance from victims of torture in countries lacking appropriate treatment facilities and to assist victims of amputation and mutilation coming from Sierra Leone. A second category of grants, totalling US$ 400,000, has also been set aside for organizations which might be experiencing financial difficulties prior to the next Board session in May 200l. Those requests for urgent assistance will be dealt with in accordance with the relevant guidelines of the Fund already approved by the Secretary-General and the General Assembly (A/50/5l2, chap. IV and A/48/520, annex I). The Board recommended that requests for financing in amounts up to US$ 20,000 should be examined by its Chairman and those for higher sums should be examined by the Chairman and two other members of the Board, including the member from the region concerned. 15. The table below lists the organizations which have received grants from the Fund and have authorized the secretariat to mention it. Table 4 List of organizations financed by the Fund in 2000a Name of organization Country ACAT (Action of Christians for the Abolition of Torture) Mexico AITPN (Asian Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Network) India AMANI Trust Zimbabwe AMECON (Africa War Victims Medical Concern) Uganda Amigos de los Sobrevivientes United States Asamblea Permanente de Derechos Humanos de Bolivia Bolivia Association OSIRIS Association Primo Levi ASTT (Advocates for Survivors of Trauma and Torture) ATYHA (Centro de Alternativas en Salud Mental) Paraguay AVRE (Association por les victimes de la répression en exil) Balay Inc., Rehabilitation Centre Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of Torture BFU (Centre for the Treatment of Torture Victims) Boston Medical Center BZFO (Centre for the Treatment of Torture Victims) Calgary Catholic Immigration Society Canada CAPSDH-Burundi (Comission africaine des promoteurs de la santé et des droits de l'homme) Burundi CAPSDH-Ghana Ghana CAPSDH-Guinea Guinea CARITAS (Cologne) CCVT (Canadian Centre for Victims of Torture) CDHES (Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El Salvador) El Salvador CEDAVIDA (Fundación Social Colombiana) Colombia CEFPRODHAC (Centro de Estudios Fronterizos y de Promoción de los Derechos Humanos) CEJIL (Centro por la Justicia y el Derecho Internacional) Centre de consultations et programmes de prévention en santé mentale d'appartenances Centre for Care of Torture Victims Centre for Care of Torture and Trauma Nigeria Center for Justice and Accountability Center for Multicultural Human Services Centre neuropsychiatrique Carvitore Mauritanie Mauritania Centre for Rehabilitation of War and Torture Victims Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation Centre for Torture Victims Sarajevo Bosnia-Herzegovina Centre for Treatment and Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture (CTRVT) Malawi Centre for Victims of Political Persecutions Centro Alternativas CETAWO (Centre for Eradication and Treatment of War Effects) CINTRAS (Centro de Salud Mental y Derechos Humanos) CNDDHH (Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos) Peru CODESEDH (Comité para la Defensa de la Salud, la Ética Profesional y los Derechos Humanos) COMEDE (Comité médical pour les exilés) COMISEDH (Comisión de Derechos Humanos) Concerned Christian Community Liberia Cordelia Foundation for the Rehabilitation of Victims of Organised Violence Hungary COSOT (Coalition of Survivors of Torture) C3RJ (Consulting Centre for Constitutional Rights and Justice) CVT (Center for Victims of Torture) DITT-CODEPU (Corporación de Promoción y de Defensa de los Derechos del Pueblo) EATIP (Equipo Argentino de Trabajo e Investigación Psicosocial) Edmonton Centre for Survivors of Torture and Trauma EKT (Centre for Rehabilitation of War and Torture) EXIL (Centre médico-psychosocial pour réfugiés et victimes de la torture) FASIC (Fundación de Ayuda Social de las Iglesias Cristianas) FEDEPAZ (Fundación Ecuménica para el Desarrollo y la Paz) FIDH (International Federation of Human Rights) FIND (Families of Victims of Involuntary Disappearances) Fondation Trente Septembre Haiti FRC (Family Rehabilitation Centre) Fund Against Violation of Law Armenia Gaza Community Mental Health Programme Palestine Guatemala Human Rights Commission/USA HEMAYAT HMD Response Home for Human Rights Human Rights Foundation of Turkey ICAR Foundation (Medical Rehabilitation Centre for Victims of Torture) Romania International Institute of Boston International Institute of New Jersey International Society for Health and Human Rights IRCT-Zagreb Croatia Italian Refugee Council Italy Jammu and Kashmir Council for Human Rights Pakistan Kanyarwanda Carvitore Rwanda Khmer Health Advocates Khulumani Support Group LDH (Mozambican League for Human Rights) Mozambique Legal Resources Centre LRCT (Lahore Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Survivors) LTDH (Ligue togolaise des droits de l'homme) Togo MAG (Medical Action Group) Marjorie Kovler Center for the Treatment of Survivors of Torture MEDH (Movimiento Ecuménico por los Derechos Humanos) Medical Foundation Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture Medical Network for Social Reconstruction in the Former Yugoslavia Slovenia Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights MRCT (Research and Support Centre for Victims of Maltreatment and Social Exclusion) Greece Medical Rehabilitation Center for Torture Victims Memoria Moldova Medical Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims MRT (Estonian Centre of Medical Rehabilitation for Victims of Torture) Estonia NIDEREF (Niger Delta Environment and Relief Foundation) OASIS (Treatment and Counselling of Refugees) OMCT (World Organization against Torture) Omega Health Care Centre ONDH (Organisation nationale des droits de l'homme) Senegal Ottawa-Carlton Immigrant Services Organization Palet PCATI (Public Committee Against Torture in Israel) Israel Penal Reform International Physicians for Human Rights POC Fund (Prisoners of Conscience Appeal Fund) Program for Torture Victims Proyecto Adelante RAHAT (Voice Against Torture) RCT (Rehabilitation and Research Centre for Torture Victims) RCVTE (Rehabilitation Centre for Victims of Torture in Ethiopia) Ethiopia Red de Apoyo por la Justicia y de la Paz Venezuela Redress Trust Refugio-Bremen Refugio-Munich Restart Center Lebanon RIVO (Réseau d'intervention auprès des personnes ayant subi la violence organisée) Rocky Mountain Survivors Center SACH (Struggle for Change) SERSOC (Social Rehabilitation Service) Uruguay SFT (Association Santé-Formation-Travail) SIRDO (Romanian Independent Society of Human Rights) SMRC (Medical Rehabilitation Center for Torture Victims and their Families) Latvia SOPROP (Solidarité pour la promotion sociale et la paix, section française pour l'Europe) Democratic Republic of the Congo SOSRAC (Society for Social Research Art and Culture) SOTI (Survivors of Torture, International) Sudanese Victims of Torture Group Survivors International Swedish Red Cross -- Gälve Red Cross Rehabilitation Centre for Tortured Refugees -- Malmö Swedish Red Cross -- Skaraborg Branch Swedish Red Cross -- Stockholm Swedish Red Cross -- Uppsala Swiss Red Cross TOHAV Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims Tortura Nunca Mais TRC (Treatment and Rehabilitation Center for Victims of Torture) TRUSTT Australia UFADESCH (Union des formateurs animateurs du Sud en éducation civique et respect des droits de l'homme) Unité de médecine des voyages et des migrations -- Geneva Vasavya Mahila Mandali VAST (Vancouver Association for Survivors of Torture) Victim Services Inc. WACOL (Women's Aid Collective) XENION ZEBRA (Zentrum zur sozialmedizinischen, rechtlichen und kulturellen Betreuung von Ausländern in Österreich) a The Fund also financed five other humanitarian organizations providing medical, psychological or social assistance or training for health professionals. V. Anticipated requirements for the year 2001 16. The demand for assistance from the Fund to torture victims is constantly increasing. For 1999, $8.2 million was requested for 139 projects, but only $5.2 million was available. For 2000, as anticipated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in her "Annual Appeal 2000", $10.1 million was requested for 188 projects, including 51 new projects, but only a little over $7 million was available. The growth in donations (up $2 million) merely offset the growth in demand (up $2 million). The gap between the amount available for grants and the amount requested from the Fund for 2000 was therefore over $3 million, roughly the same as for 1999. If demand continues to grow, it is estimated that, to meet it in full, some $12 million in new contributions will need to be received, if possible by 1 March 2001, as requested by the Commission on Human Rights, or at the latest before the next session of the Board of Trustees, scheduled for 18 May to 1 June 2001 in Geneva. VI. Fund-raising 17. Since it adopted resolution 36/151, by which it created the Fund, the General Assembly authorized the Board of Trustees to promote and solicit contributions and pledges. The Assembly requested the Secretary-General to give the Board all the assistance it might require and appealed to all Governments to respond favourably to requests for contributions to the Fund. The General Assembly, in its resolution 54/156 of 17 December 1999, and the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 2000/43 of 20 April 2000, again appealed to all Governments, organizations and individuals to contribute annually to the Fund, and preferably by 1 March 2001, before the annual meeting of the Board, if possible with a substantial increase in the level of contributions, so that consideration might be given to the ever-increasing demand for assistance. 18. At the close of its nineteenth session, the Board recommended that the High Commissioner should maintain her practice of sending a letter to States towards the end of September to remind them to contribute regularly to the Fund prior to 1 March 2001. The Board expressed its appreciation for the practice of the Commission on Human Rights of inviting a member of the Board to make an appeal for contributions during the session of the Commission in connection with the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Fund, and suggested that the General Assembly might do likewise. The Board continued to encourage initiatives designed to procure further voluntary contributions and recommended that the Secretariat should envisage further fund-raising activities, in particular through the production of written or audio-visual information material on the Fund. 19. The High Commissioner agreed to send a reminder to States the following autumn. In the context of the general appeal launched at the start of the year (see para. 16 above), it had been anticipated that the needs of the Fund would total $10 million, corresponding exactly to the total volume of the requests for funding received for 2000. In the general appeal for 2001, the High Commissioner will again make an estimate of the financial needs of the Fund. 20. During the oral consideration of the reports of States Parties, the members of the Committee against Torture asked Governments whether they contributed to the Fund and, if not, suggested that they might make contributions, even if only of nominal amounts. The Board regards the fact that one State contributed or pledged a contribution to the Fund as a positive sign. 21. In its joint declaration for the commemoration of 26 June 2000, the Board of Trustees, the Committee against Torture, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on questions relating to torture and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights reminded Governments of the importance of contributing annually to the Fund in order to meet the ever-increasing demand for assistance. VII. United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, 26 June 22. The General Assembly, by its resolution 52/149 of 12 December 1997, proclaimed 26 June United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture. To mark the occasion, the Board of Trustees of the Fund, the Committee against Torture, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on questions relating to torture and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, issued a joint declaration (see annex I.A) aimed at States and organizations concerned, and a joint message to the public at large (see annex I.B). At the opening of the special session of the General Assembly on 26 June in Geneva, the President of the Assembly, Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab (Namibia), delivered a message in which he quoted extracts from the joint declaration, recalled that every year the Fund assisted thousands of victims of torture through its grants and asked that everything should be done to assist victims of torture to become full participants in society. The Secretary-General also delivered a message (see press release SG/SM/7461, OBV/147 of 21 June 2000). 23. To celebrate the Day, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights organized an exhibition of works of art by torture victims at Palais Wilson, headquarters of the Office of the High Commissioner, from 15 June to 10 July. The exhibition comprised about a hundred works of art including paintings, posters, drawings, photographs, sculptures and embroideries sent to the Fund secretariat by some 30 organizations that have assisted such victims and their families (see press release XB/00/7 issued on 21 June 2000 by the Information Services of the United Nations Office at Geneva, entitled "Exhibitions of works of art by victims on the occasion of the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture"). Among the organizations which sent works this year, mention may be made of the following: CODESEDH (Comité para la Defensa de la salud, la Ética Profesional y los Derechos Humanos, Argentina); CDHES (Comisión de Derechos Humanos de El Salvador, El Salvador); Concerned Christian Community (Liberia); FAVILEK (Haiti); HEMAYAT (Austria); Lahore Rehabilitation Centre (Pakistan); Mozambican League for Human Rights (Mozambique); Fondation Trente Septembre (Haiti); Gaza Community Mental Health Programme (Palestine); Gramma Abhyudaya Samastha (India); Posa Adinarayan (India); C3RJ (Nigeria); SACHRCVT (Pakistan); SOPROOP (Democratic Republic of the Congo); Trauma Centre (Cameroon); TOHAV (Turkey); SIRDO (Romania); Tortura Nunca Mais (Brazil); TRUSTT (Australia); RIVO (Canada); Cordelia Foundation (Hungary) and Jammu and Kashmir Council (Pakistan). Some works which had been received in the two previous years were also exhibited. 24. The exhibition was officially opened on 26 June 2000 by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, who also read out the joint message (see annex I.B). Two directors of non-governmental organizations specializing in assistance to torture victims, Ms. Helen Bamber, Director of the Medical Foundation (London), and Mr. Eric Sottas, Director of the World Organization Against Torture (Geneva, Switzerland), also spoke. Representatives of the permanent missions to the United Nations in Geneva, journalists, representatives of non-governmental organizations and international civil servants attended the commemoration. 25. On 26 June at United Nations Headquarters, the New York Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights held a press conference attended by Ms. Inge Genefke, Secretary-General of the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (IRCT), Mr. Allen Keller of the Bellevue/New York University Program for Torture Survivors, torture victims, representatives of permanent missions to the United Nations in New York, journalists, representatives of other non-governmental organizations and international civil servants. 26. IRCT included an introductory note on the Fund and an application for a grant from the Fund in the press kit containing a number of documents which IRCT distributed widely to encourage over 150 organizations in 85 countries to celebrate the Day on 26 June. 27. The declaration and the joint message were also sent to bureaux and other field presences of the Office of the High Commissioner, to the United Nations coordinators in the field and to networks of non-governmental organizations specializing in the area of human rights. 28. The Day was celebrated throughout the world by many other events, organized in particular by organizations financed by the Fund. VIII. Conclusions 29. The Fund's financial support is essential for the organizations concerned, because sources of funding for assistance to victims of torture and to the members of their families are limited, both nationally and internationally, whereas the amount of funds requested for assistance continues to increase each year (by more than 2 million between 1999 and 2000), as does the number of torture victims who require specialized assistance. Continuous and increasing financial support is therefore necessary. 30. Donors wishing to contribute to the Fund are requested to refer to paragraph 10 above for information on modalities of payment; for further information, they may also consult the Fund secretariat through the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Voluntary Fund Unit, SSB/OHCHR, CH-1201 Geneva 10, tel. (4122) 917.93.15, 917.91.20, fax (4122) 917.90.17, e-mail: dpremont.hchr@unog.ch. 31. By contributing to the Fund, donors express their solidarity with the victims, enabling them to receive medical, psychological, financial, social or legal assistance and thus to resume living a decent life. 32. The United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture was celebrated on Monday, 26 June 2000 for the third time since its proclamation by the General Assembly on 12 December 1997. On that occasion, the Board of Trustees of the Fund, the Committee against Torture, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on questions relating to torture and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights -- in other words, the main United Nations bodies involved in combating torture -- launched two appeals in the form of a message and a declaration, (see text in annex I), with a view to encouraging the commemoration of the Day throughout the world. Annex I Joint declaration and message on the occasion of the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, 26 June 2000 A. Joint declaration The Committee against Torture, the Board of Trustees of the Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture (the Fund), the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on questions relating to torture and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Recalling the decision of the General Assembly to declare 26 June United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/43 of 20 April 2000, which called upon all Governments, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to commemorate on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, this year with particular emphasis on reparation for torture victims, Recalling the joint declarations they adopted on 26 June 1998 and 26 June 1999, Recalling also the continued regular exchange of views between the Board of Trustees of the Fund, the Committee against Torture and the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on questions relating to torture with regard to their common mandate to assist victims of torture and taking note of the need stressed by the General Assembly for further exchange of views with other relevant United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuance of cooperation with relevant United Nations programmes, notably the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, with a view to enhancing further their effectiveness and cooperation on issues relating to torture, inter alia, by improving their coordination, Recalling the appeals against torture of the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in which, inter alia, all Governments were exhorted to defeat torture and bring to justice torturers everywhere and reminded that ending torture was a beginning of true respect for the most basic of all human rights: the intrinsic dignity and value of each individual, Reaffirming that torture is one of the vilest acts to be perpetrated by human beings upon each other, Concerned that requests for assistance to the Fund for victims of torture and members of their families are constantly increasing, Recalling that torture is prohibited by article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as by specific provisions of international human rights treaties adhered to by the majority of the States, Recognizing that torture is a breach of a non-derogable human right which cannot be justified under any circumstances and that its systematic or widespread practice is characterized as a crime against humanity under international law, in particular, by article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Conscious of the necessity to place emphasis on prevention of torture, as recommended by the World Conference on Human Rights of 1993, Acknowledging the valuable work of Governments, associations, groups and individuals in contributing to the effective elimination of all forms of torture, Paying tribute to all those who work selflessly to relieve the suffering and assist the recovery of torture victims around the world, Commending the persistent efforts by non-governmental organizations to combat torture and to alleviate the suffering of victims of torture, 1. Renew their appeal to provide support to victims of torture, this year with particular emphasis on reparation, as well as to prevent and prohibit torture on the occasion of the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture of 26 June 2000, and to this end, 2. Stress in particular the increasing need for legal assistance to obtain reparation, compensation and rehabilitation services for victims of torture and encourage the Fund to continue to support small projects of humanitarian assistance to victims of torture in various countries, taking into consideration that efficiency is linked to the proximity of these humanitarian organizations to the victims, 3. Express their gratitude and appreciation to those Governments, organizations and individuals that have contributed to the Fund, in particular those which have been able to reply favourably to the appeal by the Chairman of the Board of Trustees and paid their contributions before the annual session of the Board, as well as those which have increased the amount of their contribution and encourage them to continue to do so, 4. Urge all Governments, organizations and individuals to contribute annually to the Fund, preferably by 1 March, before the annual session of its Board of Trustees, and if possible with a substantial increase in the contributions in order to take into consideration the ever-increasing requests for medical, psychological, social, economic, legal, humanitarian and other forms of assistance to victims of torture and members of their families worldwide, 5. Urge all States to become parties to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment without reservation, if they have not already done so, 6. Urge State parties to the Convention that have not yet accepted its optional provisions to do so as soon as possible, 7. Call on all States to redouble their efforts to achieve the early adoption of the optional protocol to the Convention, 8. Urge all States to become parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, adopted on 17 July 1998, as a matter of priority, 9. Urge all States to ensure that torture is a crime under their domestic law and to rigorously pursue perpetrators whenever and wherever the act was committed and bring them to justice, 10. Welcome the decision of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 2000/43 of 20 April 2000, to draw the attention of Governments to the Principles on the effective investigation and documentation of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, annexed to that resolution, 11. Support the recommendation of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2000/32 of 20 April 2000 that the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights encourage forensic experts to coordinate further and produce additional manuals concerned with examination of living persons, a resolution in which the Commission welcomed the initiative by the Office of the High Commissioner to publish the "Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment" in its Professional Training Series, towards which the Fund contributed, 12. Urge all States to provide for fair and adequate reparation, including compensation and rehabilitation of the victims of torture in their domestic law, 13. Urge all States to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur on questions relating to torture in fulfilling his mandate, 14. Express their gratitude to those States that have extended invitations to him to visit their countries and urge those from whom he has solicited an invitation to respond positively to his request, 15. Consider that, by these means, the crime of torture may be effectively prosecuted and condemned throughout the world and that impunity of torturers, regardless of their status, will not be tolerated, 16. Request the Secretariat to transmit to all Governments this joint declaration and give it the widest possible distribution. B. Joint message to the public at large The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Committee against Torture, the Board of Trustees of the Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Special Rapporteur on questions relating to torture recall on this United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture that torture, an international crime, is committed on a wide scale and often at the instigation or with the approval of government agencies. It is a crime which cannot be justified under any circumstance. Torture is simply not acceptable. Governments should, therefore, prohibit it, prevent it from happening and, if it has happened, prosecute and punish those who have committed the crime. It is not only Governments that should take action: individuals, groups of citizens and non-governmental organizations may contribute to the elimination of torture by condemning this crime and by not accepting torture as if it were a regular feature of police detention or imprisonment, as something which is an inevitable part of the treatment by police or prison officials. Public awareness is an important tool in the fight against torture, especially public awareness of the right of everyone to be safeguarded from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Let this Day be a reminder for each of us that we owe it to the victims of torture to stand up for them against the evil of torture. Let us all do whatever we can to help victims of torture participate fully again in society and to recognize their special needs. Procedures and guidelines of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture for the use of organizationsa I. Introduction 1. With an increasing number of requests for assistance, the highest standards should be applied to procedures to be followed by organizations applying for grants from the Fund. Accordingly, at its ninth session, in 1990, the Board of Trustees decided to start reviewing the guidelines for applications for grants. The following guidelines and procedures were recommended by the Board at its ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and nineteenth sessions and approved by the Secretary-General. 2. As a rule, the Board meets for 10 working days in May of each year to examine compliance by applicants with the guidelines, to review new applications for grants, to consider the narrative, financial and auditors' reports received on the use of previous grants and to adopt recommendations on new grants for submission to the Secretary-General. II. Applications for grants 3. The projects for which a grant is requested should provide medical, psychological, social, economic, legal, humanitarian or other form of assistance to torture victims and members of their family. The highest possible amount of money available in the Fund is devoted to such assistance. 4. Applications made by organizations for projects concerning legal assistance to defend the right to restitution, compensation and rehabilitation of victims of torture will be looked at favourably by the Board. Organizations should submit information on whether the judiciary can provide free legal aid to defend the victims' requests, in conformity with the legal provisions in force in the country. The Fund does not provide financial compensation to victims. The list of the victims to be assisted under legal aid should be provided together with the application form. 5. Applications for grants for projects concerning the social or economic reintegration of victims of torture into society, including vocational training for the victims themselves and income-generating projects, are admissible. 6. Applications for grants for projects to organize training, seminars or conferences for health or other professionals providing assistance to victims are admissible. 7. Applications for grants for projects on investigations, studies or the publication of newsletters are inadmissible. 8. The Fund's grants can cover up to a 12-month period. 9. As a rule, the Board does not recommend setting up a new organization with money from the Fund. 10. As a rule, the Fund does not subsidize a project through another organization, in order to avoid retaining fees on the money channelled and to maintain control over the use of the money. 11. Organizations should not expect automatic renewal of a grant. A grant for the continuation of a project can be requested every year, provided that the Board is satisfied with the use of the previous grants and satisfactory narrative and financial reports on the use of all previous grants have been received within the deadline established by the Board or the secretariat of the Fund. 12. Applications by governmental, parliamentary or administrative entities, political parties or national liberation movements are inadmissible. III. Submission of applications for grants for projects 13. Applications for grants should be submitted before 31 December of each year. Applications received after this deadline are inadmissible. 14. Incomplete applications or applications that do not comply with the guidelines are inadmissible. In order to be admissible, budgets should be based on realistic local costs and salaries. Application forms not duly signed and dated by the project leader are inadmissible. 15. As a rule, the amount requested in the application should not exceed one third of the project budget, for the project should not be totally dependent on the Fund. 16. Applications for grants for projects to organize training, seminars or conferences should be submitted separately. The amount requested of the Fund cannot exceed $30,000. These applications should be sent well in advance of the meeting scheduled since the Board does not subsidize a meeting that has already taken place. The provisional lists of participants, speakers and themes to be covered as well as the draft programme should be attached to the application form. The final lists should be sent to the secretariat after the meeting. The report on the meeting as well as any act, proceeding and other relevant document of such meetings should be sent to the secretariat. IV. Reporting on the use of grants 17. Narrative and financial reports should be submitted by 31 December of each year. If final reports cannot be provided by then, an interim report should be submitted by 31 December and a final report by 15 February at the very latest. 18. The narrative and financial reports should answer all the items on the secretariat's form (showing with exactitude how the grant from the Fund was used; for instance, for staff costs, the amount spent for each individual staff salary should be specified). 19. If available, audited accounts are recommended. 20. As a rule, the Board will not consider projects from which it has not received satisfactory reports within one year since the latest communication by the secretariat, and, as the case may be, will recommend that the grant be refunded. If the request for a refund is not acceded to by an organization within the time-limit indicated by the Board, a new application from the organization concerned is inadmissible. 21. Organizations should indicate in their narrative report the number of victims assisted with the grant, detailing how many were assisted free of charge or what percentage they paid, provided that this does not endanger the victims and their families. 22. If the organization assists hundreds of torture victims, a chart should be provided detailing the percentage of victims assisted by, inter alia, kind of torture suffered, after-effects, assistance provided and gender of the victims. 23. Every organization should include, as part of its narrative report, 10 anonymous case studies on victims assisted with the grant. The case studies should include the following information: (a) the history of the victim (in which context and by whom the victim was tortured and which are the physical and psychological after-effects on the victim); (b) the type of assistance provided by the organization; (c) the results expected or already obtained by the assistance provided; and (d) future assistance to be provided to the victim. 24. Information may be requested on projects subsidized by the Fund from United Nations staff in the field and representatives of other United Nations agencies, funds or programmes, such as the United Nations Development Programme. If those officials agree to visit a project and submit an evaluation of the project, the Fund secretariat shall inform the project leader in advance. The cooperation of the project leader is requested. 25. The Fund secretariat may inform the United Nations representatives in the field of grants awarded to projects in their country, so that they are aware of the Fund's relationship with the organizations in charge of the projects. The project leader concerned shall be notified accordingly by the Fund secretariat. If project leaders do not wish other United Nations agencies, funds or programmes operating in their country to be informed of their project, they should notify the Fund secretariat and provide an explanation. 26. Members of the Board and the Fund secretariat may visit any project and meet staff members of the organization implementing the project as well as victims of torture or members of their families assisted with a grant from the Fund in order to better understand and evaluate the work done and planned. The Fund secretariat will inform the organization concerned in advance that such a visit may take place. A short but detailed report on this visit will be prepared for consideration by the members of the Board at the annual session. 27. The Board may hear project leaders at its annual session, especially those who are first-time applicants. Travel costs arising from such visits may not be charged to the United Nations or the Fund. V. Withholding of payments 28. On the basis of information received after the Board's session, the secretariat can decide, upon consultation with the Chairman, to withhold the payment of a grant or to ask a project leader to set apart a grant recommended by the Board and approved by the Secretary-General, in case of doubts regarding over-budgeting or mismanagement. VI. Refund 29. Upon a recommendation by the Board, the secretariat may request organizations to refund a grant when: (a) the project was not implemented in full or in part; (b) the grant was spent for expenditures other than those mentioned in the budget proposal submitted to and approved by the Board; (c) no narrative or financial report was submitted within the deadline established by the Board or the secretariat; or (d) a narrative report and/or a financial report submitted within the deadline was declared "unsatisfactory". VII. Emergency assistance 30. On an exceptional basis, organizations can submit a request for emergency assistance during the inter-sessional period for programmes which are already subsidized by the Fund but which encounter financial difficulties. Requests for funding amounting up to $20,000 will be examined by the Chairman of the Board. Requests for higher amounts will be examined by the Chairman and two other members of the Board, including the member representing the relevant geographical region. 31. On an exceptional basis, individual victims of torture may apply for emergency assistance at any time. The individual should provide a medical report showing that the victim suffers from after-effects due to torture as well as any kind of supporting documentation showing that the individual is a victim of torture (such as the context in which the torture took place and identification of torturers). Notes a Revised at the nineteenth session of the Board of Trustees on 26 May 2000. 