%%%RACIAL DISCRIMINATION|XENOPHOBIA|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS|CONFERENCES|HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|SPECIAL RAPPORTEURS|INTERNET|TRUST FUNDS|EXTRABUDGETARY FINANCING|DOCUMENTS|

Fifty-fifth session Item 114 of the provisional agenda* Elimination of racism and racial discrimination Preparatory process for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism Report of the Secretary-General** Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction First session of the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance Documentation presented to the Preparatory Committee Commission on Human Rights World Conference information campaign Coordination between OHCHR, United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies Liaison to non-governmental organizations Future meetings Proposals on how to ensure the financial and personnel resources required for the full implementation of the Programme of Action * A/55/150. ** In accordance with General Assembly resolution 54/248, sect. C, para. 1, this report is being submitted on 10 August 2000 so as to include as much updated information as possible. Status of the Trust Fund for the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination Fund for Voluntary Contributions to the World Conference Annexes I. Trust Fund for the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination II. Fund for Voluntary Contributions for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance I. Introduction 1. The General Assembly, in resolution 52/111, decided to convene a World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance which would take place no later than the year 2001. The Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1998/26, requested that the activities of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination be focused on the preparatory process for the World Conference. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in conformity with the Commission resolution, is orienting the activities of the Third Decade towards the preparation of the Conference. 2. The present, consolidated report, prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/132, reflects the progress achieved in the preparatory process of the World Conference. It also contains the activities implementing the Programme of Action of the Third Decade to Combat Racism. II. First session of the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance 3. The process leading up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance began formally with the first session of the Preparatory Committee, held in Geneva from 1 to 5 May 2000, as mandated by the General Assembly in paragraph 29 (d) of its resolution 52/111. 4. The session was attended by representatives of Member States of the United Nations, non-member States represented by observers and Palestine, by representatives of specialized agencies, United Nations bodies, intergovernmental organizations, human rights bodies and mechanisms, non-governmental organizations and other entities. 5. During its first session, the Preparatory Committee took key decisions on the provisional agenda and the draft rules of procedure for the World Conference, the accreditation of non-governmental organizations that do not have consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, and the participation of indigenous people's representatives. Further, the Preparatory Committee decided that a request be addressed to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in her capacity as Secretary-General of the Conference, to draw up a draft declaration and programme of action for the Conference. The Committee also recommended to the General Assembly the establishment of an intersessional working group to meet in Geneva in January 2001 to further develop the draft agenda and draft declaration and programme of action for the Conference. The Preparatory Committee further recommended that its second session, to be held in 2001, be extended up to five working days.1 6. The Preparatory Committee adopted, without a vote, a proposal to accept the invitation of the Government of South Africa to host the World Conference and a proposal to hold the World Conference from 31 August to 7 September 2001. The representative of South Africa stated that the exact location of the Conference venue in South Africa had not yet been determined and would be communicated at a later time. 1. Expert seminar on racism, refugees and multi-ethnic States 7. In the context of the revised Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 49/146, OHCHR organized an expert seminar on racism, refugees and multi-ethnic States, at the United Nations Office at Geneva, from 6 to 8 December 1999. The purpose of the seminar was to examine racism and ethnic conflicts as among the root causes of refugee flows, to find ways and means to stop the expansion of racism and ethnic conflicts in order to prevent refugee flows, to examine how better protection of vulnerable groups within the States concerned might be ensured, and to protect the rights of refugees within host States. A report on the seminar was submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/9). 8. The seminar observed that legal provisions alone are insufficient solutions to racial and ethnic discrimination. Combating racial and ethnic discrimination must entail the redistribution of social, economic and cultural power by promoting social justice and fairness, ensuring equal opportunities and participation for all. 9. In its final observations and suggestions, the seminar recommended, that at the national level, States must acknowledge and implement in their legislation the reality of the multi-racial, multi-ethnic and multicultural composition of their populations. With regard to asylum seekers, it was recommended that Governments should comply with their obligations under international law and grant asylum according to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. 2. Expert seminar on remedies available to victims of racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and on good national practices in this field 10. Pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/78, an expert seminar on remedies available to the victims of racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and on good practices in this field was organized by OHCHR and was held at the United Nations Office in Geneva from 16 to 18 February 2000. Major topics discussed were: racial discrimination in economic, social and cultural life; racial discrimination against vulnerable groups; recourse procedures of non-nationals, migrants, asylum-seekers, refugees, minorities and indigenous peoples; remedies available to victims of racial discrimination; activities of national institutions; and examples of good practices and reinforcement of regional and international mechanisms. A report on the seminar was submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/8). 11. The seminar noted that international human rights instruments contain extensive requirements for making effective remedies available. It recommended that at the national level States should become parties to all of the international instruments that promote and protect racial equality and implement them in good faith. 12. The seminar also pointed out that remedies available to victims of racial discrimination in economic, social and cultural life should include: recourse to national institutions which can play an important role in disseminating information about protection against discrimination and in advising victims of remedies available; recourse to law enforcement officials, who are responsible for protecting victims and carrying out measures to curb discrimination; recourse to prompt and effective action by the judicial system; educational activities through which racial prejudice or practices may be curbed; and the activities of the media, which should promote tolerance, understanding and racial equality. 3. Questionnaire circulated to review progress made in the fight against racism 13. Pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/78, OHCHR prepared a questionnaire for States, United Nations specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and national institutions in order to review the progress made in the fight against racism and to reappraise the obstacles to further progress and ways to overcome them. A report containing an analysis of the replies to the questionnaire was submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/3). 14. The report stated that most respondents noted that several laws had been enacted in their respective States to address the issue of racial discrimination in areas such as incitement to racial hatred, racial discrimination in employment and consumer practice, discrimination against women, racial equality before tribunals, equality in housing, and laws against racist or hate organizations. However, it was noted by respondents that there was little evidence that those laws were effective. There are very few benchmarks to measure success or progress. 15. The replies to the questionnaire revealed that there was little information on the factors that lead to racism. A few respondents pointed to economic factors, such as concentration of wealth, globalization, and the history of colonial regimes in given countries, which have impeded the economic development of certain groups and perpetuated racist practices. Some respondents expressed the view that regional stability affected the internal racial and ethnic situation of their States. Other factors indicated were political and psychological in nature. 16. In light of the fact that a significant number of States have not yet responded to the questionnaire, OHCHR decided to send it out again. Their replies will be analysed and compiled for submission to the second session of the Preparatory Committee. 4. Effects of racial discrimination on children of minorities and migrant workers 17. The General Assembly, in its resolution 54/154, requested the Secretary-General to draw attention to the effects of racial discrimination on minorities and migrant workers and members of their families, especially children and women, in the fields of education, training and employment, and to submit in his report specific recommendations for the implementation of measures to combat such discrimination. 18. A study on this subject was prepared by the Secretary-General and submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/11). The report indicated that the education system can foster a learning environment of multiculturalism and respect for diversity in society. Offering instruction in the history, culture and language of both the majority and the minorities and also of migrant workers might provide children with an understanding of the need for inclusiveness, not only within the classroom but also within society as a whole, and help to reduce intolerance in the future. It was recommended that further measures should be taken to ensure the provision of such intercultural education in schools. 19. The report noted that the lack of data and information disaggregated according to race, minority or migrant status had precluded a thorough analysis of the effects of racial discrimination. Therefore, it was recommended that information and data, at the national level, be systematically collected on a disaggregated basis. Consideration should also be given to providing support to Governments undertaking such efforts, through international cooperation, where appropriate and feasible. Once information and data are collected, they should be shared and analysed to assist in the formulation of appropriate and effective policies and strategies to combat racial discrimination against minorities and migrant workers and members of their families. United Nations agencies, such as the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Development Programme, have a particularly important role in supporting data collection, analysing the results and researching racial discrimination in the fields of education, training and employment. 20. It was also recommended that Governments ensure that measures are taken to provide mechanisms by which minorities and migrant workers and their families are able to be involved in the formulation, implementation and monitoring of policies and decisions affecting them. The right to participate, along with freedom from discrimination, are general principles laid down in various human rights standards, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, for which States are required to take action to implement. Moreover, special measures of protection for women and children are provided for in various human rights treaties. They require that additional efforts and measures should be taken, inter alia, to prevent the exploitation of minority children and women and migrant workers. 21. The study added that, in general, Governments should consider undertaking actions to promote social inclusion and combat exclusion with respect to the development of employment policies, the provision of training and other public services, such as education. 22. Furthermore, the media has a role to play in combating racial discrimination against minorities and migrant workers, and it was recommended that consideration be given to codes of conduct being drawn up by journalists. Moreover, national human rights institutions have and should play a strong advocacy and supportive advisory role in combating racial discrimination, and in monitoring any such abuses in the fields of education, training and employment. In certain instances, and with a view to deterring racial discrimination in the workplace, such institutions provide considerable support in taking up individual cases of alleged victims of racial discrimination. Establishing and supporting national institutions to perform such functions was recommended. 5. Consultations on the use of the Internet 23. As of the writing of the present report, 15 replies had been received by OHCHR to its communication of 20 May 1999 to member States, United Nations bodies, specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, requesting information on the use of the Internet to incite racism, xenophobia and intolerance. A report on the use of the Internet for such purposes (A/CONF.189/PC.1/5), submitted to the Preparatory Committee by the Secretariat, included a summary of the replies. The respondents recognized that the Internet could be both a source of harm, used to incite hatred, and a tool in the struggle against racism and intolerance. The importance of an educational component in any programme to combat racism and intolerance on the Internet was also recognized. 6. Consultations on the World Conference 24. A report of the Bellagio Consultations on the World Conference, held in Bellagio, Italy, from 24 to 28 January 2000, was submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/10). The purpose of the Consultations was to bring together diverse groups of experts from around the world to formulate recommendations on the forthcoming Conference. The report sets out the recommendations developed by the participants relating to the core themes and possible outcomes of the World Conference. 7. Ways of improving coordination between OHCHR and the specialized agencies 25. A note by the United Nations Secretariat on ways of improving coordination between OHCHR, the specialized agencies and international, regional and subregional organizations in the field of action to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance was presented to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/4). The information in the note was based on information received from the specialized agencies and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and on memoranda of understanding signed between OHCHR and other agencies which define bilateral action to be taken to combat racism. 26. In its conclusions, the note recommended that a systematic flow of information should be ensured between OHCHR and United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international, regional and subregional organizations on the situation of racism and racial discrimination. 8. Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights 27. During the first session of the Preparatory Committee, Mr. Paulo Pinheiro, member of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, introduced a document submitted by the Subcommission to the Preparatory Committee (A/CONF.189/PC.1/13), in accordance with Commission resolution 1998/26, and a working paper he had prepared, "Proposals for the work of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance" (A/CONF.189/PC.1/13/Add.1), pursuant to Subcommission resolutions 1998/6 and 1999/6. The working paper stated that the Subcommission considered the World Conference to be an important and unique opportunity to formulate a worldwide strategy to combat racism in the twenty-first century. It recalled that experts of the Subcommission had contributed to the struggle against racism through the elaboration of studies which had proposed recommendations and measures to be taken. The Subcommission has been responsible for introducing themes reflecting new challenges and forms of racism, particularly in relation to economic factors affecting racial discrimination. Globalization was highlighted in regard to its effect on incidents of racism and discrimination. The Subcommission believes that the World Conference should address the denial of racism and the need for thorough analysis of contemporary forms of racism, such as discrimination in multiracial societies and ethnic divisions in areas that have suffered armed conflicts. 9. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 28. Mr. Michael Sherifis, Chairperson of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD), introduced the Committee's contribution to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/12). The report recalled that at CERD's fifty-third session (3 to 21 August 1998), the Committee had discussed a wide variety of ideas about matters which might feature in the agenda and in the declaration and programme of action of the World Conference and had adopted decision 9 (53). At its fifty-fifth session (2 to 27 August 1999), the Committee had continued to discuss its contribution to the preparatory process of the World Conference and had adopted decision 5 (55) in which it proposed to the Preparatory Committee that it include in the agenda of the World Conference consideration of the problem of how the international community might prevent or mitigate mass and flagrant violations of the human rights of persons belonging to ethnic and racial groups. In paragraph 6 of decision 5 (55), the Committee suggested that an eventual plan of action for the World Conference might deal with such issues as: (a) Processes of racial reconciliation; (b) Racial discrimination against indigenous populations; (c) All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights; (d) Racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, challenge to peace, human rights, including the right to life, human dignity, stability and the rule of law; (e) Incitement to racial hatred as a punishable offence; (f) Effective measures to protect all persons against racial discrimination in both public and private sectors, and remedies and reparations for victims; (g) Educational measures for all segments of the population in the spirit of the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and intolerance; (h) National commissions on human rights in the light of the Committee's general recommendation XVII. 10. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 29. Ms. Virginia Dandan, Chairperson of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, introduced a document, "Contribution of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to the preparatory process for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance" to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/15). The document focuses on the right to education as set out in articles 13 and 14 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The Committee was of the view, according to Ms. Dandan, that an important strategy for the elimination of racism is a renewed commitment to the right to education. The submission highlights General Comment No. 13, adopted by the Committee in December 1999, on article 13 of the Covenant (E/C.12/1999/10), and General Comment No. 11, adopted in May 1999, on article 14 of the Covenant (E/C.12/1999/4). 11. Committee on the Rights of the Child 30. A document entitled "Contribution of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to the preparatory process for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance" was submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/15). 31. In the document, the Committee stated that it had decided to draft a general comment on article 29 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (on the aims of education) and that the general comment, once adopted, would be submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its second session. The Committee also indicated that it would appoint one or two of its members to represent the Committee at the meetings of the Preparatory Committee and at the World Conference itself and would continue to consider other contributions that could be made to the preparatory process for the World Conference. 12. Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance 32. In a note by the United Nations Secretariat (A/CONF.189/PC.1/6), Mr. Maurice Glèlè-Ahanhanzo, Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, stated that, owing to circumstances beyond his control, he had not been able to present the study requested by Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/78, "Preventive measures relating to ethnic, racial, religious and xenophobically motivated conflicts" to the Preparatory Committee at its first session. 33. In his oral statement at the first session, the Special Rapporteur pointed to several current world problems relating to racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. He referred in particular to the political activities of extreme right-wing parties, racist violence against migrant workers, the dangers of xenophobic or racist groups gaining political power in certain countries, discrimination against Roms and the expansion of racist hate speeches through the Internet. He recommended the adoption of international measures to counter hate speech on the Internet. 34. The Special Rapporteur recommended that an international consultation be organized to discuss these issues. He noted that legal and penal measures existed against racism and intolerance but suggested that greater economic and social measures needed to be implemented as well, to help victims of racism and racial discrimination. Consequently, he proposed that each concerned country should adopt a national plan to integrate minorities, migrant workers and indigenous populations into their societies, with a full account of economic and social measures and legal measures to combat racism, racial discrimination and related intolerance. Each country should present its plan to the World Conference. He maintained that economic and social measures against racism should be an integral part of the discussions at the World Conference. 13. Special Rapporteur on religious intolerance 35. Mr. Abdelfattah Amor, Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on religious intolerance, introduced his report, "Racial discrimination and religious intolerance identification and measure" (A/CONF.189/PC.1/7) to the Preparatory Committee at its first session. The report reviewed the international mechanisms for the protection of victims of religious intolerance and made three main recommendations. The first was that international mechanisms should be strengthened at both the international and national levels and that legal, particularly penal, protection should be improved. The second recommendation was for the creation of independent national institutions that could deal with cases of religious and racial intolerance and which would provide publicity, information and proposals to Governments and legal advice and support to individual victims of discrimination. The institutions should also have a conciliatory mission. The third recommendation was for various preventative measures in regard to education, information, communication, democracy, development and dialogue within and between different religious groups. 14. Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants 36. Under paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 54/154, the Secretary-General was requested to give special attention to, and provide information on, the situation of migrant workers in his report on racism. The situation of migrant workers and other categories of migrants is currently under study by the newly appointed Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, Mrs. Gabriela Rodriguez Pizarro. The Special Rapporteur was mandated to participate actively in the preparatory process of the World Conference against Racism, in pursuance of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/44. As stated in "Working paper of intergovernmental experts on the human rights of migrants" (E/CN.4/AC.46/1998/5), "One of the most relevant factors which led the Commission on Human Rights to create the working group on international migrations and human rights was the increasing manifestations of racism, xenophobia and other forms of discrimination and inhuman and degrading treatment against migrants in different parts of the world." Discrimination against migrants continues to increase, despite efforts undertaken by the international community to protect the human rights of migrant workers and members of their families. The decision to appoint the Special Rapporteur was meant to provide a reporting mechanism and to focus attention on the alarming upsurge in intolerance, discrimination, racism and xenophobia in the form of outright violence against migrants in practically every region in the world. 37. The Special Rapporteur is initiating a programme of action that will provide substantive information on the situation of migrants with respect to racism and discrimination. She will also submit her final recommendations on measures needed to combat discrimination against migrants and their families to the next session of the Commission on Human Rights, in 2001, prior to the World Conference. The Special Rapporteur has already submitted a list of preliminary recommendations to the Preparatory Committee at its first session (A/CONF.189/PC.1/19), as part of her contribution to the World Conference. Those recommendations deal with the key themes on which the World Conference should focus in relation to migrants and their families, particularly the double discrimination suffered by women. The Special Rapporteur suggested that the World Conference should be utilized as a forum to focus attention on the situation of migrants and their families in order to enhance respect for the basic human rights of migrants, whether in a regular or irregular situation, and regardless of their colour, race or origin. 38. The Special Rapporteur highlighted the links between racism and racial discrimination and the trafficking of illegal immigrants. She drew attention to the links between discrimination against women and racism in countries of origin which can result in the decision to migrate using the services of traffickers. She called for legislation against trafficking which would simultaneously seek to protect migrants and penalize traffickers. She called attention to the numerous violations of the human rights of migrants, noting both the causes and consequences of migration and how forms of racial discrimination and racism could prompt processes of migration in countries of origin as well as in countries of transit and destination. 39. The activities undertaken by the Special Rapporteur will generate an overview of the situation of migrants and will contribute directly to the World Conference. Those activities include soliciting information from a wide variety of organizations on violations against the human rights of migrants, identifying the distinct forms of racial discrimination and racism that confront different categories of migrants, and several investigatory field missions which racial discrimination will be a key element. The Special Rapporteur will carry out her first mission in September 2000 and will produce a report that will focus on identifying problems and elaborate examples of good practice. III. Commission on Human Rights 40. At its fifty-sixth session, the Commission on Human Rights, in resolution 2000/14, welcomed the offer by South Africa to host the World Conference against Racism in 2001. 41. In the same resolution, the Commission decided to appoint an 11-member Bureau for the two sessions of the Preparatory Committee of the World Conference, consisting of two representatives per regional group, and a representative of the host country as an ex-officio member. 42. The Commission invited Governments to promote the participation of national human rights institutions and local non-governmental organizations in the preparations for the World Conference. It also encouraged all parliaments to participate actively in the preparations for the World Conference, through relevant international organizations. IV. World Conference information campaign 43. In response to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/78, a world information campaign aimed at sensitizing world public opinion on the World Conference and its objectives is being developed by OHCHR, in close collaboration with the Department of Public Information, United Nations Secretariat. The campaign targets a global audience, in particular the media, non-governmental organizations and individuals involved in the combat to eliminate racial discrimination. The Department has prepared a brochure and two background papers on the Conference in English, French and Spanish for distribution in printed format. Arabic, Chinese and Russian versions will soon be made available on the Internet. In addition, a six-language poster will be produced. Two banner designs for the launch of the World Conference, held on Human Rights Day 1999, were developed, and a second set of banners was designed in Spanish for a concert tour of the Caribbean and Latin America to promote the Conference, by Ruben Blades, a goodwill ambassador for the Conference. 44. The following seven internationally renowned figures from the worlds of literature, music and human rights advocacy were appointed by the High Commissioner to serve as goodwill ambassadors for the World Conference: Nobel Prize laureates for literature Wole Soyinka of Nigeria and Seamus Heaney of Ireland; Panamanian actor and musician Ruben Blades; Moroccan writer Tahar Ben Jelloun; Indian sitarist Ravi Shankar; former Icelandic President Vigdis Finnbogadottir; and children's rights defender Marian Wright Edelman of the United States. The goodwill ambassadors will work in coordination with OHCHR and the Department to promote awareness of the World Conference. 1. Human Rights Day 45. On Human Rights Day on 10 December 1999, the global information campaign for the World Conference was launched at the United Nations office by Mary Robinson, High Commissioner for Human Rights and Secretary-General of the World Conference. The Department of Public Information brought to Geneva 12 journalists from print and broadcast media covering developing countries. They engaged in discussions with the High Commissioners for Human Rights and for Refugees, the Director-General of the World Health Organization, and others, on racism and other human rights issues. The Department held press conferences in Geneva and New York and arranged media interviews with two of the goodwill ambassadors. In New York, it briefed representatives of non-governmental organizations about the World Conference. 2. International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 46. The commemoration of International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (21 March) was organized in 2000 at the United Nations Office at Geneva by OHCHR, in cooperation with the United Nations Information Centre. The theme of the round table was the World Conference. 47. The round-table discussion was chaired by the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The members of the panel were Sipho George Nene, Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Absa Claude Diallo, Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Michael E. Sherifis, Chairman of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination; and Gay McDougall, CERD member and Executive Director of the International Human Rights Law Group. 48. The United Nations information centres and services utilized the International Day to undertake activities at the national level to promote the World Conference, and will do so again in 2001. The messages of the Secretary-General and of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and an editorial by the High Commissioner were distributed to the information centres and services for placement in national and international media for the International Day. Attention was also drawn on the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. 3. World Conference web site 49. In response to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/78, a web site devoted to preparations for the World Conference has been established. It can also be accessed from the OHCHR home page (www.unchr.ch). This web site includes general information, an initial programme of events, a documents database, press releases and statements regarding racism, racial discrimination and the World Conference. It will be updated and expanded on a regular basis up to and during the World Conference. 4. Other information activities 50. The Commission on Human Rights requested the High Commissioner to include in her strategy for informing international public opinion about the World Conference an invitation to the sports world to cooperate actively as a partner. OHCHR has been in contact with various international sporting organizations and is discussing with them what contribution they could make to furthering the objectives of the World Conference. 51. On 25 October 1999 OHCHR circulated to all Permanent Missions in Geneva a note verbale containing the declarations and programmes of action of the two previous world conferences, together with six studies prepared by members of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. V. Coordination between OHCHR, United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies 52. The General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights have requested United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies to be actively involved in the preparatory process for the World Conference. The General Assembly, in its resolution 54/154, also requested specialized agencies and the regional commissions, in coordination with the High Commissioner, to contribute to the holding of regional preparatory meetings. Pursuant to that request, OHCHR is working closely with the regional commissions on the organization of the regional preparatory meetings and expert seminars. 53. The High Commissioner briefed the Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) at its second regular session for 1999 and at its 2000 spring session on the forthcoming World Conference and invited organizations of the system to participate actively in the preparatory process. She also requested organizations to present their own perspectives in dealing with racial discrimination, including inputs (in the form of background documents and studies) to the regional expert seminars, the regional preparatory meetings, the sessions of the Preparatory Committee and to the World Conference itself. In addition, organizations were invited to use their networks and experience at the country level to inform their constituencies and to sensitize and mobilize non-governmental organizations and civil society about the aims of the World Conference. ACC invited its members to participate actively in the preparatory process of the World Conference and to contribute fully to ensuring its success. 54. On 25 April 2000, OHCHR organized an informal meeting on system-wide coordination within the United Nations in relation to the preparatory process for the World Conference. The meeting was opened by the High Commissioner, who encouraged the specialized agencies and United Nations bodies and programmes to designate focal points to facilitate coordination for the preparation of the Conference. Representatives from the following organizations attended the meeting: the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Economic Commission for Europe, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, CCPOQ, the World Health Organization and the World Bank. Participants exchanged ideas about better coordination for the preparation of the World Conference and for long-term projects to combat racism. VI. Liaison to non-governmental organizations 55. In its resolution 1999/78, the Commission on Human Rights requested the High Commissioner to undertake consultations with non-governmental organizations on the possibility of holding a forum both before and during the World Conference and, insofar as possible, to provide them with technical assistance for that purpose. 56. In order to undertake appropriate consultations with non-governmental organizations and to encourage them to actively participate in the World Conference, OHCHR has appointed a non-governmental organization liaison officer for the World Conference. The liaison officer supplies information of specific interest to non-governmental organizations, convenes regular non-governmental organization meetings and supplies adequate documentation about the World Conference. An NGO ListServ has also been established to keep non-governmental organizations fully informed about developments of the preparatory process. "Information notes" in English, French and Spanish will be sent on a regular basis to the ListServ addresses. While the information is targeted primarily at non-governmental organizations, academics, national institutions, and individuals working with governmental agencies or with intergovernmental organizations who have indicated their wish to be kept informed about the World Conference are also on it. 57. OHCHR has entered into consultations with non-governmental organizations in New York, Geneva and elsewhere for the holding of forums before and during the Conference. OHCHR is also planning to support four regional non-governmental organization meetings intended to feed into the World NGO Forum. The dates and venues for these meetings have not yet been determined. VII. Future meetings 1. Regional meetings 58. In its resolution 1999/78 the Commission on Human Rights requested the High Commissioner to help States and regional organizations, on request, to convene national and regional meetings. It also requested the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies, and the regional commissions to provide financial and technical assistance for the organization of the regional preparatory meetings planned in the context of the World Conference and stressed that such assistance should be supplemented by voluntary contributions. The dates and venues for the regional preparatory meetings on which OHCHR is cooperating with the regional commissions are as follows: (a) Council of Europe, Strasbourg, France, from 11-13 October 2000; (b) African regional meeting, Dakar, Senegal, tentatively scheduled for November 2000; (c) Latin America and the Caribbean regional meeting, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 4-7 December 2000; (d) Asian regional meeting, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 19-21 February 2001. 2. Expert seminars 59. The following regional expert seminars are planned by OHCHR: (a) Western Europe and other States, "Remedies available to the victims of acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and on good national practices in this field" (Geneva, 16-18 February 2000); (b) Eastern and Central Europe, "Protection of minorities and other vulnerable groups and strengthening human rights capacity at the national level" (Warsaw, Poland, 5-7 July 2000), organized in cooperation with the Government of Poland; (c) Asia and the Pacific, "Migrant workers and trafficking of persons, with particular reference to women and children" (Bangkok, Thailand, 5-7 September 2000); (d) Africa, "Preventing ethnic and racial conflicts" (Addis Ababa, 4-6 October 2000); (e) Latin America and the Caribbean, "Economic, social and legal measures to overcome racial discrimination with reference to vulnerable groups" (Santiago de Chile, Chile, 25-27 October 2000). 60. Reports of the seminars will be submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its second session. VIII. Proposals on how to ensure the financial and personnel resources required for the full implementation of the Programme of Action 61. As mentioned above, the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1998/26, requested that the activities of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination be focused on the preparatory process for the World Conference. The United Nations High Commissioner, in conformity with the Commission resolution, has oriented the activities of the Third Decade to the preparation of the Conference and will include the activities of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade in her annual appeal in 2001. A new post has been created in OHCHR to coordinate issues dealing with racism, including the activities of the Programme of Action. Further proposals for the implementation of the Programme of Action will be considered after the conclusion of the World Conference, to take into account its substantive outcome and recommendations. IX. Status of the Trust Fund for the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination 62. The financial status of the Trust Fund for the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination is set out in annex I to the present report. X. Fund for Voluntary Contributions to the World Conference 63. In its resolution 1999/78, the Commission on Human Rights requested the High Commissioner to set up a voluntary fund designed specifically to cover all aspects of the preparatory process for the World Conference and the participation of non-governmental organizations, especially from developing countries, and requested all Governments, international organizations, non-governmental organizations and private individuals to contribute to the fund. To that end, a fund has been established specifically to meet the needs of the Conference, and OHCHR has already sent notes on this subject to potential donors. The financial status of the Fund is set out in annex II below. 64. In resolution 54/154, the General Assembly requested "the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and the regional commissions to provide financial and technical assistance for the organization of the regional preparatory meetings planned in the context of the World Conference and stressed that such assistance should be supplemented by voluntary contributions". The General Assembly also requested the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner to make every effort to ensure the mobilization of resources for the voluntary fund for the World Conference to cover the participation of the least developed countries in the preparatory process and in the Conference itself, and requested all Governments, international organizations, non-governmental organizations and private individuals to contribute to the fund. 65. The Preparatory Committee, in its decision PC.1/6, decided to recommend to the General Assembly that it reiterate its appeal for contributions of extrabudgetary resources to meet the cost of participation of representatives of the least developed countries in the preparatory processes and at the World Conference. 66. In its resolution 2000/14, the Commission on Human Rights expressed concern at the lack of financial support to hold regional meetings in preparation of the World Conference and invited all States to contribute generously to the trust fund established by the High Commissioner in order to cover the activities foreseen within the framework of the World Conference and, in particular, to respond positively and in a timely manner to the appeal for the preparation of the Conference as contained in the Annual Appeal of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Notes 1 See A/CONF.189/PC.1/21. Annex I Trust Fund for the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination Country Amount Paid on Contributionsa received from July 1999 to July 2000 Germany 10 December 1999 India 6 April 2000 Japan 29 February 2000 Saudi Arabia 22 July 1999 Total Contributionsa pledged Ireland 25 November 1999 a United States dollars. Fund for Voluntary Contributions for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance Country or entity Cuba 2 September 1999 Finland 25 January 2000 Luxembourg 27 February 2000 Israel 17 August 1999 Netherlands 20 January 2000 Norway 6 July 1999 Poland 6 October 1999 South Africa 31 March 2000 Spain 18 February 2000 Switzerland 8 February 2000 United Kingdom Sweden United States of America 16 May 2000 26 May 2000 Italy 15 May 2000 15 July 2000 United Nations Fund for Partnership (UNF/UNFIP) 1 March 2000 Ford Foundation 11 May 2000 