%%%INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|POVERTY MITIGATION|HUMAN RIGHTS|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 60 (b) United Nations reform: measures and proposals: the Millennium Assembly of the United Nations Letter dated 1 September 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Guyana to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the Declaration of the Council of Presidents of the General Assembly on the occasion of the Millennium Summit of the United Nations (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex distributed as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 60 (b). (Signed) S. R. Insanally Ambassador Permanent Representative Declaration of the Council of Presidents of the General Assembly on the occasion of the Millennium Summit of the United Nations We, the Council of Presidents of the General Assembly of the United Nations, on the occasion of the Millennium Summit, declare as follows: :: We reaffirm our faith in and adherence to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. Indeed, the Charter has been and remains the enduring foundation of international law. :: The United Nations is a beacon of hope for its members and humanity as a whole. :: The universal membership and comprehensive mandate of the United Nations gives the Organization strength and credibility. The General Assembly remains the only organ of the United Nations where all States participate on an equal footing. :: In order to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations it is imperative that action be taken to strengthen the role of the General Assembly. :: The membership and operation of the Security Council need to be made more representative, democratic and transparent. :: We are preoccupied by the increasing divide between developed and developing countries, particularly in the economic, social, information and technology areas. Accordingly, we call for the establishment of a new global human order based on the eradication of poverty and equity among nations. :: We support the recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding the urgent need for new and comprehensive efforts by the United Nations in the following areas: - to promote a culture of peace. - to take concrete measures to achieve disarmament. - to strengthen the capacity of the Organization for conflict prevention. - to develop a mechanism for preventative diplomacy that would strengthen the Organization's efforts in peace and security. - to strengthen and enhance peacekeeping in order to enable the Organization to respond swiftly and more effectively to conflict and emergency situations. - to prevent human rights abuses and violations, particularly ethnic cleansing. - to enhance, in particular, the rights of women and children and the ageing. - to strengthen the efforts of the United Nations system in promoting development. - to ensure that urgent action is taken by the international community to address the external debt problem. - to ensure that the benefits of globalization are equitably distributed. - to intensify international support to realize the goal of education for all. - to intensify efforts to combat poverty in all its aspects. - to promote sustainable development and undertake efforts to preserve our environment and to prevent its further degradation. We offer our best wishes for the success of the Millennium Summit and our full support for the efforts of the States Members of the Organization and its Secretary-General to create for the twenty-first century and beyond "a world that is free from want and free from fear". 