%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|REIMBURSEMENT|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|WORKING GROUPS|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 153 (a) Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations: financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal) I. Introduction 1. At its 9th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled "Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations: financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations" and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the question of the review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States, under this item, at its 15th meeting, on 23 October 2000. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the question are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.5/55/SR.15). 3. For its consideration of the question, the Committee had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States (A/54/763) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/54/859). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/55/L.6 4. At the 15th meeting, on 23 October, the Chairman of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States" (A/C.5/55/L.6), informal consultations on which had been coordinated by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Chairman. 5. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/55/L.6 without a vote (see para. 6). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 6. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States and of the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 2. Decides to request the post-Phase V Working Group on reform procedures for determining reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment to consider the current methodology underlying the calculations of standard rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing States, including ways to produce timely and more representative data; 3. Requests the post-Phase V Working Group to report, through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at its resumed fifty-fifth session on the results of the review. 