%%%SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY|TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|GUIDELINES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|DISARMAMENT|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 69 Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament Report of the First Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Rastislav Gabriel (Slovakia) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament" was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolution 54/50 of 1 December 1999. 2. At its 9th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the First Committee. 3. At its 2nd meeting, on 14 September 2000, the First Committee decided to hold a general debate on all disarmament and international security items allocated to it, namely, items 65 to 81, which was held at the 3rd to 13th meetings, from 2 to 13 October (see A/C.1/55/PV.3-13). Thematic discussions on the items were held, and draft resolutions were introduced and considered, at the 14th to 21st meetings, from 13 to 23 October (see A/C.1/55/PV.14-21). Action on all draft resolutions was taken at the 22nd to 28th meetings, from 25 October to 1 November (see A/C.1/55/PV.2228). 4. No documents were submitted in connection with item 69. II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.1/55/L.31 5. At the 17th meeting, on 18 October, the representative of India, on behalf of Bangladesh, Bhutan, the Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Fiji, Guyana, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament" (A/C.1/55/L.31). Subsequently, Burkina Faso, El Salvador, Mauritius and Namibia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 6. At its 24th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/55/L.31 by a recorded vote of 91 to 44, with 17 abstentions (see para. 7). The voting was as follows: In favour: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Against: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Abstaining: Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Georgia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Samoa, South Africa, Tonga, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uruguay. III. Recommendation of the First Committee 7. The First Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Recognizing that scientific and technological developments can have both civilian and military applications and that progress in science and technology for civilian applications needs to be maintained and encouraged, Concerned that military applications of scientific and technological developments can contribute significantly to the improvement and upgrading of advanced weapon systems and, in particular, weapons of mass destruction, Aware of the need to follow closely the scientific and technological developments that may have a negative impact on international security and disarmament, and to channel scientific and technological developments for beneficial purposes, Cognizant that the international transfers of dual-use as well as high-technology products, services and know-how for peaceful purposes are important for the economic and social development of States, Also cognizant of the need to regulate such transfers of dual-use goods and technologies and high technology with military applications through multilaterally negotiated, universally applicable, non-discriminatory guidelines, Expressing concern about the growing proliferation of ad hoc and exclusive export control regimes and arrangements for dual-use goods and technologies, which tend to impede the economic and social development of developing countries, Recalling that in the Final Document of the Twelfth Summit of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September 1998, it was noted with concern that undue restrictions on exports to developing countries of material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes persist, Emphasizing that internationally negotiated guidelines for the transfer of high technology with military applications should take into account the legitimate defence requirements of all States and the requirements for the maintenance of international peace and security, while ensuring that access to high-technology products and services and know-how for peaceful purposes is not denied, 1. Affirms that scientific and technological progress should be used for the benefit of all mankind to promote the sustainable economic and social development of all States and to safeguard international security and that international cooperation in the use of science and technology through the transfer and exchange of technological know-how for peaceful purposes should be promoted; 2. Invites Member States to undertake additional efforts to apply science and technology for disarmament-related purposes and to make disarmament-related technologies available to interested States; 3. Urges Member States to undertake multilateral negotiations with the participation of all interested States in order to establish universally acceptable, non-discriminatory guidelines for international transfers of dual-use goods and technologies and high technology with military applications; 4. Encourages United Nations bodies to contribute, within existing mandates, to promoting the application of science and technology for peaceful purposes; 5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the item entitled "The role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament". 