%%%NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|DECOLONIZATION|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 88 Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Rapporteur: Mr. Shingo Miyamoto (Japan) I. Introduction 1. At its 9th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled "Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations" and to allocate it to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee). 2. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 September 2000, the Fourth Committee decided to hold a general debate covering agenda items 18, 88, 89, 90 and 12, and 91. The general debate on the items was held at the 3rd to 7th meetings, from 25 to 29 September (see A/C.4/55/SR.3-7). The Committee took action on item 88 at its 8th meeting, on 3 October (see A/C.4/55/SR.8). 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Relevant chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/55/23 (Part II), chap. VIII and A/55/23 (Part III), chap. XIII); (b) Report of the Secretary-General (A/55/77 and Add.1). II. Consideration of a draft resolution contained in document A/55/23 (Part III), chapter XIII, section A 4. At the 3rd meeting, on 25 September, the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples made a statement in which he gave an account of the relevant activities of the Special Committee during 2000. He also drew attention to chapters VIII and XIII of the report of that Committee (see A/55/23 (Part II and Part III)), the latter containing, inter alia, the related draft resolution submitted by the Special Committee for the consideration of the Fourth Committee. 5. At its 8th meeting, on 3 October, the Fourth Committee adopted draft resolution I contained in chapter XIII, section A, of the report of the Special Committee (see A/55/23 (Part III)) by a recorded vote of 103 to none, with 5 abstentions (see para. 8). The voting was as follows: In favour: Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia. Against: None. Abstaining: Estonia, France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 6. The representative of Morocco made a statement (see A/C.4/55/SR.8). 7. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the representative of the United States of America; after the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (see A/C.4/55/SR.8). III. Recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) 8. The Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations The General Assembly, Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and the action taken by the Special Committee in respect of that information, Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General, Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, Recalling also its resolution 54/83 of 6 December 1999, in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the Territories concerned, 1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;3 2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory; 3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned; 5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session. 