%%%OBSERVER STATUS|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 172 Observer status for the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Drahoslav Štefánek (Slovakia) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Observer status for the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly" was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly at the request of Sweden, on behalf of the following States members of the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance: Australia, Barbados, Belgium, Botswana, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, India, Namibia, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden and Uruguay. 2. At its 9th meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 26th, 32nd and 33rd meetings on 10, 16 and 17 November 2000. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.6/55/SR.26, 32 and 33). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it a letter dated 14 August 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/55/226). II. Consideration of draft decision A/C.6/55/L.14 5. At the 32nd meeting, on 16 November, the Chairman of the Committee introduced a draft decision entitled "Observer status for the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly" (A/C.6/55/L.14) and orally amended it by deleting the phrase "and to include in the provisional agenda of that session the item entitled `Observer status for the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly'" at the end of the text. 6. At its 33rd meeting, on 17 November, the Committee adopted draft decision A/C.6/55/L.14, as orally amended, without a vote (see para. 8). 7. The representative of Sweden made a statement on behalf of the States members of the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (see A/C.6/55/SR.33). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 8. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decision: Observer status for the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly The General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, decides to resume its consideration of and defer a decision on the request for observer status for the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly to its fifty-sixth session. 