%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|HAITI|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|PROPERTY|DISSOLUTION|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 150 Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report provides details on the final disposition of the assets of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH). The inventory value of the assets of the Missions as at 15 March 2000 amounted to some $27.2 million, 46 per cent of which have been transferred to other peacekeeping operations or to the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, for temporary storage. The disposal of the assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH has been guided by the principles endorsed by the General Assembly in section VII of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly, as set out in paragraph 8 below, are to take note of the present report on the final disposition of assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH. Paragraphs Page Introduction Classification and disposition of the assets of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti Losses of United Nations property Action to be taken by the General Assembly Annexes I. Summary of the final disposition of assets II. Property transferred to other missions A. Property transferred to the International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Logistics Base, the United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights in Guatemala, the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the United Nations Headquarters B. Property transferred to the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola and others III. Property sold A. Property sold to individuals, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Office for Project Services and the World Food Programme B. Property sold to the United Nations Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq, the Electoral Council and the Haitian National Police IV. Property written off or stolen A. Property written off as unaccounted for, through wear and tear and hostile action and due to accidents B. Property written off due to damage and as uneconomical to recover C. Property written off as theft and total assets written off 1. By its resolution 1063 (1996) of 28 June 1996, the Security Council established the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH). The mandate of the Support Mission ended on 31 July 1997. By its resolution 1123 (1997) of 30 July 1997, the Council established the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) for a single four-month period ending 30 November 1997. By the same resolution, the Council decided that UNTMIH would assume responsibility for all elements and assets of UNSMIH remaining in Haiti to deploy as appropriate until they were withdrawn. By its resolution 1141 (1997) of 28 November 1997, the Council established the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) and decided that MIPONUH would assume responsibility for those UNTMIH personnel and United Nations-owned assets for its required use in fulfilment of its mandate. The mandate of MIPONUH ended on 15 March 2000. 2. The present report on the final disposition of the assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH is submitted pursuant to section VII of General Assembly resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, in which the Assembly endorsed the proposals of the Secretary-General on the disposition of the assets of peacekeeping operations contained in his report of 25 May 1994 (A/48/945 para. 110 (d)) and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its report of 18 November 1994 (A/49/664, para. 116). II. Classification and disposition of the assets of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti 3. The process of liquidating the assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH was guided by the following principles and policies as approved by the General Assembly in section VII of its resolution 49/233 A: (a) Equipment in good condition that conforms to established standardization or is considered compatible with existing equipment will be redeployed to other United Nations operations elsewhere in the world or will be placed in reserve to form the start-up kits for use by future missions; (b) Equipment not required by other peacekeeping missions but which may be useful for operations of other United Nations agencies, international organizations or non-governmental organizations and which it is not feasible to keep in reserve will be sold to a relevant agency or organization; (c) Any equipment or property not required or which it is not feasible to dispose of in the above manner or which is in poor condition will be subject to commercial disposal in the area of operations, following standard United Nations regulations and procedures; (d) Any surplus mission assets remaining after disposition under the terms referred to under paragraphs (a) to (c) above and/or any assets that have already been installed in the country and which, if dismantled, would in fact set back the rehabilitation process of the country, will be contributed to the duly recognized Government of the respective country. This refers in particular to airfield installations and equipment, bridges and mine-clearing equipment. All efforts should be made to obtain from the Government its agreement to compensate the United Nations in a mutually acceptable form (contributions, services, tax exemption, etc.) for the residual value of any surplus mission assets installed in the country that could not be otherwise disposed of. The General Assembly should, as a matter of principle, be requested to approve any such disposition of mission assets, which would provide for free-of-charge contribution to the Government. 4. Based on the inventory records at 15 March 2000, the inventory value of the assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH amounted to approximately $27.2 million. For ease of classification, these assets have been grouped into 15 categories of equipment presented in standard peacekeeping operation budgets: prefabricated buildings, vehicular equipment, naval equipment, communications equipment, office equipment, data-processing equipment, generators, observation equipment, petrol tank plus metering equipment, water and septic tanks, accommodation equipment, refrigeration equipment, miscellaneous equipment, water purification equipment and public information equipment. 5. In accordance with the principles and policies recalled in paragraph 3 above, the assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH have been placed into the following three groups and three sub-groups, as presented in summarized form in annex I and in detailed form in annexes II to IV: (a) Group I includes assets identified as meeting the requirements of other United Nations missions. The items in the group, with an inventory value of $12,463,300 (46 per cent of total asset value), have been transferred to other United Nations missions, United Nations Headquarters or the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi for temporary storage pending future use. Details are shown in annex II; (b) Group II consists of assets with an inventory value of $9,368,800 and (34 per cent) which have been sold to other organizations or sold within the mission area. A breakdown of the recipients of the sale value of $2,000,400 is shown in the table below and more detailed information is contained in annex III. This amount has been credited as miscellaneous income to the UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH Special Account. (United States dollars) Sold to Inventory value Sale value Individuals Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations United Nations Development Programme United Nations Office of Projects Services World Food Programme United Nations Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq Electoral Council Haitian National Police Total (c) Group III includes two sub-groups: III (a) assets written-off, with a total inventory value of $5,055,100 (19 per cent) and III (b) assets stolen during the course of the mission with an inventory value of $332,500 (1 per cent). Detailed information on the assets recommended for write-off by the UNSMIH/UNTMIH/ MIPONUH Local Property Survey Board is shown in annex IV. The approval of all write-off cases has not yet been completed. III. Losses of United Nations property 6. In accordance with paragraph (c) of General Assembly decision 52/485 of 26 June 1998, detailed information and justification on written-off and lost items is provided below: (a) Property unaccounted for. The large number of "unaccounted for" items is attributable to lack of proper inventory control to account for unserviceable/missing/stolen assets. Assets were also cannibalized prior to write-off action being taken and most write-offs were postponed until the end of the Mission. These assets include: communications, office and data-processing equipment, generators, fuel pumps, water and septic tanks, welfare, accommodation and miscellaneous equipment. Such assets, with a total inventory value of $648,100 and a residual value of $281,100, are being written off as unaccounted for. Measures taken to prevent such losses include the implementation of the following procedures: strict accountability of assets managers for their inventory, physical checks and reconciliation of all assets twice a year between the self-accounting units and the Property Control Inventory Unit and the writing-off of assets as soon as they are lost, damaged or no longer serviceable. Follow-up checks have been instituted to ensure that written-off assets are disposed of in accordance with the decisions of the Property Survey Boards. In this connection, two cases were forwarded to the Headquarters Property Survey Board for approval; (b) Wear and tear. Assets with a total inventory value of $2,919,600 and a residual value of $1,277,300 have been identified as unserviceable due to wear and tear. These include 54 prefabricated buildings, 135 items of vehicular equipment, 152 items of communications equipment, 11 items of office equipment, 605 items of data-processing equipment, 35 water tanks, 8 generators, 18 items of petroleum equipment, 58 items of accommodation equipment, 21 items of miscellaneous equipment, 4 items of water purification equipment, and 6 items of public information equipment; (c) Hostile action. A deteriorating security situation caused by the increased violence and civil disobedience on 29 February 2000 at the Haitian National Police Station at Cite Soleil, where the civilian police were co-located, forced the mission to abandon its assets in situ. As a result, one sea container, one item of radio equipment, two generators and one air conditioner, with a total inventory value of $16,600 and a residual value of $11,900 were left behind and recommended for write-off due to hostile action; (d) Accident. Thirty-four light vehicles and three medium vehicles were written off due to traffic accidents and during rescue efforts after the March 1999 helicopter crash. In addition, six items of communications equipment and one item of observation equipment were also lost during the helicopter crash. The total inventory value of assets written off due to the accidents amounted to $492,600. The corresponding residual value is $163,100; (e) Damage. Assets with a total inventory value of $524,500 and a residual value of $200,300, including 10 items of prefabricated buildings, 6 light vehicles, 2 motorcycles, 6 items of naval equipment, 55 items of communications equipment, 26 items of data-processing equipment, 3 items of observation equipment, 14 water and septic tanks, 1 air conditioner and 1 water purification unit were damaged beyond repair during the course of the Mission and recommended for write-off; (f) Uneconomical to recover. These items, with an inventory value of $453,600 and a residual value of $218,800, including 22 prefabricated buildings, 5 generators and 39 air conditioners, were recommended for write-off. Four air conditioners were left in place in a warehouse leased by the Mission in order to offset substantial claims for compensation for damage incurred by the United Nations while vacating the premises; (g) Theft. Seven light and three medium-sized vehicles, four items of vehicular equipment, 276 items of communication equipment, three items of office equipment, 20 items of data processing equipment, 1 generator, 1 item of observation equipment, 7 fuel pumps, two air conditioners and two items of public information equipment with a total inventory value of $332,500 and a residual value of $198,200, were reported stolen during the course of the mission due to theft or negligence of staff members. Measures to prevent theft were implemented as described in subparagraph (a) above. Other measures taken include the installation of anti-theft devices and electronic alarm and panic systems in all vehicles. In order to deal with the issue of security of United Nations-owned property, the mission has instituted detailed check-out procedures consisting of a check-out form signed by each Section Chief indicating that the departing staff member, civilian police or military personnel has complied with all requirements and has returned all mission assets in good condition. Deductions are made for all Local Property Survey Board assessments, where applicable and, in addition, five days worth of mission subsistence allowance is withheld from each individual to cover any unforeseen receivables. This amount or the balance thereof is reimbursed 30 days after leaving the mission. 7. Detailed information on measures implemented to reduce the loss of assets in peacekeeping missions was contained in section V of document A/53/340 and in section IV of document A/54/669 and Corr.1. IV. Action to be taken by the General Assembly 8. The action to be taken by the General Assembly is to take note of the report on the final disposition of assets of UNSMIH/UNTMIH/MIPONUH. 