%%%INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|EXPERTS|RULES AND REGULATIONS|CONSULTATIONS|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda items 116 and 123 Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations Human resources management Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal) I. Introduction 1. At its 9th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-fifth session the items entitled "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations" and "Human resources management" and to allocate them to the Fifth Committee. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the question of the proposed regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than Secretariat officials and experts on mission under items 116 and 123, at its 28th meeting, on 16 November 2000. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the question are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.5/55/SR.28). 3. For its consideration of the question, the Committee had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the proposed regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than Secretariat officials and experts on mission (A/54/695 and Corr.1) and the report of the Secretary-General on regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of the Secretary-General (A/54/710 and Corr.1). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/55/L.8 4. At its 28th meeting, on 16 November 2000, the representative of Portugal, Rapporteur of the Committee and coordinator of the informal consultations on this question, introduced a draft resolution, entitled "Proposed regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than Secretariat officials and experts on mission and regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of the Secretary-General" (A/C.5/55/L.8). 5. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted, without a vote, the draft resolution (see para. 6). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 6. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Proposed regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than Secretariat officials and experts on mission and regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of the Secretary-General The General Assembly, Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the proposed regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than Secretariat officials and experts on mission and on the regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of the Secretary-General, 1. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake consultations on the proposed regulations with the officials referred to in paragraph 1 (a) of his report on proposed regulations governing the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than Secretariat officials and experts on mission,1 in particular those who are elected by the General Assembly and its subsidiary organs, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its resumed fifty-fifth session, including on the following elements: (a) The compatibility of the proposed regulations with the statutes governing the officials referred to above; (b) The possible impact, if any, of the proposed regulations on the independence of those expert bodies; (c) The accountability mechanisms envisaged to enforce the proposed regulations; 2. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the report mentioned in paragraph 1 above, to submit additional information on whether the proposed regulations ensure the impartiality, neutrality, objectivity and accountability of the personnel referred to in paragraph 1 (b) of the report. 