%%%COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda items 116 and 120 Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal) I. Introduction 1. At its 9th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-fifth session the items entitled "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations" and "Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency" and to allocate them to the Fifth Committee. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the items at its 41st meeting, on 18 December 2000. Comments and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the items are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.5/55/SR.41). 3. For its consideration of the items, the Committee had before it the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the activities of the Advisory Committee during the fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly (A/55/7). II. Consideration of draft decision A/C.5/55/L.23 4. At its 41st meeting, on 18 December, the Chairman of the Committee introduced a draft decision entitled "Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency" (A/C.5/55/L.23). 5. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft decision A/C.5/55/L.23 without a vote (see para. 6). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 6. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decision: Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency The Fifth Committee decides to recommend to the General Assembly that it take note with appreciation of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the activities of the Advisory Committee during the fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly1 and requests the Secretary-General to bring the report to the attention of the executive heads of the specialized agencies and the funds and programmes concerned. 