%%%EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE|CZECH REPUBLIC|MALAYSIA|MEXICO|QATAR|SCHOLARSHIPS|NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES|

Fifty-fifth session * A/55/50. Item 92 of the preliminary list* Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories Report of the Secretary-General I. Introduction 1. By General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954, Member States were invited to extend to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories offers of facilities not only for study and training of university standard, but also for study at the post-primary level, as well as technical and vocational training of immediate practical value. 2. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 1696 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, offers extended under resolution 845 (IX) are communicated by the Secretariat to the administering Powers to enable them to give appropriate publicity to the offers in the Territories under their administration. 3. Information on scholarships offered by Member States under the programme is made available to prospective applicants. Reference to the programme is included in the thirtieth edition of the handbook entitled Study Abroad, published by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 4. Under the terms of General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) and subsequent resolutions,1 the Secretary-General submits to the Assembly each year a report containing detailed information on the offers made and the extent to which they were utilized.2 The present report, which covers the period from 13 August 1999 to 31 May 2000, is submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 54/86. II. Scholarship offers and awards A. Offering States 5. Over the years, the 48 States Members of the United Nations and 1 non-member State listed below have offered to make scholarships available for the use of inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories in response to the aforementioned resolutions: Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Finland, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Yugoslavia. B. Offers and awards Czech Republic 6. In a note verbale dated 23 March 2000, the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic to the United Nations informed the Secretary-General that for the academic year 2000/01 the Czech Republic had granted 200 scholarships to the developing countries and to other countries in need. Even though for that academic year none of the scholarships were granted to Non-Self-Governing Territories, the Secretary-General was assured that in subsequent years the provisions of resolution 54/86 would be given due consideration by the Government of the Czech Republic. Malaysia 7. In notes verbales dated 27 and 29 March 2000, the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations informed the United Nations Secretariat that the Government of Malaysia was offering under the Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme fellowships to the inhabitants of the British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Turks and Caicos Islands the following short courses: (i) Systems Development for Small and Medium Enterprises, 19 June-4 August 2000 (closing date: 28 April 2000); (ii) Work Study for Productivity Improvement, 19 June-4 August 2000 (closing date: 28 April 2000); and courses conducted by the following departments: :: Department of Irrigation and Drainage; :: Tun Abdul Razak Broadcasting Institute (IPTAR); :: National Institute of Valuation (INSPEN); :: National Archives of Malaysia; :: Department of Fisheries Malaysia. Mexico 8. In a note verbale dated 11 February 2000, the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations informed the Decolonization Unit that, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 53/63, the Government of Mexico had decided to offer scholarships to nationals of Non-Self-Governing Territories to undertake studies in Spanish language and Mexican culture aimed at students and teachers for a period of six months, and subsequently to carry out specialized studies; to pursue master's or doctorate degrees; to carry out high-level doctoral research with tutoring in Mexican academic institutions; or to pursue postdoctoral studies in Mexican academic institutions, during the academic year 2001. 9. The scholarship programme is available to nationals of the following Non-Self-Governing Territories: American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Caledonia, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, Tokelau, Turks and Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands. 10. The scholarships will cover the following expenses: (a) registration fees and tuition; (b) monthly subsistence allowance as determined by the Mexican authorities; (c) installation costs; (d) medical insurance; (e) international transport; and (f) local transport from Mexico City to the academic institution. 11. Scholarship applications should be submitted by the appropriate authorities in the Non-Self-Governing Territories to the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations, no later than 31 May 2000. To carry out specialized studies, to pursue master's or doctorate degrees, or to carry out doctoral or postdoctoral research, candidates must have the acceptance of the receiving Mexican institution. Scholarships for the academic year 2001 will be made available by the Mexican Institute for International Cooperation (IMEXCI) in October 2000. Qatar 12. In a note verbale dated 18 April 2000, the Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar to the United Nations informed the Secretary-General that the Government of the State of Qatar offers scholarships to some developing countries or organizations and educational and cultural institutes in those countries. III. Applications made through the United Nations 13. In accordance with the procedure established by the General Assembly in its resolution 1696 (XVI), applications for scholarships received by the United Nations Secretariat from inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories are transmitted simultaneously to the offering States for consideration and to the administering Powers for information. 14. Between 13 August 1999 and 31 May 2000, the Secretariat received requests from three students for information on the availability of scholarships. One, a national of Western Sahara, requested assistance to pursue postgraduate studies at a particular institution. The Secretariat forwarded the request to a number of States. However, replies indicated that this type of assistance was not available under existing programmes. The remaining two students were not inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories. Notes 1 The most recent resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on this question are resolutions 50/35, 51/142, 52/74, 53/63 and 54/86. 2 For the most recent reports, see A/50/481; A/51/373; A/52/388; A/53/262 and Add.1; and A/54/267. 