%%%SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|TRADE LIBERALIZATION|ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION|EXPORTS|

Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Implementation of the Outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and Further Initiatives Second session 3-14 April 2000 * A/AC.253/12. Item 2 of the provisional agenda* Preparations for the special session of the General Assembly on the implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and further initiatives Review reports and proposals for further action and initiatives submitted by organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations system and other concerned organizations Note by the Secretary-General Addendum Contribution on assistance to countries with economies in transition 1. The Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Implementation of the Outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and Further Initiatives, in paragraph 4 of the annex to decision 1,1 requested the Secretary-General, in conjunction with the relevant United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies, to prepare a report on additional measures to support the efforts of the countries with economies in transition directed towards reducing the social costs of the transition process and achieving sustained economic growth, including the formulation by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development of a positive agenda for trade for those countries, with a view to liberalizing markets and increasing access for the exports of the countries with economies in transition. 2. In response to that request, the Secretary-General wishes to draw the attention of the Preparatory Committee to the publication entitled "Transition 1999: Regional Human Development Report for Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS",2 which was prepared by the United Nations Development Programme. Notes 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/54/45 and corrigendum), chap. VI, sect. B. 2 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.99.III.B.6. 