%%%DEVELOPMENT FINANCE|REGIONAL COMMISSIONS|CONFERENCES|CONSULTATIONS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

Preparatory Committee for the High-level International Intergovernmental Event on Financing for Development Resumed organizational session 30 May 2000 Item 4 of the provisional agenda* Preparation for the substantive preparatory process and the high-level international event Programme of work Note by the Secretary-General Preparation for the regional consultations 1. In the draft resolution recommended by the Preparatory Committee at its resumed organizational session for adoption by the General Assembly (A/54/L.82), the Preparatory Committee approved the recommendation of its Bureau (A/AC.257/6, para. 11) that the regional commissions, in conjunction with the regional development banks and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), organize consultations during the second half of 2000 on substantive matters before the Preparatory Committee. The Bureau had indicated in its report that the regional interactions with relevant stakeholders should be a proper component of the regional consultation process. The Bureau also suggested that the planning of the regional consultations be left to the aforementioned institutions, under the overall coordination of the financing for development coordinating secretariat in New York, which was to keep the Bureau informed about planned activities. * A/AC.257/3/Rev.1. 2. Since the last organizational session, the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee, in addition to the Secretariat, has met with the Executive Secretaries of the Regional Commissions. The Executive Secretaries on behalf of the regional commissions expressed their willingness to organize regional consultations on financing for development and to extend an invitation to the corresponding regional development banks to play a lead role in the organization of the regional consultations. 3. The Executive Secretaries also met with a sub-group of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs consisting of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, UNCTAD, the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to discuss the preparations for the regional meetings. The financing for development coordinating secretariat has also had separate meetings with various regional commissions, UNCTAD and other bodies to ensure an effective organization of the regional consultations. 4. Once the agenda for the international event is clarified, the regional meetings can be organized in accordance therewith, although it is understood that each regional meeting may evolve its agenda according to the region's specific particular interests and concerns. It has been stressed that the regional meetings should be seen as an integral part of the overall global process and their results will be treated as primary inputs into that process. 5. On participation of other institutional and non-institutional stakeholders in the regional meetings, it was noted by the Executive Secretaries that the meetings had to be short and focused in order to capture the attention of finance ministers and central bankers. It may be difficult to bring in too many other stakeholders in a meaningful way and consequently it was agreed that the focus should be on regional financial institutions including, besides the regional development banks, subregional financial entities as well as regional industry and business associations. 6. At the moment, arrangements are under way for an ESCAP meeting in August in Indonesia; an ECA meeting in November in Addis Ababa as part of the ECA meetings of Ministers of Finance and Trade; an ECLAC meeting in November in Colombia; and ECE and ESCWA meetings at dates and venues yet to be determined. Preparation for the hearings Hearings with non-governmental organizations 7. The Preparatory Committee accepted the Bureau's recommendation to hold a set of "hearings" with representatives of non-governmental organizations of two days' duration, consisting of morning and afternoon sessions in panel format. Tentative dates for these are 6 and 7 November 2000. The specific subjects for these hearings will be drawn from the financing for development agenda. It is expected that the participation will be welcomed of accredited non-governmental organization representatives, from, inter alia, the following broad categories: the academic and research community, foundations, religious organizations, trade unions, the media and other non-governmental organizations. 8. General participation in the financing for development process has been opened, according to the decision of the Preparatory Committee, to non-governmental organizations currently in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and other non-governmental organizations are welcome to apply for ad hoc consultative status (see A/54/L.82, operative para. 2 (e)). It is expected that the non-governmental organizations that participate in the hearings will be drawn from one of these two categories. 9. The financing for development coordinating secretariat may also seek the assistance of "organizing partners", from among the non-governmental organization community, who can help in carrying out the preparatory and logistic work for the hearings. (A draft list of non-governmental organizations participants should be available by 1 October 2000). 10. Each session of the hearings will start with a 15-minute presentation by each of the participants, followed by possible 10-minute reactions from appointed delegation "commentators". The remaining time will be devoted to an interactive dialogue between non-governmental organization participants and governmental delegates, moderated by the Co-Chairmen of the Preparatory Committee, without a previously fixed list of speakers. United Nations agencies and intergovernmental organization representatives may also participate in the discussion. 11. A Co-Chairman's general summary of the hearings will be prepared to serve as an informal record of the key views expressed and proposals made in the hearings, reflecting the nature of the debate as accurately as possible. This summary will hopefully provide a useful reference for delegations in their official deliberations. Hearings with the business sector 12. The Preparatory Committee also decided, upon the recommendation of the Bureau, to hold a two-day set of hearings with representatives of the business sector. Tentative dates for these hearings are 11 and 12 December 2000 and they also will comprise morning and afternoon sessions in panel format. The subject of the hearings would be defined by the financing for development agenda and the chairman of the hearings would prepare a summary of the views exchanged, similar to that for the non-governmental organization hearings. This summary, besides being made available to delegations, will be taken into account by the Secretariat in the preparation of the documentation that will be presented to the future substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee. 13. The coordinating secretariat, in consultation with the Bureau, would invite business representatives from the following broad categories to participate in the hearings: private banks (including investment banks, commercial banks, savings institutions and savings and loan associations), institutional investors (including pension funds, mutual funds, hedge funds, microfinance funds and venture capital companies), other market institutions (including markets, supervisory bodies and credit rating agencies), non-financial corporations, and business associations. Within each category, efforts will be made so that the "leading" institutions are selected to receive an invitation to the hearings, but other important criteria will also be taken into consideration, such as, for example, an adequate representation of business entities from developing countries. 14. Apart from the two-day set of hearings in December, the Preparatory Committee and the Bureau may also consider additional modalities of engaging with the private sector. For example, they could encourage private initiatives to organize public discussions on financing for development topics that could be attended by members of the Bureau and the Preparatory Committee. Likewise, side activities, involving the private sector (for example, panels, discussions) could be organized in parallel to the final event and during the sessions in 2001 of the Preparatory Committee. Preparation of the official substantive documentation: intersecretariat issue-oriented working groups 15. To help prepare the substantive documentation that the Secretary-General intends to present to the Preparatory Committee, it is planned that there will be established four or five intersecretariat issue-oriented working groups, drawn from the staff of the organizations of the United Nations system and of other intergovernmental organizations that have offered to support the financing for development process. These working groups will be asked to help develop concrete, action-oriented policy proposals on the different issues that fall within the agenda to be agreed for the financing for development event. Each working group will be initially convoked in June/July 2000 by the Executive Coordinator of the financing for development secretariat and will be requested to submit its report before the end of the year. A member of each working group will be asked to serve as coordinator for the group, aided by an assistant-rapporteur. 16. Each working group should comprise a balanced selection of highly experienced experts in the relevant fields of inquiry. Likewise, each working group may, if appropriate, commission review papers on specific topics from consultants so as to establish a common background for its discussions, and also invite relevant experts from international organizations and civil society to provide inputs to its technical deliberations. The working groups would take into consideration the reports of the regional consultations and draw inputs from the hearings on financing for development that are to take place during the year. 17. Each working group would meet an average of once a month during the second semester of the year, before finalizing the texts to be brought back to the financing for development coordinating secretariat. The coordinating secretariat will then review and combine the reports of the various issue-oriented working groups and prepare a single coherent, comprehensive policy report for the consideration of the Preparatory Committee at its second substantive session in the first quarter of 2001. This policy report will be the main document submitted by the Secretary-General to the Preparatory Committee for the High-Level International Intergovernmental Event on Financing for Development and will mainly contain specific recommendations for decision and action, though it will also include short introductory analytical sections for each chapter and may be accompanied by supporting materials taken from the United Nations Organization's own work or supplied by the other institutions represented in the working groups. 18. As has been indicated, the Preparatory Committee will also have for its consideration the reports emanating from the regional meetings, the summaries of the hearings, and any other documents to be provided by accredited institutional and non-institutional stakeholders that wish to make substantive contributions to the financing for development preparatory process and final event. The Preparatory Committee and the Bureau may wish to use some of these reports, in addition to the official policy report of the Secretary-General, in their substantive consultations with the major institutional stakeholders. Dates for the 2001 substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee 19. The Preparatory Committee has decided that its second substantive session should be held in the first quarter of 2001 and the third substantive session in the second quarter of 2001. Tentative dates that have been identified for these sessions are, respectively, 12 to 23 February and 2 to 12 April 2001. 