%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|REIMBURSEMENT|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|BUILDINGS MANAGEMENT|ASBESTOS|

Fifth Committee Summary record of the 15th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 23 October 2000, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: Mr. Mselle Contents Agenda item 153: Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations (continued) (a) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations (continued) Other matters The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m. (a) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations (continued) (A/C.5/55/L.6) Draft resolution A/C.5/55/L.6 1. The Chairman drew attention to draft resolution A/C.5/55/L.6 entitled "Review of the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troop-contributing States", which the representative of Cuba had submitted on his behalf following informal consultations. He took it that the Committee wished to adopt the draft resolution without a vote. 2. Draft resolution A/C.5/55/L.6 was adopted. 3. The Chairman said that he had received a communication from the President of the Coordinating Committee for International Staff Unions and Associations of the United Nations System (CCISUA) requesting access to address the Fifth Committee under agenda items 123 (Human resources management) and 124 (United Nations common system). He took it that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 35/213 and in keeping with the Committee's practice at previous sessions of the General Assembly, the Committee wished to invite the representative of CCISUA to make oral statements in connection with agenda items 123 and 124. 4. It was so decided. 5. Ms. Incera (Costa Rica) said that her delegation was concerned at the risk posed to occupants of the Secretariat building from possible exposure to asbestos arising from the construction work currently under way on a number of floors in the building. The Permanent Mission of Costa Rica had arranged for a sample of construction material retrieved from the area of the Staff Café to be tested in a laboratory and the results of that test were now available. She wondered what measures had been put in place by the Secretariat to ensure the safety of the building's occupants and whether experts in the field had been consulted prior to the commencement of the renovation projects in question. 6. Mr. Acakpo-Satchivi (Secretary of the Committee) said that the Assistant Secretary-General for Central Support Service in the Department of Management would be invited to respond at a future meeting to the concerns just raised by the representative of Costa Rica. The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m. 