%%%CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS|ILLICIT ARMS TRAFFICKING|SMALL ARMS|

Disarmament Commission 2000 substantive session New York, 26 June-7 July 2000 Practical confidence-building measures in the field of conventional arms Working paper submitted by Switzerland 1. The compilation of the various existing confidence-building measures (CBMs) in different regions of the world will provide a reasonable and useful basis for the Commission's deliberations and should therefore be as broad and comprehensive as possible. Yet this inventory will not claim to be an exhaustive one. 2. The European experience in the field of confidence- and security-building measures (CSBMs), which have been elaborated in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) since 1975, is assessed to be very positive by the States concerned and could therefore be a valuable contribution for the Disarmament Commission discussions. 3. The underlying principle of the set of CSBMs agreed by consensus in the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe and later on in today's OSCE is the indivisibility of security, which basically means that no State should seek security at the expense of the security of others. Reciprocity, mutuality and consensus are other important prerequisites to achieving confidence in the spirit of cooperative security. 4. CBMs cannot replace disarmament nor are they designed to do so. Moreover, they fit into the wide range of arms control measures, which are different in nature and kind. However, CBMs are not an end in themselves; only the degree of their implementation in good trust accounts for how much confidence and security is built between States or other actors involved. 5. The cornerstone of the current CSBM regime in OSCE was laid in the Helsinki Final Act in 1975, in which the participating States agreed to certain measures designed to contribute to reducing the dangers of armed conflict and of misunderstanding or miscalculation of military activities which could give rise to apprehension, particularly in a situation where the participating States lack clear and timely information. 6. These CSBMs of the first generation have been further developed and currently encompass provisions for the exchange and verification of information regarding armed forces and military activities, as well as certain mechanisms promoting cooperation among States in regard to military matters. These measures aim at promoting mutual trust and dispelling concern about military activities by encouraging openness and transparency. 7. Measures contained in the Vienna Document 1999, which is the basic reference document in OSCE concerning CSBMs, include: :: Annual exchange of military information on forces, major weapons systems and on plans for their deployment; :: Exchange of information on defence planning; :: Risk reduction measures, such as mechanisms for consultation and cooperation as regards unusual military activities, hazardous incidents of a military nature; :: A programme of military contacts and cooperation; :: Prior notification and observation of certain military activities; :: Constraining provisions for military activities above a certain threshold and within a given time-frame; :: Compliance and verifications measures, such as inspections and evaluations; :: Finally, provisions regarding the OSCE communications network. 8. Further CBMs could be developed with regard to military doctrines, such as: :: Transparency measures; :: Information exchange; :: Holding of seminars to deepen the understanding of each other's doctrines. 9. Military doctrines should allow for only maintaining such military capabilities as are commensurate with individual or collective legitimate security needs. 10. In the field of small arms and light weapons, the International Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in all its Aspects, to be held in 2001, should address ways and means to enhance, inter alia, transparency through information exchange and cooperation between governmental branches in charge of export controls, law enforcement agencies, customs, etc., as well as other measures which could also promote confidence and trust. Such measures are hence necessary prerequisites for effective destruction and collecting of small arms. Thus the Conference would take both prevention and reduction equally into consideration. 11. Finally, the democratic political control of military, paramilitary and internal security forces, as well as of intelligence services and the police are important if not indispensable elements of stability and security. While reaffirming the principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as the sovereign right of States, the latter will, inter alia: :: Determine their military capabilities on the basis of national democratic procedures; :: Not attempt to impose military domination over any other State; :: Further the integration of their armed forces with civil society; :: Provide and maintain effective guidance to and control of its military, paramilitary and security forces by constitutionally established authorities vested with democratic legitimacy; :: Thereby clearly define the roles and missions of such forces and their obligation to act solely within the constitutional framework; :: Provide for its legislative approval of defence expenditures and for transparency and public access to information related to the armed forces; :: Instruct their armed forces personnel in international humanitarian law, rules, conventions and commitments governing armed conflict. 