%%%DIPLOMATIC PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES|DIPLOMATS' SECURITY|TURKEY|GREECE|EMBASSIES|DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR SERVICE|

Fifty-fourth session Consideration of effective measures to enhance the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives Report of the Secretary-General Addendum I. Introduction 1. One additional report was submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 53/97 of 8 December 1998. II. Report received from a State pursuant to paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 53/97 2. Greece submitted a report, dated 12 April 2000, containing comments on a report dated 10 June 1999 submitted by Turkey (see A/INF/54/5/Add.1). The text of the response from Greece is as follows: Comments on Turkey's allegations on the security of its diplomatic and consular missions in Greece. 1. Turkey's diplomatic and consular missions in Greece are not under "permanent threat". In fact, because of the recent amelioration in Greek-Turkish relations, Turkish diplomats are welcomed everywhere in Greece. 2. Greece condemns all kinds of terrorism, including the targeting of diplomats. Greek security authorities take all necessary measures to protect Turkey's diplomatic and consular missions and representatives. The Turkish Embassy in Athens has repeatedly expressed appreciation for the measures taken by Greek authorities and aimed at its protection. 3. As far as violent acts against Turkish representatives are concerned, the relevant investigations are still going on. Greece, having suffered herself heavy casualties because of terrorism, spares no effort to bring to justice the perpetrators of these murders. In her fight against the scourge of terrorism, Greece cooperates with several countries on a multilateral and also on a bilateral basis. 4. The Turkish Embassy in Athens was informed in writing on 31 March 1999 on the outcome of the investigations carried out by the Greek authorities. 5. Greece fully complies with her international obligations. Turkey, acknowledging this well-known fact, has at last proceeded, in January 2000, to the signing of an agreement with Greece on combating terrorism, organized crime, illegal immigration and drug trafficking. 