%%%WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT|GENDER STATISTICS|CAPACITY BUILDING|HOME ECONOMICS|CAMEROON|

Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women Twenty-third session 12 June-30 June 2000 * CEDAW/2000/II/1. Item 5 of the provisional agenda* Implementation of article 21 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women Report provided by specialized agencies of the United Nations on the implementation of the Convention in areas falling within the scope of their activities Note by the Secretary-General Addendum Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 1. On 12 April 2000, on behalf of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the Secretariat invited the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to submit to the Committee, by 15 May 2000, a report on information provided by States to FAO on the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, in areas falling within the scope of its activities, which would supplement the information contained in the reports of the States parties to the Convention that will be considered at the Committee's twenty-third session. A country brief prepared by FAO is annexed to the present report. 2. Other information sought by the Committee refers to activities, programmes and policy decisions undertaken by FAO to promote the implementation of the Convention. 3. The report annexed hereto has been submitted in compliance with the Committee's request. Report of the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations to the twenty-third session of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Headquarters, New York, 12 to 30 June 2000) Country: Cameroon In the framework of the implementation of its plan of action on women in development (1996-2001), FAO provided technical assistance to Cameroon, in particular in the following three priority areas: improvement of gender data and information on rural populations; strengthening of national capacity-building through gender training; and household resource management programme. 1. Gender sensitive statistics and information (a) Cameroon participated in the high-level consultation on rural women and information organized by FAO in October 1999. This meeting brought together ministers and senior officials from ministries of women's affairs and agriculture, media specialists and representatives of civil society to discuss ways of better informing decision makers, media and the public at large on the essential role of rural women in agricultural and rural development and their contribution to food security. The main outcome of the consultation was the strategy for action for the production, dissemination and utilization of information and data on rural women. Specific follow-up actions will be included in the next FAO plan of action on gender (2002-2005) as well as in individual national action plans for the integration of women in development. (b) In the framework of its assistance to member countries to improve their statistical operations, FAO invited Cameroon to participate in the recent roundtable in Abidjan in March to analyse the new trends of the World Agricultural Census 2000, in Africa. On the basis of their national agricultural census 1984/85, Cameroon has just now put in place a permanent agricultural survey system. At the same time, the Government has completely reviewed its definitions, concepts and methodologies. Advice and technical elements for the inclusion of a gender dimension have been provided. In addition, since agricultural extension agents, who are utilized as frontline enumerators are now given gender training, there is some hope that gender issues are more likely to be taken into consideration. 2. Socio-economic and gender analysis training A training of trainer's workshop on socio-economic and gender analysis (SEAGA) was carried out in Yaoundé, Cameroon, from 7 to 28 November 1999. The collaborating institutions were FAO, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and the Human Resources Office of the Department of Agricultural Research and Extension of the Ministry of Agriculture of Cameroon (PNVRA). The objective of the workshop was to re-enforce national capacity for integrating socio-economic and gender analysis and participative approaches in agricultural extension work. The workshop participants came from PNVRA headquarters in Yaoundé, as well as from each of the 10 provincial PNVRA offices. Selected non-governmental organizations (NGOs) also participated. For this joint undertaking there were four facilitators for the workshops, one each from IFAD, FAO, PNVRA headquarters and from a local NGO called "Gender Lenses". The workshop stressed the following three components: (a) presentation of the SEAGA framework and discussion of integration of the gender dimension in extension work; (b) exercises in using SEAGA tools; (c) the practical application of SEAGA on the PNVRA's plan of action as well as practice in scheduling future SEAGA training of trainers workshops. 3. Household resource management programme Cameroon was one of the pilot beneficiary countries of a project designed to strengthen national household resource management programmes. Project activities included the training of home economics offices using SEAGA methodologies, the preparation of a strategy document to re-orient home economics programmes to meet the needs and new roles of rural women. The main outcome has been a SEAGA sector guide to assist development agents to improve their performance by using more appropriate and more participatory tools and methodologies at the household and community level, while simultaneously taking global development policies into consideration. 