%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|ISRAEL|WEST BANK (STATE OF PALESTINE)|GAZA STRIP (STATE OF PALESTINE)|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|PALESTINIANS|HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Fifty-seventh session Item 8 of the provisional agenda QUESTION OF THE VIOLATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE OCCUPIED ARAB TERRITORIES, INCLUDING PALESTINE Letter dated 10 October 2000 from the Permanent Observer for Palestine to the United Nations Office at Geneva addressed to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights In follow up to our last two letters to Your Excellency dated 2 and 4 October 2000 concerning the continued massacres perpetrated by the Israeli occupation forces against the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, we would like to expose before Your Excellency the latest developments of this bloody tragedy up to Sunday, 8 October 2000. On Friday, 6 October 2000, the Israeli occupation forces continued to open fire, using their traditional and internationally banned weapons, against the Palestinian population, killing 11 martyrs and wounding 419 others in various cities and villages of occupied Palestine. On Saturday, 7 October 2000, the Israeli occupation forces killed four martyrs and wounded dozens of others in those regions. These same authorities have also attacked 14 ambulances, 4 of which were completely destroyed, and have fired dozens of missiles at residential buildings situated at the Gaza Martyrs' Junction. On Sunday, 8 October 2000, Israeli military occupation forces demolished three buildings to the south of Gaza. They also fired artillery and missiles at the residential district of Abu Snineh in Hebron, thus killing or wounding many Palestinian civilians. On the same day, two Palestinian martyrs were killed and more than 20 others were injured in Gaza, upon being hit by live ammunition fired at them by the Israeli occupation troops. GE.00-15868 (E) On the evening of Sunday to Monday, 8-9 October 2000, more than 1,000 Israeli Jews, assisted by the Israeli police force, stormed into the Palestinian city of Nazareth inside the Green Line, they opened fire at the Palestinian population there and kept beating them until late in the evening. As a result, two Palestinian martyrs were killed and 74 others were injured, bringing the total of victims inside the Green Line to 13 martyrs and more than 120 wounded since the beginning of the "Al-Aqsa Intifadah". Through such persistence in committing crimes of deliberate killing against Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory, and even inside the Green Line, the Israeli Government as well as its occupation forces, persevere in their blatant violations of human rights, in total disregard of the principles of international law, the will of the international community and even the simplest human rights principles. We reiterate our call to Your Excellency to take action and to intervene immediately in order to put an end to these massacres of human beings. We would also be grateful if you could have the text of this letter circulated as an official document of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on Human Rights under agenda item 8. Signed: Nabil RAMLAWI Ambassador Permanent Observer 