%%%SOCIAL POLICY|WEST AFRICA|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|CIVIL SOCIETY|WOMEN|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|GLOBALIZATION|WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT|LAND REFORM|GENDER|AIDS|DEMOCRATIZATION|GOVERNANCE|HUMAN RIGHTS|RACIAL DISCRIMINATION|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|INTERNSHIP PROGRAMMES|

Commission for Social Development Thirty-ninth session 13-23 February 2001 Item 5 (c) of the provisional agenda* Programme questions and other matters: United Nations Research Institute for Social Development Report of the Board of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the Commission for Social Development at its thirty-ninth session the report of the Board of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development on the work of the Institute during 1999 and 2000. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Special events and activities for Geneva 2000 and Women 2000 Geneva 2000 Visible Hands: Taking Responsibility for Social Development Civil society organizations and social integration Review of parliamentary actions to implement the Social Summit commitments Social policy in West Africa Women 2000 Current programme of research Social policy and development Social policy in a development context Neo-liberalism and institutional reform in East Asia Globalization, export-oriented employment for women and social policy Agrarian change, gender and land rights HIV/AIDS and development Democracy, governance and human rights Public sector reform and crisis-ridden States Technocratic policy-making and democratization Urban governance Civil society and social movements Grass-roots movements and initiatives for land reform D. Identities, conflict and cohesion Racism and public policy E. Technology and society Information technologies and social development Business responsibility for sustainable development IV. Improving knowledge for social development in international organizations V. Advisory work VI. Publications and dissemination VII. Internship programme VIII. Financial situation I. Introduction 1. The United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) was established in 1963 with a mandate "to conduct research into problems and policies of social development and relationships between various types of social development and economic development during different phases of economic growth". Its work and approach have evolved considerably over the years. Early emphasis on the measurement of social development and on analysis of the relation between social and economic development was broadened during the 1970s and 1980s, when UNRISD took up questions of inequality, discrimination and participation in development processes. From that time onward, the Institute has sought to promote a holistic and multidisciplinary approach to social development research, emphasizing the complex and often subtle nature of decision-making processes, as well as the multifaceted social impacts of development processes and policies. 2. During the 1990s, UNRISD became more involved in applied research and increased its efforts to make findings accessible to policy makers and the international development community. The Institute participated actively in preparatory work for the global conferences of the 1990s, and particularly for the World Summit for Social Development, sponsoring numerous workshops, seminars and conferences that encouraged dialogue among policy makers, donors, scholars and civil society organizations. The number of its publications increased dramatically during this period; and its research findings were disseminated much more widely, both in printed and electronic form. 3. The present report covers the activities of UNRISD in 1999 and 2000. It is submitted to the Commission for Social Development in accordance with the terms of reference set out in the Secretary-General's bulletin (ST/SGB/126, 1 August 1963), in which it is stipulated that the Board of the Institute should, inter alia, submit regularly to the Commission "a progress report on the work of the Institute". 4. During the last two years, UNRISD has intensified the outreach effort begun earlier in the decade, undertaking five activities related to the special session of the General Assembly to consider implementation of the World Summit for Social Development (Geneva 2000). The largest of these projects evaluated progress towards fulfilling the first commitment of the Copenhagen Declaration: to create an enabling environment for social development. Findings are presented in a new book-length report entitled Visible Hands: Taking Responsibility for Social Development. The report, which synthesizes findings from 40 commissioned papers, highlights patterns of economic growth, liberalization and inequality that continue to obstruct rather than facilitate progress. Furthermore, it draws attention to the fact that while the necessity for social protection has increased since the Copenhagen Summit, resources allocated for this purpose are actually shrinking. It also calls for renewed recognition of the fact that active social policy is an essential ingredient in promoting sustained economic development. Visible Hands, first published in English in May 2000, is now being translated into French, Spanish, Russian and Arabic. 5. The Institute also contributed to preparatory work for the Beijing+5 review process during late 1999 and early 2000. Over a dozen papers were commissioned to assess how contemporary debates on rights and democracy have strengthened women's struggles for greater gender justice. Three related dimensions of "rights-based" development were considered, in particular, the relationship between needs and rights, whether democracy has empowered women, and women's rights and multiculturalism. 6. At the same time, research has continued within six UNRISD projects initiated during the previous biennium: information technologies and social development; gender, poverty and well-being; business responsibility for sustainable development; public sector reform and crisis-ridden States; grass-roots initiatives for land reform; and urban governance. Details on these projects are provided below. Information is also provided on four new projects initiated during 1999-2000: neo-liberalism and institutional reform in East Asia; social policy in a development context; technocratic policy-making and democratization; and HIV/AIDS and development. 7. The evolution of the UNRISD programme of research has been shaped by a series of activities designed to evaluate the current research profile of the Institute and to explore areas of priority concern for the future. First, the Director and staff worked together to prepare UNRISD 2000+: A Vision for the Future of the Institute. A consultative meeting of 25 distinguished third world scholars was held in May 1999 in Thailand. Suggestions on priority areas of concern in Latin America, Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Eastern Europe were incorporated into Institute thinking on future research.1 8. As a result of these discussions, the UNRISD research programme was regrouped under five main themes or areas: social policy and development; democracy, governance and human rights; identities, conflict and cohesion; civil society and social movements; and technology and society. Calling attention to these overarching concerns should not only allow the Institute to make a more coherent and policy-relevant presentation of research findings from various projects, but also reinforce the synergies among projects. The new organization of the UNRISD research programme will be reflected in the format of the present report. 9. The report also highlights two new special activities through which UNRISD hopes to contribute to the work of the broader United Nations system during the next few years. A first initiative should strengthen the empirical basis for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to be held in South Africa in September 2001, by commissioning papers from some of the most knowledgeable scholars and policy makers in this field. The effort, which will include a large public conference, will be coordinated with the Social Policy and Development Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 10. A second special initiative, Improving Research and Knowledge on Social Development within International Organizations, began in November 2000 with a small planning meeting in Bellagio, Italy, at which 15 high-level United Nations officials, closely involved in research on social development, discussed the kinds of problems on which coordinated attention should be focused and agreed to take part in a series of future seminars on key research questions. The first of these will be organized around the theme "Equity in the Global Economy". 11. In addition to their research and administrative activities, UNRISD staff carry out a range of advisory tasks for United Nations agencies, multilateral and bilateral organizations, Governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), research institutes and universities. As the present report notes in greater detail, they have spoken at numerous conferences and seminars, provided input on research and policy proposals, acted as advisers to development NGOs, and referred articles for well-known development journals. 12. The UNRISD publication and dissemination unit has devoted considerable effort over the past two years to reaching new audiences and making access to documents easier. Hundreds of papers and reports can now be easily downloaded from the web site (www.unrisd.org). The past two years have also been very productive in terms of traditional publications. A total of 19 books were published with commercial or academic presses. In-house publications included 18 occasional papers, 19 discussion papers, five programme papers, and four conference reports. In addition, UNRISD News was published regularly, and new presentation documents, including an information brochure, annual report and publications catalogue, were inaugurated. 13. An internship programme provides a few outstanding graduate students with opportunities to work in an international research setting. In 1999-2000, 29 interns from 16 countries participated in the programme. UNRISD is also attempting to secure funding for a new initiative that would permit young scholars with advanced degrees from developing countries to spend up to 18 months at the Institute as Research Fellows. 14. The Governments of Denmark, Finland, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland have long supported the work of the Institute as core funders. During the last biennium, the United Kingdom also joined this group. The level of core funding rose significantly, as the majority of donors increased their contributions. Nevertheless, increases in contributions made in national currencies pegged to the euro were to some extent offset by the depreciation of the euro against the United States dollar. The level of project funding has also improved over this period, although it is still insufficient and must be increased. 15. More information on all UNRISD activities during 1999-2000 is presented below, beginning with an overview of work for Geneva 2000 and Women 2000. II. Special events and activities for Geneva 2000 and Women 2000 A. Geneva 2000 16. During the last biennium, the Institute sponsored five different projects that were specifically designed to support preparatory work for Geneva 2000. One of these -- a Virtual Forum on Initiatives, maintained on the UNRISD web site as a means for individuals and organizations around the world to share information on their preparation for the Summit review -- is discussed in the section of the present report on dissemination. The other four are explained below. 1. Visible Hands: Taking Responsibility for Social Development 17. By far the largest project involved an effort, carried out over an 18-month period, to evaluate progress made towards implementation of the first commitment of the Copenhagen Declaration: creating an "economic, political, social, cultural and legal environment" in which social development can flourish. Eight areas of policy and institutional reform were explored: :: Attempts to integrate social and economic policy; :: Initiatives to improve the flow of resources for social development; :: Democratization; :: Public sector restructuring; :: Efforts to strengthen corporate social responsibility; :: Debates on the role of civil society organizations in service provision and international decision-making; :: Attempts to make development more accountable to women; and :: The promotion of "people-centred" sustainable development. 18. A total of 40 background papers were commissioned on these subjects, 10 of which were published separately as UNRISD Occasional Papers for Geneva 2000.2 Several more were issued as Programme Papers.3 All served as inputs for a book-length report entitled Visible Hands: Taking Responsibility for Social Development, which was published by the Institute in May 2000 and formally presented at a large public conference held concurrently with the special session of the General Assembly at Geneva in late June 2000. 19. The report paints a fairly disturbing picture of initiatives that remain more at the level of agency rhetoric than effective implementation; and of patterns of economic growth, liberalization and inequality that continue to obstruct rather than facilitate progress in social development. Although there are signs that the ideological climate for rethinking development policy is more favourable than it has been for years -- there has been some reassessment of the importance of the public sector, as well as heightened sensitivity on the part of Governments and international financial institutions to social issues -- there has been no fundamental rethinking of economic policies themselves, nor any serious attempt to integrate social and economic policy. Social policy remains largely detached from economic policy, or is seen as an add-on intended to mitigate the social costs of economic liberalization and structural adjustment. 20. While the necessity for social protection has increased, resources allocated for this purpose are shrinking as a result of declining aid, cuts in government expenditure and tax avoidance. While public sector restructuring has been a condition of much development assistance in the 1990s, it has often failed to produce hoped-for results. Not only have the Governments of many developing countries had to reduce levels of public spending, but the task of improving the managerial efficiency of the public sector has often been undermined by the limited capacity of many States to monitor the operations of new agencies and privatized services. Similarly, while donors and multilateral agencies frequently stress the importance of working with and through civil society organizations (CSOs), political and institutional constraints often limit the effectiveness of civil society both in advocacy and in service delivery. 21. The report concludes that during the past decade there has been far too much confidence in the "invisible hand" of an unregulated market and too little understanding of the necessary relation between public policy and development. Until Governments and public-spirited citizens reassert their rights to orient economic and social policy towards more inclusive and egalitarian goals, central commitments of the Social Summit are unlikely to be met. 2. Civil society organizations and social integration 22. In mid-1999, the Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly invited UNRISD to prepare a report on institutional arrangements for social integration, including the role of civil society in the planning and provision of social services.4 Utilizing some of the studies mentioned above, as well as ongoing work within its research projects, the Institute prepared a document that was submitted to the Commission for Social Development in February 2000. The report was discussed at the thirty-eighth session of the Commission; and it was also presented at a seminar on the role of civil society in policy formulation and service provision, sponsored by UNRISD and the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and held in New York in March 2000, prior to the second Preparatory Committee meeting for Geneva 2000.5 23. The report submitted to the Commission for Social Development highlights the recent and growing contributions made by CSOs in the international arena, including their role in policy design and advocacy. This has come about in part because opportunities for exchange of views with international bodies are being institutionalized. The report noted, however, that CSOs of the countries of the North tend to have greater influence in the international arena than do their counterparts of the South, and called for strengthened efforts by international agencies and donors to facilitate greater participation of CSOs of the South in international forums. 24. At the national level, there is a clear trend towards growing CSO involvement in service provision. More government and donor funds have become available for this purpose at the same time that reform and restructuring are weakening the overall framework for government provision of services. This, paradoxically, has negative ramifications for the capacity of CSOs to work effectively in this field. The report emphasizes that CSOs do a better job when they work within a framework established by an efficient and democratic State.6 3. Review of parliamentary actions to implement the Social Summit commitments 25. At the beginning of 1999, the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) at Geneva requested that UNRISD prepare a report on the role of parliaments in implementing the Declaration and Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development, based on the results of an IPU questionnaire survey. The survey was carried out in September 1998 and covered 136 national parliaments. UNRISD staff processed, annotated and analysed information from the 44 legislatures providing the most complete responses. A report was completed in February 1999 and presented at a meeting in early March of the IPU Committee for Sustainable Development, as well as at a tripartite meeting of representatives of parliaments, Governments and intergovernmental organizations at United Nations Headquarters in New York in late March 1999. 26. The report suggests that national parliaments have played a considerable role in the follow-up to the Social Summit. They have helped to promote dialogue on social development and popularized the various concepts and goals of the Social Summit; and they have also enacted legislation on many critical social questions. Parliaments have frequently made pledges in the field of social spending, designated institutions to oversee the implementation process, observed specific events related to Summit goals and engaged in wider interaction with NGOs, welfare institutions and other organizations of civil society. 27. Nevertheless, the survey results reflect slow progress in implementing Summit commitments. Many countries, including industrialized ones, have failed to develop detailed national strategies on poverty, unemployment and social exclusion. There has also been a failure to meet international commitments agreed at the Summit. Although national parliaments have played an important role in focusing government efforts on long-term national development strategies, systematic funding of Summit goals has occurred in only a few countries. Indeed, most countries report few or no tangible results in terms of reducing poverty, increasing productive employment or eliminating social exclusion. The report acknowledges, however, that it will require more than four years after the Social Summit to properly evaluate the effectiveness of policy measures in national settings. 4. Social policy in West Africa 28. The UNRISD project on social policy in West Africa was also designed to make a contribution to Geneva 2000. Beginning in late 1998, country studies were carried out in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali and Senegal to examine recent trends in social policy, as well as the role played by the Social Summit in shaping the policy agenda. The preliminary findings of this project were presented at a regional workshop held in Dakar, Senegal, in November 1999. 29. It is clear that the follow-up process to the Social Summit has not been strong in the study countries. To a considerable degree, this is related to the fact that macroeconomic policies linked to structural adjustment and public sector reforms that involve "downsizing", as well as some types of conditionality, have created a "disabling" environment for social policy. Several country studies also suggest that recent attempts to target health and education services have proved problematic, as they often fail to reach the poorest regions or individuals within countries. 30. Although there are signs of economic recovery following the shock devaluation of the CFA in 1994, there seems to be little corresponding progress in terms of social development, given the unequal distribution of the benefits of economic growth, shrinkage of formal sector employment, and ongoing problems of governance associated with corruption and weak public administration. There is also concern that development strategies in some countries are increasingly determined by technocrats and international consultants or advisers, rather than by broad-based social dialogue. 31. A synthesis report from this project has been published,7 and a country study on Côte d'Ivoire is currently in press. B. Women 2000 32. UNRISD focused its contribution to Women 2000 on three related dimensions of "rights-based" development: (a) the implications of changing approaches to social service provision for women's "basic needs" and "social rights"; (b) women in contemporary democratization; and (c) the relation between women's rights, multiculturalism and universalism. For this purpose, 12 papers were commissioned and a public workshop coinciding with the special session for the Beijing+5 review was held in New York on 3 June 2000. The conference report is available in print and on the UNRISD web site.8 33. Research suggests that, in a significant number of countries, the acknowledgement of formal rights for women has not been matched by an increase in substantive rights, or by an improvement in their quality of life. In some cases, an effort is made to ensure that women's "needs" are met, while their rights to self-determination are denied. In other countries, civil and political rights are codified for women, while the majority are denied economic and social resources. Yet obviously, women's ability to act as full participants in their societies depends both on their economic and social resources and on their legal rights. Without rights to legal representation, for instance, women cannot become independent economic actors; and without access to adequate health services, women cannot choose their family size. The increased reliance on non-state actors for the provision of social services is problematic in this regard, because there is a tendency to rely on women in NGOs or community organizations to perform low-paid or unpaid care work, rather than ensuring that public services are adequate to meet their basic needs. 34. It is often assumed that democracy is gender-neutral and naturally supports improvements in the condition of women. But women are seriously underrepresented in almost every national assembly, and many political leaders who otherwise work for civil liberties have regressive views on the subject of women's rights and gender justice. Quotas for women in decision-making bodies are often proposed as a way around this problem. Although quota mechanisms cannot ensure that women representatives actually work to advance women's causes, in practice such quotas are often effective in changing the nature of policy discussions. Once elected, women tend to be called on by women's groups and other CSOs to channel women's demands into the policy process. 35. Tension between the concept of individual rights and that of group rights is one reason why democratic movements sometimes fail to address gender concerns. Women have often served as symbols of cultural difference. If the defence of traditional practices, through emphasis on the rights of certain groups to preserve their cultures, infringes upon the ability of women to live with dignity and without fear, it is possible for multicultural approaches to democracy to clash with gender justice. The challenge at the core of the debates about human rights and multiculturalism is how to acknowledge and respect "difference" without supposing that this difference is static or immune to change. Cultures are not immutable; they always undergo interpretation and reinterpretation. It is essential that women be involved in this process. III. Current programme of research A. Social policy and development 36. Within the newly defined programme area of social policy and development, six research projects explore aspects of state policies and practices that directly influence the welfare and security of various groups in different societies and cultures. Their findings should make a practical contribution to improving the social policy environment in developed and developing countries. 1. Social policy in a development context 37. The project on social policy in a development context provides a framework for this area. Its purpose is to encourage genuine interdisciplinary debate on the relation between social policy, social and political institutions, and economic development. 38. The project began in 1999, with a state-of-the-art paper reviewing shortcomings of the stylized neo-liberal model that has exercised great influence during the past few decades. This way of thinking has relegated social policy to a residual role, seeing it more as a cost than as an essential element in development, and employing it primarily to deal with the most egregious failures of economic policy. In contrast, other schools of thought, such as new growth theories and new institutional economics, have recognized that social policy is central not only to improving welfare, but also to promoting economic development. 39. A conference held in Stockholm in September 2000 brought together over 30 specialists working on issues of social policy and economic development, who discussed the paper and identified possible research areas. These include new forms of social security and social protection, new approaches to education and training, a re-evaluation of social funds, reconsidering industrial policy and support for small and medium industries, and studying the redistributive implications of different kinds of public/private health care systems. Participants stressed the fact that it is in fact impossible to separate economic and social policy. All economic policy is social policy: the way any economy works has clear social implications. Therefore, while it is essential to look at all possible favourable impacts of social policy on economic performance, it is equally, or perhaps even more, important to develop distributionally sensitive, pro-poor economic policy. 2. Neo-liberalism and institutional reform in East Asia 40. The Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 was caused by a failure of institutions on multiple levels. For some, the international level was most important: inadequate regulation allowed speculative capital to cascade in and out of fragile markets in the developing world. This diagnosis has led to much debate about reforming the international "financial architecture". For others, the problem is primarily national and involves a lack of accountability and transparency in key public and private institutions. This explanation suggests the need to reform industrial and labour policy, private sector governance, the national legal context and broader development strategies in affected Asian societies. 41. Prescriptions for national reform are frequently based on ideal interpretations of how legal systems, labour markets and the corporate sector actually operate in Western industrial countries. Yet real practices are in fact enormously diverse and complex. One objective of this UNRISD project is, therefore, to understand the gap between the ideal prescriptions currently being urged on various Asian countries and real-world practices in Western countries. This should allow both public and private sectors to think more creatively about the range of opportunities for institutional reform. 42. At the same time, the project will explore lessons learned from previous crises in other parts of the world. During the early 1980s, for example, the French Government enacted market reforms without abandoning the institutions of national industrial policy. Time-share and work-share policies were devised in Germany and the Netherlands to minimize the social cost of unemployment. There are also negative lessons to be learned from the legacy of Latin American and African countries that dismantled some institutions that had previously provided a measure of protection and welfare for many people. 43. Finally, the project is promoting original research on legal traditions, public economic policy-making, corporate governance, and the evolution of labour markets in a number of East Asian countries. Alternative approaches to social policy will also be explored. The institution of "lifetime employment" in large corporations is often the only social safety net available in East Asia. As paternalistic practices in labour relations disappear, will responsibility for social welfare be assumed by the State? Or will households be expected to step in and assume the burden formerly borne by corporations? 44. Over the past year, 13 papers were commissioned covering the thematic areas outlined above. Initial drafts were presented at a conference in Bangkok in May 2000. They are currently being revised for publication as UNRISD programme papers. They will also be brought together in at least one edited volume, to be co-published with an academic press. 3. Globalization, export-oriented employment for women and social policy 45. This project, like the following one on women and agrarian change, grows out of an earlier UNRISD project on gender, poverty and well-being.9 Drawing on the experiences of women in export-oriented production zones, it attempts to deepen understanding of the relation between increasing globalization of production, women's labour market participation and social policy design and delivery. 46. Over the past two decades, the Governments of many developing countries have come under pressure to reduce their role in financing and delivering social services, and to restrict access to publicly provided income transfers. A parallel development in some countries has been growing reliance on export-oriented strategies that have, on average, increased women's share of paid employment. How have these two trends interacted? To what extent has women's increased involvement in production of globally traded manufactures enhanced their access to public services, as well as their entitlement to pensions and other benefits? 47. To explore this issue, case studies have been commissioned in China, Hungary, India, Mauritius, Mexico, South Africa and the Republic of Korea. These are countries in which women's incorporation into export-oriented employment has taken place at different times, in different sectors, and at different points of articulation with the global economy. They are also countries that entered the export-oriented drive with diverse social policy configurations -- near universal, though declining, welfare provision in China and Hungary before liberalization; indirect provisioning through the corporate sector in the Republic of Korea, expanding state services in Mexico, before economic crisis and adjustment; and minimal state provisioning in India and South Africa. There is also great diversity across these countries in terms of women's political mobilization, with India and South Africa representing cases in which women's constituencies have been particularly strong and articulate. 48. Several questions will be raised by the country studies: How have the role and the capacity of the State to finance and deliver social services changed since the early 1980s? To what extent has women's wage employment been accompanied by improved access to social services and benefits? Are these better than that of the general population? How do women's experiences compare with those of male wage labour? Do women have access to higher levels of education/training? What kinds of reproductive decisions are encouraged by the prevailing employment and social service environment? 49. Initial drafts of the country papers were presented at a workshop held in October 2000 in Bangkok. Programme papers will be available in early 2001. 4. Agrarian change, gender and land rights 50. Despite the ongoing diversification of sources of rural income, access to land continues to be an important determinant of rural people's standard of living. A gendered analysis of existing tenure systems and government programmes of land reform is therefore important. This includes looking carefully at the widely held assumption that providing individual title to land is automatically a better way of guaranteeing claims to subsistence resources, and thus of reducing women's poverty, than any other approach to land rights. In fact, many studies show that land privatization and the creation of land markets can increase the likelihood of land alienation and concentration, and thus increase the number of landless households -- as well as encouraging a more unequal distribution of holdings between men and women. Yet maintaining customary systems of access to land can also reinforce the subordinate position of women. What is the way out of this dilemma? 51. To lay the groundwork for research, a paper has been commissioned to examine policy debates on women and land rights in sub-Saharan Africa. It will focus in particular on the extent to which different women's groups and networks advocate individual titles and legal rights, as well as their attitude towards customary law as a system of guaranteed access. The paper will then consider (a) how the actors have assessed the evidence on legal and economic change; (b) the influence exercised by wider discourses and policy commitments (e.g., liberalization and economic growth strategies in agriculture, poverty reduction strategies, the extent to which a legal rights framework has been taken as a main approach to gender and development objectives, etc.); and (c) empirical findings about the ways registration and titles to individual ownership have affected women in specific cases of reform and legal change. 52. The project is also sponsoring country studies in Brazil, South Africa and Uzbekistan. A research methodology workshop held in October 1999 highlighted four sets of research questions for the case studies. First, it is necessary to be clear about the nature of the rural economy and society, its internal dynamics and importance for the broader national development effort. These factors shape the constraints under which women can work for land rights. Second, the politics of land reform -- and of women's participation in it -- must be analysed. Third, researchers will study the place of land in the household economy: is it considered a farming resource, a guarantee of shelter, a basis for identity and solidarity? They will also explore the question of how men and women differ in their relation to the land in different communities and cultures. 53. Results of this research project are expected to become available in early 2001. 5. HIV/AIDS and development 54. The AIDS pandemic is destroying the lives and livelihoods of millions of people around the world. The situation is worst in regions and countries where poverty is extensive, gender inequality is pervasive, and public services are weak. In fact, the spread of HIV/AIDS at the turn of the twenty-first century is a sign of poor development -- an indicator of the failure at both national and international levels to create more equitable and prosperous societies. 55. Social science research must play a more effective role in helping communities, Governments and international organizations deal effectively with this tragedy. Researchers must generate new knowledge about how and why the epidemic advances in particular circumstances, so that ways can be found to lessen the vulnerability of specific groups. They must help community associations and NGOs to take stock of their own efforts and to analyse the problems they face. Social scientists must also facilitate the evaluation of national responses to AIDS, exploring the factors that seem to have made some national efforts more effective than others. They must also promote analysis of global processes that drive the epidemic, so that the question of HIV/AIDS can be usefully integrated into international debates on major development issues. 56. During 1999-2000, UNRISD began work in this area. In December 1999, the Institute accepted an invitation from the Department of Policy, Strategy and Research of UNAIDS to prepare an issues paper on HIV/AIDS as a problem of development.10 In late 2000, responding to one of the major recommendations in the paper, UNRISD supported formation of a comparative international network on developmental responses to AIDS. This network is made up of researchers, activists and policy makers who are associated with efforts to fight the pandemic through initiatives that improve social relations, social institutions and the life chances of disadvantaged groups. The network will produce 10 to 12 studies during 2001, which will be widely disseminated by UNRISD. 57. At the same time, the Institute is attempting to find funding to support original research on HIV/AIDS and development in a number of countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. Within each country, social scientists, medical and public health professionals, and community development workers will form an interdisciplinary team, under the direction of a national coordinator. After discussing a specially commissioned state-of-the-art paper, providing baseline information on what has already been done and what seems to be known about the AIDS epidemic in each country, teams will design a strategy for improving national knowledge in this field and linking the national debate more closely to a consideration of development alternatives. B. Democracy, governance and human rights 58. The global debate on democratization and human rights can be sharpened by paying greater attention to specific problems of political and institutional reform at the local, national and international levels. Projects within this programme area provide an opportunity to learn from recent experiences in countries where efforts are being made to create an enabling environment for democratic governance. 1. Public sector reform and crisis-ridden States 59. Efficient, legitimate and accountable States are indispensable elements in development. But the trend in a considerable number of countries around the world has in fact been towards the weakening of state capacity, and in some cases the virtual collapse of national institutions of government. This project focuses specifically on countries that have been deeply affected by ethnic strife, civil war and economic crisis; and it evaluates two initiatives undertaken by Governments and multilateral agencies to reform and restructure state institutions. 60. The first of these is "new public management" reform, currently being carried out within a number of crisis-ridden countries. New public management represents an attempt to apply the principles of free-market economics to public administration. It emphasizes the downsizing of bureaucracies and the introduction of market discipline in provision of public services, as well as decentralization of many aspects of public administration and reform of a series of pay and employment practices within the civil service. While such approaches have been successful in some developed countries, and have had mixed results in others, they are often inappropriate for countries with very fragile Governments.11 61. The second set of reforms deals with the distribution and management of power in the public sector. Democratization requires institutions that can manage plurality in ethnically diverse and crisis-stricken societies. To further this goal, attempts have been made to decentralize power and authority, enact electoral and civil service reforms that are oriented towards proportional outcomes, encourage coalition Governments and develop other institutionalized forms of power sharing. However, like the administrative reforms discussed above, political reforms in crisis-ridden States have been unevenly applied and have produced uncertain outcomes. It is also important to note that there have been few systematic efforts to link proposed administrative reforms with political ones. 62. Ten papers have been received on the above issues and are being prepared for publication. Meanwhile, researchers continue to look more deeply at three areas in which constraint on state capacity seems especially severe. The first is employee responses to public sector reforms: management reforms create widespread uncertainties in public bureaucracies, with implications for the livelihood and loyalty of employees as well as for state capacity.12 The second is the relation between decentralization and conflict management: in some cases local elites have reaped the most substantial benefits from decentralization, and ethnic fragmentation has increased. The third involves problems of designing electoral systems for ethnically plural societies. The research will examine two main approaches to the distribution of power in ethnically segmented societies: majoritarian electoral reforms that reward moderation and plurality in party systems, encourage vote pooling and punish ethnic sectarianism; and consociational forms of government that draw ethnically defined factions into power-sharing arrangements. 2. Technocratic policy-making and democratization 63. As democracies -- old or new -- become increasingly integrated into the world economy, they confront new challenges. One of these is a growing trend for power to be drained away from elected representatives towards officials who operate beyond democratic oversight. To gain and retain the confidence of investors and lending agencies, Governments are often urged to isolate macroeconomic decision-making from the day-to-day political fray, through granting autonomy to central banks, establishing autonomous tax agencies, and placing a great deal of decision-making power in the hands of the Finance Ministry. This, in turn, can alienate citizens and weaken democratic institutions. 64. In April 2000, UNRISD sponsored an international conference to explore the question: What choices do democracies have in globalizing economies? Eighteen researchers and practitioners were invited to lead the discussions, which were organized around four panels: (a) independent authorities and democratic accountability; (b) democratization and social policy; (c) civil society and technocratic governance; and (e) economic policy-making and parliamentary accountability.13 65. A research network on the last of these themes is now at work in eight countries: Argentina, Benin, Chile, the Czech Republic, Hungary, India, Malawi and the Republic of Korea. Members of the group are looking particularly at how budgets are drawn up, debated and approved. This should provide insight into the extent of democratic oversight of economic policy-making in each country, and it should also facilitate analysis of the conflicts that frequently arise between economic imperatives and social policy needs. In addition, it will illustrate the very different institutional environments within which elected representatives attempt to influence the course of public policy in a rapidly globalizing world. Research reports are expected to be available in early 2001. 3. Urban governance 66. UNRISD has a long history of work on urban governance.14 Therefore, as part of its work for Geneva 2000, the Institute commissioned six papers on urban sustainable development, which have been brought together in a book to be published in early 2001.15 The first chapter reviews general trends in external assistance for urban projects in the developing world. The second chapter examines a small but influential multilateral technical assistance project, the Urban Management Programme. Despite its limited resources, this joint venture of the World Bank, United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and United Nations Development Programme has had considerable impact on thinking about how to pursue urban development in the South. The remainder of the book consists of case studies of urban sustainable development initiatives in India, Peru, the Philippines and the United Republic of Tanzania. 67. UNRISD also acted as joint host for a workshop of the Network Association of European Researchers on Urbanization in the South, held in May 2000 at Geneva. The workshop theme was Cities of the South: Sustainable for Whom? The workshop explored two important questions from the perspective of people living in the barrios and bidonvilles of third world cities: (a) what should be the goals of sustainable development and what approaches are most likely to achieve it; and (b) how can the research community help donors understand these needs and develop effective means of addressing them? A report on the workshop is forthcoming; and a selection of the papers will appear in the Oxfam journal, Development in Practice, in May 2001, just prior to the five-year review of Habitat II. C. Civil society and social movements 68. Research within this programme aims to improve understanding of the potential for civic action and local self-organization in different kinds of societies and political regimes around the world. This requires adopting a critical attitude towards the concept of civil society, which is often used without sufficient grounding in analysis. Placing excessive faith in civil society, vaguely defined, glosses over important differences between NGOs, grass-roots organizations, social movements and other forms of civic action. It also ignores an array of problems that affect the quality and effectiveness of popular organizations in specific social and political settings. 69. Over the past biennium, UNRISD sponsored a number of studies of CSOs as part of its work for Geneva 2000. Eight papers were commissioned in 1999, exploring subjects ranging from prospects for creation of a "global civil society" to analysis of the challenges faced by social movements, non-governmental and community-based organizations in various parts of the world. Four of these papers are now available in printed and electronic form.16 Taken together, they highlight some opportunities and obstacles that popular initiatives confront within the changing national and international context associated with globalization. 70. UNRISD sponsors a large international network on grass-roots movements and land reform. This project, launched in 1997, initially aimed to identify and document the involvement of CSOs in securing rights to land and other productive assets for landless and marginalized groups in different agrarian contexts. Over the years, the scope of the project has expanded beyond the simple cataloguing of initiatives and formation of networks. It now includes research on broader issues of agrarian reform, as well as consideration of emerging trends in agrarian relations in Africa, Asia and Latin America. 71. The new focus is reflected in a volume, currently being completed, on different regional experiences with land reform, which comprises studies from South-East and South Asia, the Near East, southern and West Africa, and Central and South America. Each chapter analyses current land tenure legislation in the region under consideration, the role of the State in various countries, the strength of market forces in determining land tenure patterns, the position of different donor agencies and the nature of important civil society initiatives. 72. Six discussion papers on issues of land reform were also published during the past biennium. These cover subjects such as the nature of "partnerships" between leading international agencies and CSOs; the relation between various forms of property rights and participatory approaches to natural resource management; youth employment in agriculture; repression of peasants, indigenous peoples and social activists working for agrarian reform in some countries; and the relationships between land tenure conflicts and demographic factors in specific cases.17 73. The project has involved continuing cooperation with the various regional and national nodes within the Knowledge Network on Land Reform, established originally by the International Fund for Agriculture and Development (IFAD), and now managed by the Popular Coalition to Eradicate Hunger and Poverty. The exchange of ideas with teams in Bangladesh, Bolivia, Cameroon, Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Peru and the Philippines has been especially important. The Institute has contributed references to literature on land reform themes, comments on project proposals and scholarly articles, and advice on publication possibilities. 74. During the coming years, UNRISD aims to conduct research on problems of identity in a shrinking world. This will not be the first time the Institute has done so. During the early 1990s, UNRISD sponsored a large multidisciplinary network on ethnic conflict and development, which produced widely used books on the roots of ethnic strife in eight countries. In the mid-1990s, the Institute supported a network of scholars concerned with the problems that globalization poses for the construction of citizenship -- a form of identity that creates the possibility of orderly recognition of difference and an institutional structure for working out the rights and obligations of different groups in society. 75. This new programme area will help researchers, policy makers and citizens address the question of how an emphasis on certain identities, and not on others, affects patterns of exclusion or solidarity in different times and places. It begins not with a full-fledged research project, but with a special activity: the generation of background documents for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. 76. As part of the special project on racism and public policy, UNRISD will invite 25 outstanding social scientists and legal scholars from various parts of the world to present papers that summarize current research findings and clarify debates on racism, xenophobia and intolerance among different groups, countries and regions. This will also provide an opportunity to examine the difficulties confronted by those involved in designing public policies for overcoming divisive forms of identity. 77. Recent findings in genetics reject the scientific value of the concept of race. Advances in DNA research in the last 20 years demonstrate that, on average, 99.9 per cent of the genetic features of human beings are the same. This means that the idea of race is socially constructed. The Institute will invite an eminent scientist to prepare a paper on the current state of scientific knowledge about race; and it will also ask four or five scholars from different parts of the world to discuss the complex ways in which racial identities are created and modified. 78. Under a second theme, papers will explore the concrete policies and practices that create inequality among different groups, racially defined, and that reinforce prejudice and antagonism. Under a third, researchers will consider how different types of people are recruited into racist or xenophobic movements and how the agendas of these groups evolve over time. They will also analyse the strengths and limitations of anti-racist or anti-xenophobic civil rights groups. 79. Finally, the UNRISD project will focus on innovative attempts to design public policies that improve race relations and reduce xenophobia. These include affirmative action; anti-poverty programmes; new forms of minority representation in state institutions; and the reform of law enforcement agencies and the criminal justice system. The attempt to deal equitably with international migrants is another important area. 80. These studies will be widely disseminated in printed and electronic form. They will also be distributed at a two-day international conference, sponsored by UNRISD and held in South Africa as a parallel event to the United Nations World Conference against Racism, in September 2001. 81. The world is caught up in a rapidly accelerating process of scientific and technological change that may benefit the majority of humankind or, on the contrary, may benefit only the few. UNRISD work in this programme area draws on case studies and debates at national and international levels to explore ways of encouraging a more socially responsible use of science and technology. It also draws on broader studies of corporate responsibility -- often generated in relation to social and environmental issues -- which highlight the constant tension between the desire of the private sector to maximize profits, and the expectation on the part of the public that new products and techniques will meet social needs. 1. Information technologies and social development 82. The purpose of this UNRISD project is to consider the implications of new information and communications technologies for social, economic and political development in third world countries. This requires new research in developing countries themselves. But it also presupposes debate on directions of change within the global context that shapes development options. In determining the terms on which individuals, enterprises and Governments can participate in the "information revolution", the business strategies of multinational corporations play a central role as do rulings and agreements on information technology policy issues hammered out in national and international agencies. Constant interaction between private profit-making strategies, public regulation and the creative efforts of civic groups forms the background against which advanced information technologies are introduced into third world settings. 83. UNRISD research under this project includes both work undertaken in the international context and a series of studies commissioned within a country project on Senegal. Within the first category, the Institute is supporting the preparation of a small book titled Global Media Governance: A Beginners Guide, which provides a concise analysis of the roles and responsibilities of international institutions in setting information technology policy. This follows upon, and complements, an issues paper, published last year, which reviews some of the key global policy aspects of the information technology field.18 84. The Senegal country project, which began in early 1999, was designed to deepen understanding of the role played by new information technologies in development. It consists of 11 studies concerned with such issues as: :: The implications of new information technologies for growth and patterns of economic development; :: How information technologies are being incorporated within formal private sector enterprises; :: How information technologies are being used by the informal sector; :: Information technologies and the media in Senegal; :: Information technologies, popular participation and democracy; and :: The use of information technologies in secondary and higher education in Senegal. 85. First drafts of reports were received in late-2000 and, when edited, will be made available on the project web site (www.unrisd.org/infotech). An overview volume will be prepared by the Senegal project coordinator in mid-2001. One paper has already been published in printed and electronic form.19 86. The Senegal country project also sponsors a monthly newspaper supplement, titled Les TIC (technologies de l'information et de la communication) et le développement social au Sénégal, appearing throughout the second half of 2000 in a leading Dakar daily, Sud quotidien. Each supplement contains four pages of news, interviews and analysis, focusing on a major information technology issue. Some of the material comes from the ongoing research, and some is written by journalists specifically for each supplement. Readers who collect the entire series will have a useful introduction to the field. 87. Papers already published by UNRISD for this project20 have been used in a number of United Nations publications on information technologies and social development, including the 1999 Human Development Report on Globalization with a Human Face and the 2000 World Economic and Social Survey, which has a section devoted to information technology and development. 2. Business responsibility for sustainable development 88. While various pressures and market opportunities are encouraging some firms to improve their environmental and social record, this process remains fragmented. It is very unevenly spread among companies, sectors and countries; and, from the perspective of sustainable development, it is fraught with contradictions. Current wisdom suggests that the best way to promote corporate responsibility is to rely upon voluntary initiatives and partnerships. Despite their obvious appeal, such institutional arrangements also carry with them inherent dangers -- not the least of which is the possibility that they will be used as a poor substitute for stronger forms of regulation necessary to improve the environmental and social performance of big business. 89. This project aims to promote research and policy dialogue on issues of corporate social and environmental responsibility in developing countries. In the past two years, studies have been sponsored within a number of areas. First, there has been an analysis of the political, institutional, technological and economic conditions associated with globalization that seem to favour social and environmental awareness -- particularly among some sectors of transnational corporations (TNCs).21 90. Second, researchers have examined the changing nature of NGO-business relations and the development by civil society of new strategies and tactics to promote corporate environmentalism. Through exercising pressure, and also through engaging in various forms of collaboration, NGOs have become as important in creating a new agenda for business as have the companies themselves. 91. The contemporary power of NGOs that promote corporate environmentalism reflects a new form of consumer politics, as well as new kinds of regulation. "Civil regulation" -- distinct from both State regulation and corporate self-regulation -- is now a powerful force for change. Business is having to comply with norms and standards imposed not only by law or by senior management, but also by NGOs and other civil society institutions. One of the reasons for this is the growing power of the Internet. The use of web sites and other forms of electronic communication in NGO strategies is playing an important role in monitoring corporations, disseminating research findings, exchanging information and building alliances.22 92. During 2000, the project developed a third area of research, looking more closely at the potential and limits of voluntary initiatives, developed by the corporate sector itself. Since the early 1990s, considerable attention has been focused on the use of such initiatives -- as opposed to "command and control" regulations -- as a means of promoting corporate responsibility. Voluntary initiatives may range from forms of corporate "self-regulation" where, for example, individual firms adopt codes of conduct or cleaner technology, to various types of "co-regulation" where business interests negotiate agreements with Governments or enter into "partnerships" with NGOs and United Nations agencies in such areas as environmental certification, social auditing, independent verification and the promotion of human rights and core labour standards. Nevertheless such initiatives may be lacking in substance or poorly implemented, they may be hard to implement in the South or they may be in conflict with developmental goals in the South. Empirical research is necessary to help civic groups, policy makers and businesses to develop a realistic picture of the kinds of contributions such measures can make to sustainable development. 93. Preliminary discussions with a range of people during mid-2000 set the stage for a workshop, Promoting Corporate Responsibility in Developing Countries: The Potential and Limits of Voluntary Initiatives, held at Geneva in October 2000. Following that meeting, research is beginning in a number of developing countries, including Mexico, the Philippines and South Africa. A workshop report is currently being prepared and will be available as an issue of Conference News in both printed and electronic form. 94. In future, the comparative advantage of international organizations will rest far more upon their capacity to generate ideas and to shape the normative framework for development than upon their ability to transfer resources. Yet existing arrangements for improving the knowledge base of the United Nations system are clearly inadequate. At present, there is far too little exchange of information among international organizations, despite the fact that almost all of them have significant research budgets and generate important new insights on problems within their sphere of competence. Moreover, communication between most multilateral institutions and the academic community is weak. Although high-level officials are bombarded with information from many quarters, they rarely have an opportunity to discuss central concerns about the direction or pace of change with colleagues in other agencies. 95. In collaboration with the Rockefeller Foundation, UNRISD is exploring ways to provide small groups of United Nations officials with an opportunity to consider substantive questions of world development in an intellectually satisfying atmosphere. One approach is to sponsor annual retreats at the Bellagio Centre. Each residential seminar, of two or three days' duration, would focus on a single theme, for which a small number of papers by eminent scholars would be commissioned. 96. Early in November 2000, UNRISD sponsored a small planning meeting at Bellagio to develop the content of these retreats. Fifteen officials of United Nations agencies or divisions with a special interest in social development suggested key issues of common concern and proposed papers that might be written for each event. They will also assist in drawing up the list of participants for each retreat. On the basis of these conversations, a formal proposal will be submitted to the Rockefeller Foundation, covering three high-level seminars over the period 2001-2003. 97. In addition to their ongoing research and administrative activities, UNRISD staff members are called upon to act in a range of advisory roles for United Nations agencies, multilateral and bilateral organizations, Governments, NGOs, research institutes and universities. Work of this nature provides UNRISD with opportunities to make substantive contributions to the thinking and programmes of other institutions and groups, while staff members benefit from the exchange of ideas and are also able to network, identify potential researchers and explore funding opportunities. 98. Advisory work takes many different forms -- coordinating research projects; preparing or commenting on reports and papers; developing new programmes and evaluating existing ones; acting as resource persons; acting as keynote speakers, lecturers and discussants at conferences, workshops and seminars; and serving as committee or board members. During the past two years, staff members carried out advisory activities on at least 100 occasions. While most of this work is done on an informal basis, in some cases the Institute is contracted by other institutions to carry out specific tasks. 99. The UNRISD publications and dissemination unit devoted substantial time and resources to preparing for Geneva 2000. This included developing and producing an Occasional Paper series; producing and publishing a book-length report; designing and implementing a Geneva 2000 sub-site for the Institute's web site; and producing related promotional materials. 100. The regular work of the unit also continued during this period. In addition to presentational documents, newsletters and Visible Hands, UNRISD published 18 occasional papers, 19 discussion papers, 5 programme papers, and 4 conference reports.23 Nineteen books were also published by commercial or academic presses.24 This was made possible by an effective use of internal and external capacity. The Institute's newsletter, UNRISD News, has also been produced twice a year and distributed to a mailing list of over 12,000. 101. In addition, the publications and dissemination unit developed and implemented a new outreach strategy during this period. A new set of background and information documents was produced, and documents were targeted to new audiences. In accordance with the regrouping of UNRISD projects into five programme areas, a Programme Paper series was inaugurated for each area. Conference reports are now published as Conference News. A depository library system was put in place, and all in-house publications are now provided free of charge to over 200 libraries and public access institutions, most of them in developing countries. 102. The UNRISD web site has been strengthened through the inclusion of an ever-increasing number of UNRISD publications, free of charge. Traffic on the UNRISD web site doubled from March 1999 to March 2000. Nearly 150,000 hits per month are being registered, and over 600 documents per month are downloaded. At the time of the Social Summit, the Virtual Forum on Initiatives -- created on the UNRISD web site to collect, sort and communicate information on follow-up work to the Social Summit -- proved extremely useful. Participants in the Virtual Forum used an on-line form to register their initiatives. Then, once an initiative had been entered, users could browse or search for specific initiatives using thematic, organizational and geographic keywords. 103. The UNRISD internship programme provides a limited number of outstanding graduate students from around the world with the opportunity to gain experience in an international research setting. Interns are selected on the basis of their academic experience and interests. Students spend a minimum of two months at UNRISD assisting Project Leaders in developing project proposals, compiling annotated bibliographies and data, helping to organize research seminars and translating correspondence. During this reporting period, students from Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Peru, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States participated in the programme. 104. Although it is part of the United Nations system, UNRISD finances all of its activities through voluntary contributions from Governments, international agencies and foundations. The Governments of Denmark, Finland, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland have long supported the work of the Institute. During the last biennium, the United Kingdom also joined the group of core funders. 105. UNRISD core funding has risen significantly in nominal terms since the last reporting period, as the majority of donors have increased their contributions. Nevertheless, the appreciation of the United States dollar has meant that core funding remained approximately level in real terms over the past two years, at around $2,050,000 annually. Project funds, received from a variety of multilateral and bilateral agencies and foundations to carry out work under particular research programmes, were approximately $660,000 per year in 1999/2000. Notes 1 For the report of the conference, see Perspectives on Social Development Research at the Millennium, Report of the UNRISD International Conference, Rayong, Thailand, 26-28 May 1999, Conference News. UNRISD 2000+: A Vision for the Future of the Institute is also available from the Institute in hard copy. All UNRISD publications can be obtained from the web site, at www.unrisd.org. 2 OPG 1 Civil Society, NGDOs and Social Development: Changing the Rules of the Game, Alan Fowler, January 2000; OPG 2 Business Responsibility for Sustainable Development, Peter Utting, January 2000; OPG 3 Public Sector Restructuring: The Institutional and Social Effects of Fiscal, Managerial and Capacity-Building Reforms, Yusuf Bangura, February 2000; OPG 4 Women in Contemporary Democratization, Shahra Razavi, February 2000; OPG 5 Globalization and Social Policy: The Threat to Equitable Welfare, Bob Deacon, March 2000; OPG 6 Promoting Sustainable Human Development in Cities of the South: A Southeast Asian Perspective, Adrian Atkinson, May 2000; OPG 7 The Political Economy of Pension Reform: Latin America in Comparative Perspective, Evelyne Huber and John D. Stephens, May 2000; OPG 8 Reproductive and Sexual Rights: Charting the Course of Transnational Women's NGOs, Rosalind P. Petchesky, June 2000; OPG 9 Global Economic Trends and Social Development, Ajit Singh, June 2000; OPG 10 Globalization and Social Development after Copenhagen: Premises, Promises and Policies, Thandika Mkandawire and Virginia Rodríguez, June 2000. 3 See, among others cited elsewhere, Jorge Schvarzer, External Dependency and Internal Transformation: Argentina Confronts the Long Debt Crisis, Programme Paper on Social Policy and Development, Number 1, May 2000. 4 See A/AC.253/L.7/Rev.1. 5 The Role of Civil Society in Policy Formulation and Service Provision. Report of the UNRISD Geneva 2000 Seminar, New York, 31 March 2000, Conference News. 6 Civil Society Organizations and Social Integration document A/AC.253/16/Add.6 of 10 February 2000. See also Andrew Clayton, Peter Oakley and Jon Taylor, Civil Society Organizations and Service Provision, Programme Paper on Civil Society and Social Movements, Number 2, October 2000. 7 Momar-Coumba Diop, Les politiques sociales en Afrique de l'Ouest: Quels changements depuis le Sommet de Copenhague?, Programme Paper on Social Policy and Development, Number 5, December 2000. 8 Gender Justice, Development and Rights: Substantiating Rights in a Disabling Environment. Report of the UNRISD Workshop, New York, 3 June 2000, Conference News. 9 During the reporting period, the following publications came out of the project on gender, poverty and well-being: Ann Whitehead and Matthew Lockwood, Gender in the World Bank's Poverty Assessments: Six Case Studies from Sub-Saharan Africa, Discussion Paper, Number 99, June 1999; Deniz Kandiyoti, How to Get It Wrong in Rural Uzbekistan: An Ethnographic Critique of Household Survey Categories, Discussion Paper, Number 106, June 1999; and Naila Kabeer, The Conditions and Consequences of Choice: Reflections on the Measurement of Women's Empowerment, Discussion Paper, Number 108, August 1999. 10 Joseph Collins and Bill Rau, AIDS in the Context of Development, Programme Paper on Social Policy and Development, Number 4, December 2000. 11 See Yusuf Bangura, Public Sector Restructuring: The Institutional and Social Effects of Public Sector Reform, Geneva 2000 Occasional Paper, Number 4, February 2000; Yusuf Bangura, New Directions in State Reform: Implications for Civil Society, Discussion Paper, Number 113, September 1999; George A. Larbi, The New Public Management and Crisis States, Discussion Paper, Number 112, September 1999; and Ole Therkildsen, Efficiency, Accountability and Implementation: Public Sector Reform in East and Southern Africa, Programme Paper on Democracy, Governance and Human Rights, Number 2, December 2000. 12 See Willy McCourt, Pay and Employment Reform in Developing and Transition Societies, Programme Paper on Democracy, Governance and Human Rights, Number 1, July 2000. 13 What Choices Do Democracies Have in Globalizing Economies? Report of the UNRISD International Conference on Technocratic Policy Making and Democratization, Geneva, 27-28 April 2000, Conference News. 14 YUVA, Our Home is a Slum: An Exploration of a Community and Local Government Collaboration in a Tenants' Struggle to Establish Legal Residency in Janata Squatters Colony, Mumbai, India, Discussion Paper 107, August 1999 was published during the reporting period. 15 One of these papers, by Adrian Atkinson, Promoting Sustainable Human Development in Cities of the South: A Southeast Asian Perspective, was published as a Geneva 2000 Occasional Paper, Number 6, May 2000. 16 See Alan Fowler, Civil Society, NGDOs and Social Development: Changing the Rules of the Game, Geneva 2000 Occasional Paper, Number 1, January 2000. Three further papers have been published in the Programme Paper series on Civil Society and Social Movements: Dan Gallin, Trade Unions and NGOs: A Necessary Partnership for Social Development, Programme Paper on Civil Society and Social Movements, Number 1, June 2000; Asef Bayat, Grassroots Movements, Activism and Social Development in the Middle East, Programme Paper on Civil Society and Social Movements, Number 3, November 2000; and Joe Foweraker, Grassroots Movements, Political Activism and Social Development in Latin America: A Comparison of Chile and Brazil, Programme Paper on Civil Society and Social Movements, Number 4, December 2000. 17 Peter Dorner, Technology and Globalization: Modern-Era Constraints on Initiatives for Land Reform, Discussion Paper, Number 100, June 1999; Solon L. Barraclough, Land Reform in Developing Countries: The Role of the State and Other Actors, Discussion Paper, Number 101, June 1999; Krishna B. Ghimire, Peasants' Pursuit of Outside Alliances in the Process of Land Reform: A Discussion of Legal Assistance Programmes in Bangladesh and the Philippines, Discussion Paper, Number 102, June 1999; Gerrit Huizer, Social Mobilization for Land Reform: Historical Case Studies and Theoretical Considerations, Discussion Paper, Number 103, June 1999; M. Riad El-Ghonemy, The Political Economy of Market-Based Land Reform, Discussion Paper, Number 104, June 1999; and Eduardo Baumeister, Iniciativas campesinas y la sostenibilidad de los resultados de las reformas agrarias en América Central, Discussion Paper, Number 105, June 1999. 18 Cees Hamelink, ICTs and Social Development: The Global Policy Context, Discussion Paper, Number 116, October 1999. Global Media Governance: A Beginners Guide is written by Seán O'Siochrú and W. Bruce Girard, and will be published by Rowman and Littlefield/UNRISD in summer 2001. 19 Olivier Sagna, Les technologies de l'information et de la communication et le développement social au Sénégal: Un état des lieux, Programme Paper on Technology and Society, Number 1, November 2000. 20 Kelly O'Neill, Internetworking for Social Change: Keeping the Spotlight on Corporate Environmentalism, Discussion Paper, Number 111, September 1999; Manuel Castells, Information Technology, Globalization and Social Development, Discussion Paper, Number 114, September 1999; Rafal Rohozinski, Mapping Russian Cyberspace: Perspectives on Democracy and the Net, Discussion Paper, Number 115, October 1999; and Cees Hamelink, ICTs and Social Development: The Global Policy Context, Discussion Paper, Number 116, October 1999. 21 Peter Utting, Business Responsibility for Sustainable Development, Geneva 2000 Occasional Paper, Number 2, January 2000; and David Barkin, The Greening of Business in Mexico, UNRISD Discussion Paper, Number 110, September 1999. 22 D. Murphy and J. Bendell, Partners in Time? Business, NGOs and Sustainable Development, Discussion Paper, Number 109, August 1999; and Kelly O'Neill, Internetworking for Social Change: Keeping the Spotlight on Corporate Environmentalism, Discussion Paper, Number 111, September 1999. 23 Publications not cited elsewhere, but produced during the reporting period, include: Wolf Scott, Recent Changes in Social Conditions of Countries in Transition: Eastern Europe, the Baltic States and the Commonwealth of Independent States, Discussion Paper, Number 117, April 2000; Gøsta Esping-Andersen, Social Indicators and Welfare Monitoring, Programme Paper on Social Policy and Development, Number 2, May 2000; Jean-Michel Collette, Empirical Inquiries and the Assessment of Social Progress in Western Europe: A Historical Perspective, Programme Paper on Social Policy and Development, Number 3, June 2000; Deborah Kasente, Matthew Lockwood, Jessica Vivian and Ann Whitehead, Gender and the Expansion of Non-Traditional Export Crops in Uganda, Gender Occasional Paper, Number 12, May 2000; and Naila Kabeer and Tran Thi Van Anh, Leaving the Rice Fields, But Not the Countryside: Gender, Livelihood Diversification and Pro-Poor Growth in Rural Viet Nam, Gender Occasional Paper, Number 13, September 2000. 24 The following books were co-published during 1999/2000: The Accommodation of Cultural Diversity, edited by Crawford Young, co-published with Macmillan; Cambodia Reborn? The Transition to Democracy and Development, by Grant Curtis, co-published with The Brookings Institution; Agricultural Expansion and Tropical Deforestation: Poverty, International Trade and Land Use, Solon Barraclough and Krishna Ghimire, co-published with WWF and Earthscan; Discours et réalités des politiques participatives de gestion de l'environnement: Le cas du Sénégal, edited by Peter Utting and Ronald Jaubert, co-published with l'Institut universitaire d'études du développement; Ecology and Equity: The Use and Abuse of Nature in Contemporary India (re-print in an edition with This Fissured Land) by Madhav Gadgil and Ramachandra Guha, co-published with Oxford University Press India; Ethnic Diversity and Public Policy: A Comparative Inquiry, edited by Crawford Young, co-published with Macmillan; Forest Policy and Politics in the Philippines: The Dynamics of Participatory Conservation, edited by Peter Utting, co-published with Ateneo de Manila University Press; Gendered Poverty and Well-Being, edited by Shahra Razavi, co-published with Blackwell Publishers; Globalizacíon y derechos humanos, edited by Cynthia Hewitt de Alcántara and Alberto Minujin, co-published with UNICEF and Editorial Santillana; Le conflit libanais: Communautés religieuses, classes sociales et identité nationale (Arabic edition), by Kamal Hamdan, co-published with Lebanese Printings Co.; Lima Megaciudad: Democracia, Desarrollo y Descentralización en Sectores Populares, by Jaime Joseph A., co-published with Alternativa and United Nations Volunteers; Missionaries and Mandarins: Feminist Engagement with Development Institutions, edited by Carol Miller and Shahra Razavi, co-published with Intermediate Technology Publications; Oppressed but not Defeated: Peasant Struggles among the Aymara and Qhechwa in Bolivia, 1900-1980 (Japanese edition), by Silvia Rivera, co-published with The English Agency, Japan; Post-Conflict Eritrea: Prospects for Reconstruction and Development, edited by Martin Doornbos and Alemseged Tesfai, co-published with Red Sea Press; Renewing Social and Economic Progress in Africa: Essays in Memory of Philip Ndegwa, edited by Dharam Ghai, co-published with Macmillan; Social and Economic Transformation in East Central Europe, edited by Terry Cox and Bob Mason, co-published with Edward Elgar; Social Development and Public Policy: A Study of Some Successful Experiences, edited by Dharam Ghai, co-published with Macmillan; and Welfare States in Transition: National Adaptations in Global Economies (Japanese edition), edited by Gøsta Esping-Andersen, co-published with Waseda University Press. 