%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT|CAPACITY BUILDING|GREENHOUSE GASES|EMISSION INVENTORIES|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2000/10 3 October 2000 Original: ENGLISH SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION ON THE WORK OF ITS THIRTEENTH SESSION (PART ONE), LYON, 11 - 15 SEPTEMBER 2000 CONTENTS Paragraphs Page OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) 1 - 4 5 ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS (Agenda item 2) 5 - 7 5 Adoption of the agenda 5 - 6 5 Organization of the work of the session 7 7 IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9 OF THE CONVENTION (DECISION 3/CP.3 AND ARTICLES 2.3 AND 3.14 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL) (Agenda item 3) 8 - 12 7 MATTERS RELATING TO ARTICLE 3.14 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL (Agenda item 4) 8 - 12 7 PROCEDURES AND MECHANISMS RELATING TO COMPLIANCE UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL (Agenda item 5) 13 - 16 8 ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY UNDER THE PILOT PHASE (Agenda item 6) 17 - 19 9 MECHANISMS PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 6, 12 AND 17 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL (Agenda item 7) 20 - 23 9 CAPACITY-BUILDING (Agenda item 8) 24 - 27 10 Capacity-building in developing countries (non-Annex I Parties) 24 - 27 10 Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition 24 - 27 10 NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION: GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY DATA FROM 1990 TO 1998 (Agenda item 9) 28 - 31 11 NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES NOT INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION (Agenda item 10) 32 - 37 11 Provision of financial and technical support 32 - 35 11 Report of the second meeting of the Consultative Group of Experts 36 12 Second compilation and synthesis of initial national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention 37 12 X. FINANCIAL MECHANISM (Agenda item 11) 38 - 45 12 Support to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 38 - 40 12 Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties 41 13 Other matters 42 - 45 13 VENUE OF THE SEVENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES (Agenda item 12) 46 - 50 13 ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS (Agenda item 13) 51 - 63 14 Possible options to respond to late payment of contributions 51 - 55 14 Audited financial reports 1998-1999 56 - 58 15 Interim financial performance 2000 56 - 58 15 Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement 59 - 61 15 Cooperation with the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 62 - 63 16 XIII. OTHER MATTERS (Agenda item 14) 64 - 65 16 XIV. REPORT ON THE SESSION (Agenda item 15) 66 - 68 17 CLOSURE OF THE SESSION 69 - 72 17 Page Draft decision for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at the second part of its thirteenth session. Additional guidance to the operating entity of the financial mechanism. 18 Draft decision for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at the second part of its thirteenth session. Late payment of contributions: response options 21 Report of the Joint Working Group on Compliance on its work during the first part of the thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies 23 List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at the first part of its thirteenth session 24 I. OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) The first part of the thirteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the Palais des Congrès, Lyon, France, from 11 to 15 September 2000. The opening of the session was preceded by a welcoming ceremony. Mr. Jan Szyszko, President of the Conference of the Parties, welcomed delegates to Lyon. Mr. Michael Zammit Cutajar, Executive Secretary, Mr. Lionel Jospin, Prime Minister of France, and Mr. Raymond Barre, Mayor of Lyon, addressed the delegates. The meeting observed a minute of silence in memory of Mr. Jean Ripert, the first chairman of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework Convention on Climate Change and Professor Zhong Shukong, senior environmental adviser in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China. The Chairman of the SBI, Mr. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda), opened the formal session on 11 September. The Chairman welcomed all Parties and observers to the session. He noted that in the course of this year's negotiations, and especially during the week of informal meetings which had preceded the thirteenth session, Parties had moved from a process that was intense and diffuse, to one that was more focused and had a clearer sense of urgency. The chairmen reported that the Convention had now received a total of 184 instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, while the number of ratifications or accessions to the Kyoto Protocol had reached 23. Six new instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Kyoto Protocol were received during the session, raising the total number to 29. At the 2nd meeting, held jointly with the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) on 11 September 2000, speeches were delivered by Ms Margot Wallström, Commissioner for the Environment of the European Commission, and Ms Dominique Voynet, Minister for Regional Planning and the Environment of France. At the same meeting general statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one speaking on behalf of the Environmental Integrity Group. (Agenda item 2) A. Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 11 September, the SBI considered the provisional agenda contained in document FCCC/SBI/2000/6. 1. Opening of the session. 2. Organizational matters: (a) Adoption of the agenda; (b) Organization of the work of the session. 3. Implementation of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention (decision 3/CP.3 and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol). 4. Matters relating to Article 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol. 5. Procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol. 6. Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase. 7. Mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol. Capacity-building: (a) Capacity-building in developing countries (non-Annex I Parties); (b) Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition. 9. National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention: greenhouse gas inventory data from 1990 to 1998. 10. National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention: (a) Provision of financial and technical support; (b) Report of the second meeting of the Consultative Group of Experts; Second compilation and synthesis of initial national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. 11. Financial mechanism: (a) Support to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; (b) Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties; (c) Other matters. 12. Venue of the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties. 13. Administrative and financial matters: (a) Possible options to respond to late payment of contributions; (b) Audited financial reports 1998-1999; (c) Interim financial performance 2000; Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. Other matters. Report on the session. B. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 11 September. It had before it the tentative schedule of meetings contained in document FCCC/SBI/2000/6, annex II. The Chairman noted that the schedule of meetings should be used as a guide to the organization of work of the SBI, but that flexibility would be required to respond to the pace of progress. IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9 OF THE CONVENTION (DECISION 3/CP.3 AND ARTICLES 2.3 AND 3.14 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL) (Agenda item 3) MATTERS RELATING TO ARTICLE 3.14 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL (Agenda item 4) 1. Proceedings The SBI considered these items together at its 2nd and 5th meetings, held jointly with the SBSTA, on 11 and 15 September respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2000/5 and Corr.1. Statements were made by 12 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the group of least developed countries, one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At the 2nd meeting, held jointly with the SBSTA on 11 September, Mr. Bo Kjellén (Sweden) and Mr. Abdulmuhsen Al-Sunaid (Saudi Arabia), reported on the informal meetings relating to these items which they had chaired during the pre-sessional week at the request of the chairmen of the subsidiary bodies. Also at the 2nd meeting, the subsidiary bodies agreed to consider these items by way of a joint contact group. The chairmen of the subsidiary bodies appointed Mr. Kjellén and, in the absence of Mr. Mohammad Reza Salamat (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Al-Sunaid to co-chair this contact group. 2. Conclusions At their joint meeting on 15 September, having considered a proposal by the chairmen, the SBI and the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: (a) The subsidiary bodies agreed to forward the text contained in document FCCC/SBI/2000/10/Add.1 to the second part of their thirteenth sessions for further consideration. The text is presented without prejudice as to whether one or two draft decisions on agenda items 3 and 4 would be recommended to the Conference of the Parties (COP); (b) The subsidiary bodies invited their chairmen, with the assistance of the secretariat, to convene inter-sessional consultations on these items. The subsidiary bodies decided to resume negotiations on the two agenda items at the second part of their thirteenth sessions, on the basis of the text mentioned in subparagraph (a) above, taking into account the report of the inter-sessional consultations; (c) The subsidiary bodies, on the basis of a statement made by the group of least developed countries, requested the secretariat to organize, before the sixth session of the COP (COP 6), a workshop for these countries to enable them to discuss their specific situations, needs and concerns related to adaptation, capacity-building and development and transfer of technologies, and to formulate and refine their positions with a view to moving negotiations forward at COP 6. PROCEDURES AND MECHANISMS RELATING TO COMPLIANCE UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL (Agenda item 5) The SBI considered this item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, held jointly with the SBSTA, on 11 and 15 September respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2000/7. Informal meetings had been conducted during the pre-sessional week under the co-chairmanship of Mr. Harald Dovland (Norway), Chairman of the SBSTA, and Mr. Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa). At the joint meeting on 11 September, the chairmen referred discussion of this item to the Joint Working Group on Compliance (JWG) established by decision 8/CP.4, under the co-chairmanship of Mr. Dovland and Mr. Slade. At the joint meeting on 15 September, the SBI and the SBSTA took note of the report of the JWG (see annex III below). ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY UNDER THE PILOT PHASE (Agenda item 6) The SBI considered this item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, held jointly with the SBSTA, on 11 and 15 September respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2000/6 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the joint meeting, on 15 September, the SBI and the SBSTA agreed to consider the draft revised uniform reporting format contained in document FCCC/SB/2000/6/Add.1 at their fourteenth sessions. (Agenda item 7) The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, held jointly with the SBI, on 11 and 15 September respectively. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/SB/2000/4 and FCCC/SB/2000/MISC.4 and Add.1, Add.2/Rev.1, Add.2/Rev.1/Corr.1 and Add.3. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At the joint meeting on 11 September, Mr. Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) reported on the informal meetings he had chaired on this issue during the pre-sessional week, at the request of the chairmen of the subsidiary bodies. At the same meeting, the subsidiary bodies agreed to consider this item by way of a joint contact group, chaired by Mr. Kok Kee Chow. At the joint meeting on 15 September, having considered a proposal by the chairmen, the subsidiary bodies adopted the following conclusions: (a) The subsidiary bodies considered the note by the chairmen contained in document FCCC/SB/2000/4 and took note of additional submissions by Parties contained in document FCCC/SB/2000/MISC.4 and Add.1-2, Add.2/Rev.1, Add.2/Rev.1/Corr.1 and Add.3, as well as other views expressed by Parties; (b) The subsidiary bodies noted the progress made in implementing the work programme on mechanisms contained in decision 7/CP.4; The subsidiary bodies, recalling decision 14/CP.5, agreed to forward to the second part of their thirteenth sessions the note by the chairmen of the subsidiary bodies contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2000/10/Add.1; The subsidiary bodies invited the chairmen to further consolidate, in preparation for the second part of their thirteenth sessions, the above-mentioned note in consultation with Parties. (Agenda item 8) A. Capacity-building in developing countries (non-Annex I Parties) (Agenda item 8 (a)) B. Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition (Agenda item 8 (b)) The SBI considered these sub-items together at its 2nd and 5th meetings, held jointly with the SBSTA, on 11 and 15 September respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2000/8 and FCCC/SB/2000/9. At the joint meeting on 11 September, the Chairman of the SBI, Mr. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda), reported on the informal meetings relating to these sub-items which he had chaired during the pre-sessional week. At the same meeting, the subsidiary bodies agreed to consider these sub-items by way of a joint contact group co-chaired by Mr. Ashe and Mr. Jukka Uosukainen (Finland). At the joint meeting on 15 September, having considered a proposal by the chairmen, the SBI and the SBSTA agreed to further consider, at the second part of their thirteenth sessions, the draft decisions on capacity-building in developing countries and countries with economies in transition, contained in documents FCCC/SBI/2000/10/Add.3 and FCCC/SBI/2000/10/Add.4 respectively, with a view to recommending draft decisions on these matters for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its sixth session. NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION: GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY DATA FROM 1990 TO 1998 (Agenda item 9) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd meeting, on 12 September. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2000/11. Statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. The SBI agreed to further consider, at the second part of its thirteenth session, conclusions proposed by the Chairman on this item. At its 4th meeting on 15 September, the SBI requested the secretariat to further elaborate the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2000/11 in the form of graphs and tables. This information should be available to COP 6 without prejudice to further compilation and synthesis of national communications. NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES NOT INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION (Agenda item 10) A. Provision of financial and technical support (Agenda item 10 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd meeting, on 12 September. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.7. Statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the African Group and one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 3rd meeting, the Chairman noted that, pursuant to decision 10/CP.2, the secretariat makes available at each session information obtained from the secretariat of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) on the financial support provided to non-Annex I Parties for preparation of their national communications, and stated that a report would be made available for consideration by the SBI at the second part of its thirteenth session. The SBI agreed to consider, at the second part of the thirteenth session, a proposal by the Chairman for the conclusions on this item. B. Report of the second meeting of the Consultative Group of Experts (Agenda item 10 (b)) At its 3rd meeting, on 12 September, the SBI decided to consider this sub-item at the second part of its thirteenth session. C. Second compilation and synthesis of initial national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 10 (c)) FINANCIAL MECHANISM (Agenda item 11) A. Support to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Agenda item 11 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 12 and 15 September respectively. At the 3rd meeting, the secretariat of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provided a statement by Mr. Robert Watson, Chairman of the IPCC, on the status of the capacity-building project proposal on vulnerability and adaptation to climate change of the Global Environment Facility and the IPCC. At its 4th meeting, on 15 September, having considered a proposal by the Chairman, the SBI adopted the following conclusions, (a) The SBI took note of the statement of the Chairman of the IPCC on the status of the project proposal on capacity-building related to vulnerability and adaptation to climate change ; (b) The SBI noted that the GEF had approved a Project Preparation and Development Facility Block B (PDF-B) grant of US$ 350,000 for the development of a full proposal; (c) It also noted the progress made in revising the full proposal with the participation of experts from non-Annex I Parties. B. Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties (Agenda item 11 (b)) C. Other matters (Agenda item 11 (c)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 12 and 15 September respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2000/MISC.1. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 3rd meeting, the Chairman proposed that he would conduct informal consultations on a possible draft decision on additional guidance to the Global Environment Facility for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its sixth session. At its 4th meeting, on 15 September, having considered a proposal by the Chairman, the SBI agreed to further consider, at the second part of its thirteenth session, in a contact group to be co-chaired by the Chairman of the SBI, Mr. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Mr. Kerry Groves (Australia), the draft decision on additional guidance to an operating entity of the financial mechanism, and additional submissions on this matter received from Parties, with a view to recommending a draft decision on this matter for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its sixth session (see annex I below). (Agenda item 12) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 12 and 15 September respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2000/7. The representative of Morocco made a statement thanking delegates for the confidence accorded to his country in agreeing that the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties should be held in Marrakech. He informed the meeting that the conference would take place under the high patronage of His Majesty King Mohammed VI. The representative of Morocco stated that he looked forward, on behalf of Morocco and of the whole of Africa, to welcoming delegates to Marrakech. At the same meeting, the SBI heard a report from the secretariat concerning certain technical problems that had arisen recently, necessitating reconsideration of the dates for the first sessional period in 2001. The Chairman undertook to consult on this question and report back to the SBI. At the 4th meeting, on 15 September, the Chairman reported that his consultations on this question had not reached a consensus. The dates for the first sessional period in 2001 therefore remained unchanged. At its 3rd meeting, on 12 September, having considered a proposal by the Chairman, the SBI recommended a draft decision on the venue of the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties for adoption by the Conference at its sixth session (FCCC/CP/2000/1/Add.1). (Agenda item 13) Possible options to respond to late payment of contributions (Agenda item 13 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st and 3rd meetings, on 11 and 12 September respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2000/5, annex I. Statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 1st meeting, on 11 September, after recalling that at its twelfth session the SBI had transmitted an initial draft decision proposed by the Chairman for consideration at its thirteenth session (FCCC/SBI/2000/5, para. 47 (b)), the Chairman requested Mr. Mohamed M. Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) to continue conducting informal consultations with interested Parties. At the 3rd meeting, on 12 September, Mr. El Ghaouth reported that consultations were still continuing and that Parties preferred to postpone the finalization of the draft decision until the second part of the session. At its 3rd meeting, on 12 September, having considered the outcome of the informal consultations and the statements by representatives of six Parties, the SBI agreed that the Chairman should continue informal consultations with the assistance of Mr. El Ghaouth and that decisions on this item should be postponed until the second part of the session in November, with a view to recommending a draft decision for adoption by Conference of the Parties at its sixth session (see annex II below). B. Audited financial reports 1998-1999 (Agenda item 13 (b)) C. Interim financial performance 2000 (Agenda item 13 (c)) The SBI considered these sub-items together at its 3rd meeting, on 12 September. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/SBI/2000/8, FCCC/SBI/2000/9 and FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.12. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties. At its 3rd meeting, on 12 September, having considered a proposal by the Chairman, the SBI adopted the following conclusions: (a) The SBI took note of the audited financial reports 1998-1999, the audit observations and the interim financial performance in 2000; (b) The SBI expressed appreciation to the United Nations Board of Auditors for auditing the Convention's accounts and for its observations. It expressed its confidence that the audit recommendations would be implemented by the secretariat as far as applicable; (c) The SBI decided to recommend a draft decision on administrative and financial matters for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its sixth session FCCC/CP/2000/1/Add.1; (d) The SBI agreed to start discussions on the programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 at the second part of its thirteenth session and invited the Executive Secretary to make the necessary input thereto. D. Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement (Agenda item 13 (d)) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd meeting, on 12 September. The representative of Germany gave an interim report on the action taken by his Government as a follow-up to the conclusions agreed upon by the SBI at its twelfth session (FCCC/SBI/2000/5, para. 5). He informed the SBI that additional office space had been made available as a temporary solution; reiterated the host Government's plan to accommodate all United Nations organizations in a single location; and reported on the current situation with regard to issuing visas to delegates as well as residence and work permits to United Nations staff and their families. The Executive Secretary, in response, said that the secretariat would continue to work together with the host Government and other United Nations organizations located in Bonn on these issues, and report to the SBI on any progress made. He informed the SBI that the move of staff into the additional office premises would start after COP 6. At its 3rd meeting, on 12 September, the SBI took note of the statements made by the host Government and the Executive Secretary, and invited them to report on progress at its next session. E. Cooperation with the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification At the 3rd meeting, on 12 September, the Executive Secretary made an oral presentation regarding the plan to establish common administrative services between the secretariats of the UNFCCC and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). The Chairman proposed that the secretariat report on this matter to subsequent sessions of the SBI. At its 3rd meeting, on 12 September, the SBI took note of and welcomed the plan to establish common administrative services with UNCCD. OTHER MATTERS (Agenda item 14) At the 3rd meeting on 12 September, the Chairman proposed that the SBI consider issues related to Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol at the second part of the thirteenth session after the SBSTA had arrived at conclusions on the guidelines on these articles, with the aim of submitting these guidelines for adoption by the COP at its sixth session. At the 4th meeting, on 15 September, the Chairman informed the SBI that he had received a request that the SBI be invited to revise its recommendation to the Conference of the Parties, agreed upon by the SBI at its twelfth session (FCCC/SBI/2000/5, para. 43), concerning the scenario for COP 6. The revision to the scenario would mean that the Conference would adopt its agenda on Monday, 13 November 2000, instead of Monday, 20 November 2000, as originally recommended. The Chairman reported that he had consulted on this proposal. The SBI endorsed the revised scenario for adopting the agenda of COP 6 and the Chairman asked the secretariat to integrate this revision into its planning for COP 6. REPORT ON THE SESSION (Agenda item 15) At its 4th meeting, on 15 September, the SBI considered the draft report on its thirteenth session (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2). A statement was made by one Party speaking on behalf of the African Group about the financial support to the IPCC, GEF activities in Africa, problems experienced by African delegations with regard to visas and the scenario for COP 6. At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chairman, the SBI authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report of the session, under the guidance of the Chairman. XV. CLOSURE OF THE SESSION At the final joint meeting of the SBI and the SBSTA, on 15 September, statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the least developed countries, one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the same meeting, statements were also made by a representative of the Union of Industrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe on behalf of the business community and a representative from the Consortium for Community Forest Systems on behalf of the indigenous people. The chairmen stated that no new provisional agenda and annotations would be issued for the second part of the thirteenth sessions. The secretariat would prepare a list of documents under the respective agenda items (FCCC/CP/2000/1/Add.2). At the same joint meeting, the chairmen of the subsidiary bodies requested the co-chairs of the contact groups to resume their responsibilities at the second part of the thirteenth sessions, including those who were not able to participate in the first part of the sessions. The chairmen called for co-chairs holding consultations before the second part of the thirteenth sessions to report on those consultations at that part of the sessions. Also at the final joint meeting, the chairmen suspended the sessions of the subsidiary bodies and noted that the sessions would resume in The Hague on 13 November. DRAFT DECISION FOR CONSIDERATION BY THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION AT THE SECOND PART OF ITS THIRTEENTH SESSION Draft decision -/CP.6 Additional guidance to the operating entity of the financial mechanism Text by the co-chairmen The Conference of the Parties, Recalling its decisions 11/CP.1, 10/CP.2, 11/CP.2, 12/CP.2, 2/CP.4 and 8/CP.5 and [10/CP.5], [Noting the extension of funding through the expedited procedures of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) for countries to address capacity-building needs identified in decision 2/CP.4 enabling Parties to maintain and enhance relevant national capacities and for the preparation of second national communications in accordance with decision 8/CP.5], Noting also the launching of the GEF Country Dialogue Workshops which have been designed to strengthen national coordination, capacity-building and to promote awareness raising and the results of the first phase of the GEF Capacity Development Initiative, a strategic partnership between the GEF Secretariat and the United Nations Development Programme, which was forwarded to Parties in accordance with decision 10/CP.5, Welcoming the launch of negotiations on the third replenishment of GEF, and urging Annex II Parties to [increase] their contributions to the GEF Trust Fund, Decides that, in accordance with Articles 4.3, 4.5 and 11.1 of the Convention, the GEF, as an operating entity of the financial mechanism, should provide financial resources to developing country Parties, in particular the least developed and the small island developing States amongst them, to: (a) [Implement country-driven Stage II adaptation activities that build upon work done at the national level, either in preparation of national communications or from in-depth national studies, and develop demonstration projects ("learning-by-doing") aimed at identifying and subsequently implementing viable options for Stage III adaptation activities]; (a) bis [Implement country-driven Stage II adaptation activities that build upon work done at the national level, either in preparation of national communications or from in-depth national studies in particularly vulnerable countries and regions identified in Stage I activities, and especially in countries vulnerable to climate-related natural disasters]; (a) ter [Develop demonstration projects ("learning-by-doing") aimed at identifying and subsequently implementing viable options for Stage III adaptation activities]; (b) [Support the continuation of the "country-team" approach which enhances the collection, analysis, interpretation and dissemination of data on climate change issues and increases national commitment to the implementation of the objective of the Convention]; (c) [Establish and/or strengthen national, subregional or regional databases on climate change]; (d) [Enhance the capacity of their subregional and/or regional information networks to enable such networks to serve as repositories of climate change related information on vulnerability and adaptation assessments and geographic information systems]; (e) [Improve climate change related data collection (e.g. local emission factors) and information gathering, as well as the analysis, interpretation and dissemination of these data to national policy-makers and other end-users]; (f) [Establish and/or strengthen subregional and/or regional climate change related institutions and "centres of excellence", to enable these centres and institutions to provide a supportive framework, including for information retrieval and technical support]; (g) [Develop and implement prioritized projects identified in their national communications]; (h) [Undertake, on submission of their initial national communications, in the preparation of their subsequent national communications, more in-depth public awareness and education activities and community involvement and participation in climate change issues]; (i) [Build capacity for disaster preparedness and disaster management, including contingency planning for droughts and floods in areas [prone to extreme weather events] [most vulnerable to the adverse effect of climate change]]; (j) [Strengthen [existing and, where appropriate, establish] [the capacity to participate in] early warning systems for extreme weather events in an integrated and interdisciplinary manner to assist particularly vulnerable Parties]. 2. [Requests] [Encourages] the GEF to: (a) [Continue its efforts aimed at minimizing the time between approval of project concepts, development and approval of the related projects, and the disbursement of funds by its implementing agencies to the recipient countries of those projects]; (a) bis [Further streamline its project cycle with a view to making project preparation simpler, less prescriptive, more transparent and country-driven]; (b) [Ensure that its implementing agencies are] [encourage its implementing agencies to be] more responsive to requests for GEF assistance from developing country Parties for climate change related project activities aimed at implementing the guidance of the COP; (c) Further enhance the use of national and regional experts and/or consultants in all aspects of project development and implementation. In this regard, it should make [its roster of national and regional experts and/or consultants available to developing country Parties through the institutions referred to in paragraphs 1 (e and/or g) above] [this information available to developing countries]; (d) [Further streamline its project cycle with a view to ensuring that there is only one GEF project cycle for all GEF activities within its implementing agencies]; (e) [Give consideration to recommending that the second GEF assembly increase the number of implementing agencies, thereby ensuring that developing country Parties have more opportunities available to them for accessing GEF funds for climate change activities aimed at implementing the guidance of the COP]. 3. Further requests the GEF to include in its report to the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties the specific steps it has taken to implement the provisions of this decision. Late payment of contributions: response options Recalling paragraph 8 (b) of its financial procedures, Having considered the report of the Executive Secretary on options for responding to late payment of contributions: (FCCC/SBI/2000/2), 1. Takes note of the initiatives already taken by the secretariat as indicated in document FCCC/SBI/2000/2, paragraph 17; 2. Urges all Parties to the Convention to note that contributions to the core budget are due on 1 January of each year, and to pay their respective contributions promptly and in full by that date; 3. Requests the Executive Secretary to continue using persuasion as well as other means, including posting the status of contributions on the Convention's web site in a more visible manner, to encourage Parties to make their contributions in time; 4. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 2001, Parties that have arrears of contributions of one full year or more will not be eligible: (a) For membership of the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies; (b) To participate in the debates at its sessions and at sessions of its (c) For invitation to inter-sessional workshops and other meetings; 5. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 2001, Parties which would normally be eligible for funding, and that have arrears of contributions of one full year or more, will not receive funding to attend any sessions; 6. Also decides that Parties which are least developed or small island States are exempt from paragraphs 4 and 5 unless they have arrears of contributions of two years or more; 7. Decides further that, with effect from 1 January 2001, delegations from Parties that have arrears of contributions of one year or more will be limited to two members at sessions of the Conference of the Parties and the subsidiary bodies until the arrears of the Party in question have been cleared. REPORT OF THE JOINT WORKING GROUP ON COMPLIANCE ON ITS WORK DURING THE FIRST PART OF THE THIRTEENTH SESSIONS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES I. INTRODUCTION The meetings of the Joint Working Group on Compliance (JWG) were presided over by Mr. Tuiloma Neroni Slade and Mr. Harald Dovland. One of the Co-Chairmen of the JWG, opening the meetings, recalled that consultations held during the inter-sessional period had been useful. Based on these discussions, the Co-Chairmen had prepared a text on procedures and mechanisms relating to a compliance system (FCCC/SB/2000/7). Following the discussions during the pre-sessional week of informal meetings, the Co-Chairmen prepared a revised text on compliance for discussion by the JWG. II. PROCEDURES AND MECHANISMS RELATING TO The JWG held discussions on compliance. Statements were made by representatives of 20 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States. On the basis of a proposal by the Co-Chairmen, the JWG requested the Co-Chairmen, with the assistance of the secretariat, to further develop the text on compliance contained in document FCCC/SBI/2000/10/Add.2, to serve as the basis for negotiations, along with inputs from Parties, at the second part of the thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies. III. REPORT ON THE MEETINGS The JWG considered and adopted the report on its meetings drafted by the Co-Chairmen. LIST OF DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION AT THE FIRST PART OF ITS THIRTEENTH SESSION FCCC/SBI/2000/5 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its twelfth session, Bonn, 12-16 June 2000 FCCC/SBI/2000/6 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2000/7 Venue of the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties FCCC/SBI/2000/8 Administrative and financial matters. Income and budget performance in the biennium 2000-2001: interim report as at 30 June 2000. Arrangements for administrative support to the Convention. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2000/9 Administrative and financial matters. Audit reports. Audited financial statements for the biennium 1998-1999: report of the United Nations Board of Auditors. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2000/11 National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Greenhouse gas inventory data from 1990 to 1998. Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Annex I Parties from 1990 to 1998 FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.7 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Provision of financial and technical support. Activities of the secretariat to facilitate the provision of financial and technical support, and information on communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.12 Administrative and financial matters. Income and budget performance in the biennium 2000-2001. Status report on receipt of contributions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2000/MISC.1 Financial mechanism. Other matters. Draft decision submitted by the Group of 77 and China FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2 Report on the session. Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on the first part of its thirteenth session FCCC/SBI/2000/L.3 Venue of the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.8 Administrative and financial matters. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.9 Financial mechanism. Other matters. Draft conclusions by the Chairman FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.9/ Financial mechanism. Other matters. Addendum. Add.1 Additional guidance to the operating entity of the financial mechanism. Co-Chairmen's text FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.10 Financial mechanism. Support to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Draft conclusions by the Chairman FCCC/SB/2000/4 Mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol. Consolidated text on principles, modalities, rules and guidelines. Note by the chairmen FCCC/SB/2000/5 Implementation of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention and Corr. 1 (Decision 3/CP.3 and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol). Matters relating to Article 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the chairmen of the subsidiary bodies FCCC/SB/2000/6 Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: Fourth and Add.1 synthesis report on activities implemented jointly and draft revised uniform reporting format FCCC/SB/2000/7 Products and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol. Proposals from the Co-Chairman of the Joint Working Group on Compliance FCCC/SB/2000/8 Capacity-building in developing countries (non-Annex I Parties). Possible elements of a draft framework for capacity-building in developing countries (non-Annex I Parties) FCCC/SB/2000/9 Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition. Possible elements of a draft framework for capacity-building in countries with economies in transition (Parties included in Annex I to the Convention but not included in Annex II) FCCC/SB/2000/MISC.4 Mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the and Add.1, Add.2/Rev.1, Kyoto Protocol. Principles, modalities, rules and guidelines. Add.2/Rev.1/Corr.1, Additional submissions from Parties and Add.3 FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.10 Procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol. Report of the Joint Working Group on Compliance on its work during the thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.10/ Procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Add.1 Kyoto Protocol. Proposals by the Co-Chairmen of the Joint Working Group on Compliance FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.11 Implementation of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention (decision 3/CP.3 and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol). Matters relating to Article 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions by the chairmen FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.11/ Implementation of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention Add.1 (decision 3/CP.3 and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol). Matters relating to Article 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol. [Draft decision(s)] FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.13 Capacity-building. Capacity-building in developing countries (non-Annex I Parties). Capacity-building in countries with economies in transition. Draft conclusions by the chairmen FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.13 Capacity-building. Capacity-building in developing countries Add.1 (non-Annex I Parties). Draft decision FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.13 Capacity-building. Capacity-building in countries with economies Add. 2 in transition. Draft decision FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.14 Mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol. Conclusions FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.14/ Mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17 Add.1 (Volumes 1-4) of the Kyoto Protocol 