%%%TECHNICAL COOPERATION|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR SAFETY|

Main Committee III Summary record of the 1st meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 27 April 2000, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Reimaa (Finland) Contents Programme of work General exchange of views The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m. 1. The Chairman recalled that, in accordance with the allocation of items to the Main Committees adopted by the Conference (NPT/CONF.2000/1, annex VIII), the Committee would focus on agenda item 16 (d). The Committee would also consider, in parallel with the other Main Committees, item 17. Because of the links between international cooperation in the nuclear field and non-proliferation through safeguards, the work of Main Committees III and II might overlap. Consequently, the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen would maintain close contacts with their counterparts in Main Committee II so as to avoid any unnecessary duplication of work. 2. The first two meetings would be devoted to a general exchange of views on the issues before the Committee. At the second meeting, the Director of the Division of Technical Cooperation Programmes of IAEA would brief the Committee on the Agency's activities in the field of technical cooperation. He drew attention to the documentation prepared by IAEA on articles IV and V (NPT/CONF.2000/10 and NPT/CONF.2000/11 respectively) and on article III (NPT/CONF.2000/9). 3. Mr. de Albuquerque (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the European Union, the associated countries Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Turkey, and, in addition, Iceland and Liechtenstein, said that the European Union reaffirm the importance of the commitment made in paragraph 14 of the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament that particular importance should be attached to ensuring the exercise of the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II as well as III of the Treaty. While the European Union was actively engaged in measures to facilitate and support the peaceful use of nuclear energy by all States, it wished to emphasize the importance of full compliance by all States with their obligations under the Treaty. 4. In recent years, the European Union had strongly promoted transparency in nuclear-related export controls, in accordance with paragraph 17 of the decision on principles and objectives. Several publications about the origins, role, structure and activities of the Nuclear Suppliers Group had been issued and two international seminars on the role of export controls in nuclear non-proliferation had been held in 1997 and 1999 with the participation of the States Members of the United Nations, experts from international organizations and academic and industry specialists. The European Union believed that effective export controls should not be regarded as a hindrance to international nuclear trade, but as an essential element in strengthening cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the transfer of nuclear technology. It would therefore continue to promote transparency in that area. Mention must also be made of the work done in that field by the Zangger Committee. 5. For the European Union, it was extremely important that "the highest practicable levels of nuclear safety" should be in place everywhere in the world, as provided for in paragraph 18 of the decision on principles and objectives. It recognized that responsibility for the safe design, construction and operation of any nuclear installation rested with the State having jurisdiction over the installation, but that international cooperation could play an indispensable role in helping to achieve the highest standards of safety. Thus, the European Union, through the PHARE and TACIS programmes, and its member States were major contributors to the international efforts to assist the countries of Eastern and Central Europe, including the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, in improving nuclear safety. 6. The first review meeting on the implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety held in April 1999 in Vienna had shown that the Convention was a valuable instrument for assessing and improving nuclear safety levels. The European Union hoped that that encouraging example of international cooperation would further the early signature and ratification by States of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. 7. The European Union recalled paragraph 19 of the decision on principles and objectives, which stated, inter alia, that every effort should be made to ensure that IAEA had the financial and human resources necessary to meet effectively its responsibilities in the areas of technical cooperation, safeguards and nuclear safety. The members of the European Union collectively provided more than one third of the Agency's regular budget for the financing of activities in those three areas. They provided a similarly large proportion of the voluntary contributions to the Technical Cooperation Fund of IAEA. The European Union was confident that IAEA had the means necessary to carry out its activities and supported the Agency's efforts to improve them. It considered that the technical assistance provided by the Agency should be aligned with national development programmes and that responsibility for so doing lay primarily with the recipient States. It also believed that the recipient States should pay their assessed programme contributions in full in order to demonstrate the importance that they attached to the projects. 8. Ms. Drabova (Czech Republic) said that her country had a relatively extensive nuclear programme oriented entirely towards the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Her Government was fully aware of the importance of maintaining the highest possible standards of nuclear safety and radiation protection and ensuring the necessary resources to meet its responsibilities in the field. 9. The Czech Republic recognized IAEA as the principal body for the transfer of expertise and technology for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and was participating in the Agency's Technical Cooperation Programme. In the framework of that programme it was participating in a number of projects, the most important of which concerned the establishment of a cyclotron centre for the production of short-lived radiopharmaceuticals and the application of positron emission tomography to medicine. The project was a cost-effective means of increasing capacity in health care and was an example of the effectiveness of the new IAEA technical cooperation strategy introduced in 1997. 10. The Czech Republic participated in a number of activities within the framework of the regional technical cooperation programme. Some of the activities included physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities, emergency preparedness, security of radioactive sources and materials, and information and quality assurance in the medical applications of ionizing radiation. In response to the needs of developing countries, it had also contributed to the Technical Cooperation Fund and had been involved in the financing of several technical assistance projects, in the countries of the former Soviet Union. Fellowship programmes for experts from developing countries were offered on an ongoing basis in all those areas. 11. The Czech Republic fully supported IAEA in its efforts to enhance cooperation in implementing the Programme for Preventing and Combatting Illicit Trafficking in Nuclear Material. Furthermore, as part of the process of accession to the European Union, it took part in consultations with the European Commission, participated in the PHARE programme, collaborated with the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and was involved in cooperation for nuclear safety within the Group of 24. 12. In order to ensure the safe use of nuclear energy, recipient countries must sign and ratify international agreements and conventions creating an international legal framework for safe management of both nuclear facilities and nuclear material, in particular the Convention on Nuclear Safety. 13. Mr. Minty (South Africa) said that the splitting of the atom had prompted almost universal optimism about the possibility of solving the world's energy problems and seeing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy become the magic key that could unlock new doors to a better future for all. Since then, nuclear technology applications were being use routinely in hospitals, farms, industry and universities. 14. In Africa, the application of nuclear technology had in many instances brought viable solutions to some problems. In that connection, South Africa commended IAEA which through its Technical Cooperation Programme, was making a meaningful contribution to sustainable development. The African region had largely succeeded in tailoring a common approach to the peaceful uses of nuclear science through the work of the African regional cooperative Agreement for Research, Development and Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology (AFRA). That unique Agreement was an intergovernmental pact of mutual assistance in the field of nuclear science and technology that brought together in one forum the scientific experts of Africa to find common solutions to the problems faced by the continent as a whole. The establishment of specialized teams to carry out missions in member States was a commendable development which had produced laudable results. Over the past five years, IAEA had helped AFRA members formulate new projects around four themes: radiation safety, human health, increased agricultural productivity and industrial applications. 15. Turning to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, he commended the Agency for accepting only technical cooperation projects with sustainable socio-economic benefits on regional and model projects. Concerning the latter, South Africa was strongly committed to education and training in radiological protection and nuclear safety and the establishment, in collaboration with IAEA, of an African regional centre for radiation protection and training in South Africa. The first course on radiation protection had been held from July to October 1999 at the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. His delegation welcomed the assistance provided by the Agency in the establishment of that centre of excellence. Among other successful projects currently being implemented in South Africa were the sterile insect technique for fruit flies, new screening methods to detect drug resistance in tuberculosis patients in two days and neonatal screening techniques. 16. Although there was a high rate of implementation of the technical assistance programme -- made possible by contributions from both donor and recipient countries -- problems could still arise unless steps were taken to ensure sufficient financial resources. He appealed to all, in particular the major donors, to ensure that the dues to the Technical Cooperation Fund were paid in full and on time. It was the task of the international community to ensure that humanity prospered from the advantages of radioactivity, by perfecting ways of minimizing its risks. 17. Ms. Pellicer (Mexico) said that her country had always attached great importance to article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and in particular to paragraph 2 thereof, acceptance of which had represented a major success for those who hoped to see balance in the commitments made by the nuclear-weapon States and the developing countries. Her delegation believed that the commitment made in that paragraph for the first time established a legal obligation for certain countries to contribute to the scientific and technical development of others. The gap separating rich and poor countries in the area of technology was one of the fundamental problems of the current era. If nothing was done to facilitate and accelerate the transfer of scientific and technological knowledge in the nuclear field while ensuring that it was used for peaceful purposes, the situation could only get worse. 18. The IAEA report on its activities (NPT/CONF.2000/10) gave a clear idea of the implementation of article IV, with particular emphasis on the events which had taken place since the previous review conference. The Agency's efforts to increase the effectiveness of its cooperation programmes should be noted. IAEA conducted activities in various fields of nuclear energy, from the generation of electricity to the application of radio isotopes in the fields of health care, food, industry, agriculture, water resources and the environment. The efforts to strengthen the global security regime for radiation, nuclear waste and transport of nuclear materials were particularly commendable. IAEA activities had expanded to include capacity-building, scientific analysis, assistance with legislation and exchange of information, which explained why States were making use of its services more and more frequently. All States should thus contribute to the strengthening of its technical cooperation activities. 19. Decision 2 adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference stated that every effort should be made to ensure that IAEA had the financial and human resources necessary to meet effectively its responsibilities in the areas of technical cooperation, safeguards and nuclear safety. However, there might be grounds to be concerned about the paucity of financial resources earmarked for technical cooperation. Unlike other IAEA programmes, the technical cooperation programme basically depended on voluntary contributions from Member States. However, although such contributions were voluntary, they flowed from a legal obligation under article IV of the Treaty. Not much could be said about the willingness to honour that provision if those who were in a position to do so did not provide the necessary support for the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Yet, in recent years, certain States had only partly fulfilled or failed to fulfil altogether their undertakings with respect to contributions to the Technical Cooperation Fund. Consequently, it had not been possible to complete a large number of projects submitted to the Agency. There was a considerable gap between the target for payments into the Technical Cooperation Fund set every two years by consensus by the IAEA General Conference and the financial resources that were actually paid into the Fund as voluntary contributions by both donor and recipient countries. Her delegation wished to call for the strengthening of IAEA technical cooperation activities, which meant that the States Party to the Treaty would be more firmly committed to paying their contributions to the Fund. 20. Mr. Lipár (Slovakia) said that his delegation aligned itself with the statement of the European Union. The issue of the regulation of the use of nuclear energy was of vital importance to his country. Slovakia had promulgated an Energy Management Act in 1998, which governed the terms and conditions that were applicable to businesses operating in the electricity, gas and heating industries sectors. The Act also specified that the use of nuclear power was subject to the approval of the Nuclear Regulatory Authority of the Slovak Republic. Another act, which entered into force the same year, regulated obligations and rights with respect to the safe use of nuclear energy and nuclear material, the management of radioactive waste, compensation for damages caused by nuclear accidents and State supervision of nuclear installations. In January 2000, his Government had approved a national medium-term energy plan, part of which was dedicated to the future role of nuclear energy. Its main features were energy savings, environmental protection and energy price development. Safety was the most important precondition for the use of nuclear energy. Thanks to international cooperation, two projects for the gradual reconstruction of nuclear power plants and extensive safety upgrading had been completed. 21. In 1999, Slovakia had presented its national report to the review meeting convened in accordance with the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The meeting had confirmed that outstanding results had been achieved in setting up a regulatory body and in the area of safety improvement programmes. That result had also been acknowledged by the International Conference on Strengthening Nuclear Safety in Eastern Europe held in Vienna in June 1999. 22. IAEA had played a vital role in the improvement of the level of safety in all nuclear power plants in the country. A number of activities were still pending, including determining whether the safety improvements with respect to earlier IAEA recommendations had been implemented. Apart from technical services in the field of nuclear safety, cooperation with IAEA covered other important aspects, including 12 national projects and over 30 regional and interregional projects undertaken since 1995. In that regard, Slovakia would fulfil all its obligations arising from technical cooperation with IAEA. 23. Since 1995, Slovakia had concluded bilateral cooperation agreements with Bulgaria, Canada, the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovenia and Ukraine; it also maintained outstanding relations with the Governments of Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United States of America. Such bilateral activities were mainly devoted to the development of human resources in the form of training programmes and consultations, the transfer of technical know-how and the partial supply of equipment. Cooperation with the European Commission had also been essential. 24. Slovakia was now no longer just a recipient country of technical assistance; it was involved in assistance projects developed in cooperation with other Governments and IAEA for other countries of the region. 25. Mr. Balboni Acqua (Italy) said that his delegation fully supported the statement made by the European Union. The countries members of the Nuclear Suppliers Group had taken a number of steps to increase transparency. The first step was the drafting, in 1997, of a collective paper on the origins, role, structure and activities of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). Members of the Group had requested that the paper should be circulated to all IAEA member States as an information circular. The paper explained that the NSG Guidelines aimed to ensure that nuclear trade for peaceful purposes did not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices without hindering international trade and cooperation in the nuclear field. The Guidelines therefore complemented the various international legally binding instruments in the field of nuclear non-proliferation, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 26. The Group had then organized two international seminars on the role of export controls in nuclear non-proliferation in Vienna in October 1997 and in New York in April 1999, respectively. Leading figures and senior experts in nuclear non-proliferation and export controls from all over the world had made statements at those seminars, which had also drawn over 350 participants from NPT and non-NPT countries, international organizations, including IAEA, and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. NSG countries and the European Union had provided financial support for the participation of experts from least developed and other countries facing economic hardship in the two seminars. The seminars, which were aimed at promoting an open and all-inclusive dialogue, had helped to clarify a number of misconceptions and misunderstandings about how export controls functioned. All the speeches, together with the concluding remarks by the Chairmen of the seminars, had been compiled in two booklets, which were easy to acquire. With the aim of additional transparency, it was planned to set up an NSG web site where information and documentation about the Group could be made available to Governments and the public at large. That would provide easy access to the text of the NSG Guidelines, the list of items covered by those Guidelines, the NSG collective paper and the speeches and concluding remarks of the two international seminars. 27. The NSG member States were determined to promote further transparency in nuclear-related export controls, since they believed that such transparency would enable States to participate to the fullest extent possible in the exchange of equipment, material and scientific and technological information. While reinforcing the international security environment, the Guidelines did not in any way affect the inalienable right of all parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 28. Mr. Yang Dazhu (China) said that promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was one of the main objectives of NPT, which, under its preamble and article IV, gave all the parties the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination, and the right to participate in international cooperation. 29. China had always believed that the prevention of nuclear proliferation and the promotion of peaceful uses were complementary. It wished to step up its technical assistance to developing countries and lift unreasonable restrictions imposed on technology transfers so that all humanity could benefit from nuclear energy. 30. China attached great importance to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It currently had three nuclear power plants with a capacity of 2,001 megawatts and was building four others whose total capacity would be 6,600 megawatts in order to cope with rising energy needs. China had always stressed safety and quality. 31. China participated in technical cooperation activities and in exchanges with other countries in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Treaty. The cooperation agreements it had signed with 16 countries formed a solid basis for its activities. Recognizing the sovereignty of other countries, and within the framework of reciprocal exchanges in the area of nuclear scientific research, it had provided assistance to developing countries and imported technologies from developed countries, including France, the Russian Federation, Canada, Japan and the Republic of Korea. 32. At the multilateral level, China participated in the technical cooperation activities of IAEA, to which it had always paid its contribution on time and in full; it had even made additional financial contributions within its means, particularly for projects in Ghana, Zanzibar and the Asia-Pacific region. Being a developing country itself, China benefited from IAEA technical assistance. 33. China had always fulfilled its commitment to nuclear non-proliferation within the framework of the bilateral and multilateral agreements to which it was a party. With regard to the export of nuclear materials, it subscribed to the following three principles: the export must be made for peaceful purposes; it must be made within the framework of the IAEA safeguards regime; and materials could not be transferred to a third State without the prior agreement of China. 34. Nonetheless, the prevention of nuclear proliferation should not be subject to a double standard and should not be utilized to impede international cooperation. The legitimate right of all countries, in particular most of the developing countries, to benefit from nuclear technology should be guaranteed. 35. China recognized the positive contribution and active role of IAEA in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and international cooperation. The Agency participated in more than 1,000 assistance projects for its members and had set up a new strategic framework for technical cooperation, which was proving to be effective. Nonetheless, he shared the concerns expressed by the representatives of Mexico and South Africa at the drastic decline in resources allocated to technical cooperation, despite the fact that States parties were obligated under article IV to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. All States parties to the Treaty must therefore pay their contributions to IAEA for technical cooperation activities on time and in full. His delegation congratulated the many countries which had not only done so but were also participating in those activities in other ways. It was regrettable, however, that certain countries had reduced their contributions or even stopped paying them altogether, which had caused IAEA insurmountable difficulties. 36. His delegation wished to draw all delegations' attention to the situation and announced that it had submitted a working paper on the subject to the Conference. It requested that the document should be distributed as an official document of the Conference and hoped that that suggestion would be supported by the other delegations. 37. Mr. Wood (Canada) reaffirmed his country's commitment to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as illustrated by the comprehensive review of Canada's nuclear non-proliferation policy undertaken in 1999 by its Parliament and Government. The review had reaffirmed the benefits of international cooperation in the nuclear field and had concluded that nuclear power was a safe and cost-effective source of energy. 38. Canada had a well-developed nuclear industry and was a major supplier of nuclear goods and services. It shared its knowledge and experience with a significant number of NPT signatories; it had concluded bilateral nuclear cooperation agreements with 38 countries. Those agreements provided additional assurances that cooperation would be used only for peaceful end-uses. They provided for the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information, in accordance with Canada's NPT obligations. 39. Nuclear safety and the storage and disposal of nuclear waste were among the major issues relating to peaceful nuclear cooperation. The Conference should reaffirm the objective adopted in 1995 that all States should, through rigorous national measures and international cooperation, maintain the highest practicable levels of nuclear safety, particularly with regard to waste management, and observe standards and guidelines in nuclear materials accounting, their protection and transport. Canada would soon be implementing new legislation that would place increased emphasis on nuclear safety. Although nuclear safety was a national responsibility, international cooperation was essential, and Canada actively participated in many important initiatives undertaken by IAEA to strengthen safety standards and practices. It also participated in the nuclear safety working group of the Group of Seven. 40. Canada was the signatory of a number of major nuclear conventions, particularly the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. Safety in the international transport of nuclear material, particularly by sea, was critical, and Canada encouraged the Conference to endorse the 1997 decision taken by the International Maritime Organization to incorporate a code for the safe transport of irradiated nuclear fuel into the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea. 41. The Agency played an important role in facilitating nuclear cooperation and ensuring that it was only for peaceful purposes. Every effort must be made to ensure that it had the financial and human resources necessary to effectively meet its responsibilities in the areas of technical cooperation, safeguards and nuclear energy and safety. The Agency should make every effort to use its available resources in the most efficient manner possible, in accordance with its mandate and the priority needs of member States. 42. Canada was a major donor to the Agency's technical cooperation programme and funding was always a major concern. The Conference should encourage the Agency to endeavour to find ways to fund its technical assistance activities, particularly by broadening the donor base. 43. Those issues should be addressed in a programme of action approved by the Conference for the coming five years to ensure the relevance and effectiveness of the Treaty. His delegation was prepared to participate in the preparation of the Committee's report and of the final document of the Conference. 44. Ms. Ngawati (New Zealand) said that New Zealand, having chosen not to develop a nuclear power industry, was not a major participant in exchanges of nuclear technology. It nonetheless recognized that it was important to ensure the right of parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty. Her Government was assisting developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy through the Regional Cooperative Agreement in Asia and the Pacific and cooperating in the Agency's training programmes in areas where New Zealand had particular expertise. 45. A culture of nuclear safety was a prerequisite for international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The sometimes tragic incidents in nuclear installations over the past year demonstrated only too vividly the need for the highest safety standards and unwavering vigilance in their implementation. The activities of the Agency in strengthening the global regime for nuclear, radiation, waste and transport safety were of crucial importance. 46. Her Government attached particular importance to the Agency's cooperation with States in assessing radiological conditions at former nuclear test sites. It particularly welcomed the independent investigation carried out by an international advisory committee under the auspices of the Agency on the environmental impact of nuclear testing at the atolls of Mururoa and Fangataufa in the South Pacific. 47. Ships carrying nuclear materials and radioactive waste passed along the coast of New Zealand at regular intervals. That was a source of concern for New Zealanders and the inhabitants of many other coastal States in the region. At their latest summit meeting, the South Pacific States had explicitly requested that such shipments should be carried out in a manner which addressed all risks of accident and the concerns of the countries involved, including the coastal States. In particular, they had requested that the shipments should be of demonstrably minimal risk, that ships should comply with the highest safety standards and that the shipping States should agree to promote the safety of the cargoes and provide compensation for any industries harmed in the event of an accident, even a non-nuclear one. 48. Her Government was disappointed that the dialogue with South Pacific States on compensation and liability issues had recently been suspended by the transport States, namely Japan, France and the United Kingdom. The talks had been called to address the inadequacies of the current regime. Her Government was ready to resume them at any time. Her Government's objective was a strong legal regime requiring prior notification and informed consent procedures for transboundary movements of radioactive materials, a goal it was also pursuing within IAEA and IMO. The current Conference offered a further opportunity for parties to the Treaty affected by the shipment of such materials to join together to seek a regime which would provide stronger assurances on safety, security, liability and compensation. 49. Mr. Dahan (France) supported the statement by the representative of Portugal on behalf of the European Union. In accordance with its undertaking to fully implement article IV of the Treaty and the principles and objectives adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, his Government was endeavouring to promote civilian applications of atomic energy at the national and international levels and in the framework of the European Union. France was also helping to fund the Agency's regular budget and its Technical Cooperation Fund, and participated regularly in the Agency's activities. Over the past four years, French nuclear experts had been involved in about 180 technical cooperation missions run by the Agency. France was also supporting individual programmes organized in collaboration with the Agency, and had entered into many bilateral and multilateral agreements in the area of peaceful applications of nuclear power, including 130 intergovernmental agreements with non-nuclear-weapon States. 50. Development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was only possible if they fulfilled three conditions: non-proliferation and security, safety and transparency. As for the first of those, it was essential to combat proliferation and illicit trafficking in nuclear and radioactive materials. Exchanges of equipment, materials and scientific and technical data would be acceptable only if they gave rise to no diversion for illicit purposes; that, in turn, required effective, objective and transparent export monitoring, active support for the Agency's safeguards system and adherence by States to those policies. States should work together against the threat from illicit trafficking in and diversion of nuclear materials for the purpose of proliferation or for criminal ends, through improved sharing of information and cooperating to improve their national systems of accounting and physical protection of nuclear materials. To that end, in 1998 it had helped IAEA organize an international conference on illicit trafficking and it called on all States to sign the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 51. However, the maintenance of strict nuclear-export controls was not an end in itself and must not be an obstacle to the development of nuclear trade. In that regard, France welcomed the success of the two international seminars on the role of export controls in nuclear non-proliferation held in Vienna in 1997 and in New York in 1999 and the plan to establish an information site on the Internet. It also welcomed the role played by the Zangger Committee in the application of the provisions of article III, paragraph 2, of the NPT. 52. The second condition, safety, was related to the danger inherent in the use of nuclear energy. Safety must be a constant concern and improvements were needed in all areas (nuclear reactors, management of high-level and long-lived waste, transportation of nuclear materials, management of radioactive sources and long-term waste management). France was continuing to work actively to that end, both in an individual capacity and within the framework of the European Union and IAEA. It was contributing, in particular, both directly and through the PHARE and TACIS programmes of the European Union, to the enhancement of the safety of the nuclear installations of the States of Central and Eastern Europe and the States members of CIS. 53. France called on all States that had not yet done so to sign and ratify the Nuclear Safety Convention and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. France itself was a party to the first of those conventions and had completed the domestic procedures for the approval of the second one. With respect to nuclear civil liability, it was contributing to the enhancement of existing instruments. As to environmental responsibility, it was a party to the OSPAR Convention and the Convention on Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter. 54. France considered it vital that nuclear and radioactive materials should be transported as securely and safely as possible, in conformity with the highest international standards. It was a party to the international conventions dealing directly or indirectly with that issue and participated in the relevant work of IAEA and IMO, incorporating its outcome into domestic legal instruments. Thus, vessels sailing under the French flag and transporting irradiated nuclear fuel, plutonium or highly radioactive waste in flasks had to comply with the provisions of IMO resolution A/748 (XVIII) of 4 November 1993. 55. France was involved in the efforts to improve existing safety standards and ensure the application of the new standards adopted. For example, it had participated in the meeting organized by IAEA in 1998 for the purpose of reviewing the international instruments on transportation of radioactive materials and it was taking part in the activities of the working group charged with the review of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials and its operation. 56. As to the third condition, transparency, France was committed to continuing the efforts it had already undertaken, notably in the area of safety. It was very much aware of the need for special vigilance with respect to the supervision, in conditions of transparency, of nuclear procedures and installations and for the maintenance of the independence and plurality of the bodies responsible for safety and radiation protection. It was also concerned with transparency in the management of its stocks of civil plutonium: it was a member of the group of nine States signatories of the guidelines for the management of plutonium in all peaceful nuclear activities adopted in 1997 and it made public each year the status of French stocks of civil plutonium, which was published by IAEA, as well as information on its policy in that area. 57. Development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would be a crucial challenge in the twenty-first century insofar as it would help to solve the daunting economic and human problems in the fields of energy, agriculture, health and the environment. That development could take place only in a climate of trust characterized by compliance with the commitments made in respect of non-proliferation and increased safety and transparency. France hoped that the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and of international cooperation in that area would receive the necessary attention and that it would be given a powerful impetus at the conclusion of the Conference. 58. Ms. Beliaeva (Russian Federation) said that her country paid particular attention to maintaining the strictest compliance with its obligations under article IV of the Treaty. The Russian Federation was in favour of international cooperation, on the basis of equality, in the peaceful use of nuclear energy and provision of assistance to developing countries in order to meet their needs, in strict conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty, that was to say based on the principle of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It supported broad access by countries to the benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to cooperation in that area, at both the bilateral and multilateral levels, within the framework of IAEA for example. 59. Nuclear energy was currently the only energy source capable of being a substitute for organic fuel. The burning of fuel of that type to produce energy was leading to the rapid exhaustion of reserves and the loss of a source of important raw materials for the chemical industry and for medicine, as well as contributing to the degradation of the environment. 60. At the third Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, measures had been proposed with a view to restricting and reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. The participating countries had undertaken to take steps to halt the continued degradation of the environment. 61. Given the growth of global needs in fuel and energy and the limitations of traditional sources of energy, there was an urgent need to develop new technology in the field of energy capable of satisfying most of the increased needs. Research in the Russian Federation showed that it was possible to create a nuclear fuel cycle free of the shortcomings of today's nuclear energy. The principle of "natural safety" was a generalization of the internal safety principle in nuclear power stations through its application to the entire fuel cycle, taking into account the problem of radioactive waste and the non-proliferation regime. That principle entailed, inter alia, the elimination of serious nuclear accidents that exposed the population to the dangers of irradiation, safe burial of waste and technical support for the non-proliferation regime. The users of such technology could be both developed countries and developing countries whose desire to gain access to nuclear technology was legitimate. 62. The organization of an international project aimed at developing promising nuclear technology, under the auspices of IAEA and with the participation of interested developed and developing countries, could combine the efforts of the participating countries with a view to realizing the fundamental aims relating to the use of nuclear energy. 63. The Russian Federation accorded considerable importance to the Agency's technical cooperation programme and activities. One of the main elements of technical assistance was cooperation in the areas of training of national staff and scientific research. Since the establishment of IAEA, her country had been actively involved in technical assistance programmes through the supply of equipment, machinery and materials; it had also organized interregional and regional training programmes in its institutes and enterprises, and had disseminated data acquired through its rich experience. 64. Under the IAEA technical cooperation programme, the Russian Federation organized every year in its scientific and technical institutes and enterprises, scientific training programmes and visits for specialists from developing country members of the Agency. Despite its difficult economic situation, her country continued to provide assistance to those countries, in particular with respect to the construction of accelerators and neutron generators; it also continued to train specialists. In March 1999, her Government had delivered a cyclotron to Egypt which would serve as the basis for the establishment in that country of a regional medical research centre. The Agency was involved in that project. 65. The Russian Federation accorded considerable importance to cooperation with the States members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). Such cooperation was carried out in accordance with the 1992 framework agreement on the basic principles of cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Council of Heads of Government of the CIS member countries adopted in 1997 a long-term plan to develop cooperation among those countries in that area and to strengthen the safety of nuclear facilities. The plan defined the legal, normative, organizational, economic, scientific, technical, environmental and social aspects of such cooperation as well as its main policies and tasks. The Council had decided to establish a committee of CIS member countries on cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 66. In the field of nuclear energy, the Russian Federation promoted cooperation with respect to the construction and safe operation of nuclear power plants and the construction of research reactors with many member countries signatories to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. Over the previous two years, the Russian Federation had launched two projects in Slovakia and was currently building new facilities in China and the Islamic Republic of Iran. It supplied fresh fuel for reactors and provided investment services. 67. The project for the construction of the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) was an example of success in international cooperation. It had demonstrated that it was possible to settle complex legal, international, environmental, economic and political problems. In May 1998, that international project had been praised by the G-8 Summit at Birmingham, which had noted that the results of the technical studies confirmed the validity of hopes that the physical objectives could be achieved, and demonstrated the technical viability of the concept as a whole. The technical project would be completed in 2001. The project marked a decisive stage towards the use of a new source of energy for the benefit of all countries. 68. Turning to cooperation with respect to small nuclear reactors, including sea water desalination plants, she said that her Government intended to participate in the implementation, within the framework of the IAEA programme, of an international experimental project on the construction of a nuclear desalination plant. A project on the construction of a desalination unit at sea had been undertaken with Canada; work was ongoing on a similar project in collaboration with Indonesia. 69. The guarantee of a sufficient level of nuclear safety remained a priority concern in the utilization of nuclear energy and technologies. Reference should be made, in that regard, to the convening under the auspices of IAEA of the first review meeting of the contracting parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The positive atmosphere during the deliberations had made it possible to carry out an objective assessment of the status of all the nuclear power plants in activity. Participants had overcome their political differences and considered the problems from a purely technical standpoint. 70. In 1999, the Russian Federation had signed the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. The Convention should be able to secure the number of signatures required for its entry into force in 2000. 71. The Russian Federation participated in the IAEA programme on the establishment of a network of regional and international experimental research centres on the processing of radioactive waste from the application of nuclear technology in medicine, scientific research and industry. In 1999, the Agency had opened within the framework of that programme, in the Russian Federation, an experimental centre for the CIS region, specifically for Eastern Europe. 72. The NPT had provided an exceptional framework of constantly expanding international cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the coming decade. Her country was committed to pursuing cooperation with all the countries concerned and was convinced that nuclear energy was the technology of choice for the production of energy that would give humankind an alternative to the continued environmental damage that would be inevitable if the earth's organic resources were further exploited. Nuclear technology offered new and practical prospects in terms of know-how and new models for ongoing global and societal developments. 73. Mr. Rich (United States of America) recalled the mandate of Main Committee III, noting that it had to assess achievements, review the current situation and determine what had to be done in future in order to improve still further the effectiveness of cooperation with respect to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 74. His delegation noted the cluster III debates on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy that had taken place in each of the Preparatory Committee meetings for the current Review Conference. Those debates had set the stage for the deliberations of Committee III and demonstrated the value of the strengthened review process as it applied to article IV, and of cooperation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The United States had clearly demonstrated its depth of commitment to the goals of the NPT, especially those of article IV which established the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty to pursue peaceful nuclear development and to engage in the fullest possible exchange to facilitate such development. Both bilaterally and through international organizations, including IAEA, the United States had supported nuclear cooperation in fields ranging from nuclear power to nuclear applications in medicine, agriculture, hydrology and industry. Since the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, the United States had provided some $100 million to support the Agency's technical cooperation activities. 75. A review of the current situation showed that impressive results had been achieved. An illustrative success story was how nuclear-based technology, known as the sterile insect technique, had been used to eradicate the tsetse fly from the island of Zanzibar a few years previously. That environmentally friendly technology had given hope to over 700,000 families and had also been applied in Ethiopia in an initial effort to eliminate the tsetse fly from the African continent. His Government was proud to have supported the Agency's work in Zanzibar. That experience proved that peaceful nuclear cooperation activities could make a substantial difference in the lives of people throughout the world. 76. The international community should not lose sight of the imperative of nuclear safety. The United States had contributed over $550 million to programmes to assist many countries bilaterally and through the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). His Government also supported the Agency's work on nuclear safety and had pledged a voluntary contribution for 1999 of $750,000. States parties had an obligation to ensure that cooperation under the Treaty did not contribute to the risk that nuclear explosive capabilities could proliferate or spread to additional countries or regions. Compliance with non-proliferation commitments was critical to the future of cooperation under article IV. 77. Looking ahead, the United States believed that what had already been done in the area of cooperation under article IV made it possible to realize the considerable potential of nuclear technology, which could greatly improve the well-being of people throughout the world. Nuclear applications could improve many aspects of life, including medical care, the supply of potable water, electricity generation, the shelf life of food supplies and the health of livestock. The United States remained committed to peaceful nuclear cooperation under responsible non-proliferation undertakings as provided for by the Treaty. His Government would continue to cooperate, on the basis of those principles, with the least developed countries in cases where nuclear techniques could safely contribute to sustainable development. By working together, the States parties to the Treaty could help to realize the full promise of peaceful nuclear cooperation for the benefit of current generations and those of the future. 78. Mr. Twist (Ireland) said that his delegation supported the statement made by the representative of Portugal on behalf of the European Union. Ireland was committed to both the Treaty and the Agency, which were symbiotically related. There were however elements in both the Treaty and the Statute of the Agency on which his delegation placed more emphasis. 79. After reading out paragraph 1 of article IV of the Treaty, he said that the international community could not ignore the scientific developments and resulting health and environmental awareness in the more than 40 years since the foundation of the Agency. Nuclear accidents generated headlines, some would say in disproportion to their real effects, but such negative publicity did nonetheless reflect an underlying reality, which was that the potential for catastrophe was always present when nuclear energy was used. One of the key functions of the Agency was to ensure that the world relied more on expertise than luck in avoiding the risks inherent in the use of nuclear energy, the potential consequences of which demanded the highest possible safety standards and emergency preparedness. 80. In recent years the member States of the Agency, together with its secretariat, had been developing a family of international legal instruments to implement the nuclear safety culture, particularly the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. His delegation welcomed those developments but noted that some lacunae remained, particularly regarding the regime of liability for nuclear damage, which did not yet meet the concerns of all States; the issue of research reactors, which required greater attention; and the issue of maritime transport of radioactive material, which was a matter of particular concern for Ireland as a coastal State. In relation to that last issue, his delegation shared the concern expressed by New Zealand. Pending the establishment of an international legal monitoring system, his delegation urged all States shipping radioactive material to respond positively to the invitation issued at the Agency's 1999 General Conference to provide, as appropriate, assurances to potentially affected States upon their request that their national regulations took into account the Agency's Transport Regulations and to provide them with relevant information relating to shipments of radioactive materials. 81. States which had forgone the nuclear military option and ratified the Treaty should receive assistance in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Under no circumstances should those who had refused to accept the non-proliferation commitment be treated more favourably. Ireland joined those who urged the three States operating unsafeguarded nuclear facilities to accede to the Treaty unconditionally as non-nuclear-weapon States. 82. Mr. Abe (Japan) said that the Treaty was founded on three pillars, namely, prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, all of which were essential to the credibility of the non-proliferation regime. The Treaty provided an international framework to facilitate cooperation between industrialized and developing countries for peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His Government was determined to do its best to extend its cooperation bilaterally and multilaterally and promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while ensuring non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It supported the particularly important role of the Agency in that respect. 83. Nuclear energy had an important role to play in economic and social development and in electric power generation. If it stopped its nuclear power stations, Japan would have to import 1.5 million more barrels of oil per day, and world oil production would have to increase by 16 million barrels per day. In response to the current crisis in oil prices, the OPEC countries had had difficulty in agreeing to increase their production by 1.5 million barrels per day, which was just 9 per cent of the additional oil the world would need if all nuclear reactors were to be replaced. That would also entail adding 2 billion more tons of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere every year and the construction of much infrastructure throughout the world. 84. The development and utilization of nuclear energy must go hand in hand with assurances of nuclear non-proliferation and safety. While the primary responsibility lay with individual countries, international cooperation also had an essential role to play. His Government had financed a number of projects to help the countries of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Central and Eastern Europe to improve their nuclear facilities. It had contributed to various funds created by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and to support programmes under the auspices of the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD. 85. The entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety in 1996 had been an important milestone in the area of cooperation. Japan was a party to that Convention and hoped that more countries would accede to it. A thorough investigation had been carried out into the serious nuclear accident in Tokai-mura in September 1999. His Government had made recommendations for prevention of similar accidents and was ready to share the information and lessons learned from the accident with other countries. 86. It was important to address the management of radioactive waste, which was being produced in increasing quantities. Japan was determined to continue its pursuit of an acceptable solution to the problem. It also shared grave concerns about illicit trafficking in fissile materials and had provided assistance to countries such as Kazakhstan, Belarus and Ukraine in order to improve their national systems of accounting for and control of nuclear material. His delegation appreciated the Agency's efforts in that area and would continue to contribute to activities aimed at improving physical protection. 87. The policy of his Government for the management of plutonium and other nuclear materials was based on the principle that States should have no more of such materials than was necessary for a rational and logical plan for peaceful use. His Government would continue to improve transparency in that regard by publishing the information required by international guidelines. 88. His Government supported the Agency's technical cooperation programmes and welcomed efforts to strengthen them. Japan was a major contributor to the Technical Cooperation Fund, and was participating actively in programmes of bilateral cooperation with developing countries; it would continue its efforts in that regard, taking into account the financial situation, technical capabilities and needs of recipient countries. As for the concerns expressed by some delegations about the level of the Fund, his delegation believed that that issue should certainly be addressed seriously in the Agency's deliberations, but that more care should be taken to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of each project. The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 