%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|FISSIONABLE MATERIALS|WORKING GROUPS|SECURITY ASSURANCES|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|TREATY REVIEW|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|NUCLEAR ARMS RACE|DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|

New York, 24 April-19 May 2000 Working paper submitted by Portugal on behalf of the European Union for Main Committee I Regarding articles I, II and VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the relevant provisions of the Principles and Objectives, the European Union proposes, on the basis of the framework established by the Treaty and the Principles and Objectives laid down at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, the following elements as areas, among others, in which, and the means through which, further progress should be sought in future: 1. Early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty through ratification without delay and without conditions, especially by those 44 States whose ratification is required for the Treaty to enter into force. 2. Immediate commencement and early conclusion of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices. Pending the conclusion of such a treaty, all States which have not yet done so are called upon to stop the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. 3. Establishment of an ad hoc working group within the Conference on Disarmament under agenda item 1, entitled "Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament", subject to a consensus agreement on a mandate for such a group. 4. Pursuit of the consideration of the issue of security assurances to the non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 5. Increased transparency as a voluntary confidence-building measure to support further progress in disarmament. 6. Application of the principle of irreversibility to guide all measures in the field of nuclear disarmament and arms control, as a contribution to the maintenance and reinforcement of international peace, security and stability, taking these conditions into account. 7. Calling for the prompt entry into force and the timely implementation of START II and its Protocol, and the early commencement of negotiations on START III with a view to further reductions in strategic nuclear weapons and the verified dismantlement of warheads destined for disarmament under that Treaty. 8. Reaffirmation of the importance of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty as a cornerstone of strategic stability. 9. Underlining the importance of non-strategic nuclear weapons in the framework of nuclear arms reduction efforts. 