%%%CRIME|GENOCIDE|CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY|WAR CRIMES|

New York 13-31 March 2000 12-30 June 2000 Report of the Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Addendum Finalized draft text of the Elements of Crimes* Explanatory note: The structure of the elements of the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes follows the structure of the corresponding provisions of articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Rome Statute. Some paragraphs of those articles of the Rome Statute list multiple crimes. In those instances, the elements of crimes appear in separate paragraphs which correspond to each of those crimes to facilitate the identification of the respective elements. * In view of paragraph 16 of the Introduction, the final version of this report will be issued at a later stage under the symbol PCNICC/2000/1. Contents Page General introduction Article 6: Genocide Introduction 6 (a) Genocide by killing 6 (b) Genocide by causing serious bodily or mental harm 6 (c) Genocide by deliberately inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about physical destruction 6 (d) Genocide by imposing measures intended to prevent births 6 (e) Genocide by forcibly transferring children Article 7: Crimes against humanity 7 (1) (a) Crime against humanity of murder 7 (1) (b) Crime against humanity of extermination 7 (1) (c) Crime against humanity of enslavement 7 (1) (d) Crime against humanity of deportation or forcible transfer of population 7 (1) (e) Crime against humanity of imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty 7 (1) (f) Crime against humanity of torture 7 (1) (g)-1 Crime against humanity of rape 7 (1) (g)-2 Crime against humanity of sexual slavery 7 (1) (g)-3 Crime against humanity of enforced prostitution 7 (1) (g)-4 Crime against humanity of forced pregnancy 7 (1) (g)-5 Crime against humanity of enforced sterilization 7 (1) (g)-6 Crime against humanity of sexual violence 7 (1) (h) Crime against humanity of persecution 7 (1) (i) Crime against humanity of enforced disappearance of persons 7 (1) (j) Crime against humanity of apartheid 7 (1) (k) Crime against humanity of other inhumane acts Article 8: War crimes Article 8 (2) (a) 8(2)(a)(i) War crime of wilful killing 8(2)(a)(ii)-1 War crime of torture 8(2)(a)(ii)-2 War crime of inhuman treatment 8(2)(a)(ii)-3 War crime of biological experiments 8(2)(a)(iii) War crime of wilfully causing great suffering 8(2)(a)(iv) War crime of destruction and appropriation of property 8(2)(a)(v) War crime of compelling service in hostile forces 8(2)(a)(vi) War crime of denying a fair trial 8(2)(a)(vii)-1 War crime of unlawful deportation and transfer 8(2)(a)(vii)-2 War crime of unlawful confinement 8(2)(a)(viii) War crime of taking hostages Article 8 (2) (b) 8(2)(b)(i) War crime of attacking civilians 8(2)(b)(ii) War crime of attacking civilian objects 8(2)(b)(iii) War crime of attacking personnel or objects involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission 8(2)(b)(iv) War crime of excessive incidental death, injury, or damage 8(2)(b)(v) War crime of attacking undefended places 8(2)(b)(vi) War crime of killing or wounding a person hors de combat 8(2)(b)(vii)-1 War crime of improper use of a flag of truce 8(2)(b)(vii)-2 War crime of improper use of a flag, insignia or uniform of the hostile party 8(2)(b)(vii)-3 War crime of improper use of a flag, insignia or uniform of the United Nations 8(2)(b)(vii)-4 War crime of improper use of the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions 8(2)(b)(viii) The transfer, directly or indirectly, by the Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies, or the deportation or transfer of all or parts of the population of the occupied territory within or outside this territory 8(2)(b)(ix) War crime of attacking protected objects 8(2)(b)(x)-1 War crime of mutilation 8(2)(b)(x)-2 War crime of medical or scientific experiments 8(2)(b)(xi) War crime of treacherously killing or wounding 8(2)(b)(xii) War crime of denying quarter 8(2)(b)(xiii) War crime of destroying or seizing the enemy's property 8(2)(b)(xiv) War crime of depriving the nationals of the hostile power of rights or actions 8(2)(b)(xv) War crime of compelling participation in military operations 8(2)(b)(xvi) War crime of pillaging 8(2)(b)(xvii) War crime of employing poison or poisoned weapons 8(2)(b)(xviii) War crime of employing prohibited gases, liquids, materials or devices 8(2)(b)(xix) War crime of employing prohibited bullets 8(2)(b)(xx) War crime of employing weapons, projectiles or materials or methods of warfare listed in the Annex to the Statute 8(2)(b)(xxi) War crime of outrages upon personal dignity 8(2)(b)(xxii)-1 War crime of rape 8(2)(b)(xxii)-2 War crime of sexual slavery 8(2)(b)(xxii)-3 War crime of enforced prostitution 8(2)(b)(xxii)-4 War crime of forced pregnancy 8(2)(b)(xxii)-5 War crime of enforced sterilization 8(2)(b)(xxii)-6 War crime of sexual violence 8(2)(b)(xxiii) War crime of using protected persons as shields 8(2)(b)(xxiv) War crime of attacking objects or persons using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions 8(2)(b)(xxv) War crime of starvation as a method of warfare 8(2)(b)(xxvi) War crime of using, conscripting or enlisting children Article 8 (2) (c) 8(2)(c)(i)-1 War crime of murder 8(2)(c)(i)-2 War crime of mutilation 8(2)(c)(i)-3 War crime of cruel treatment 8(2)(c)(i)-4 War crime of torture 8(2)(c)(ii) War crime of outrages upon personal dignity 8(2)(c)(iii) War crime of taking hostages 8(2)(c)(iv) War crime of sentencing or execution without due process Article 8 (2) (e) 8(2)(e)(i) War crime of attacking civilians 8(2)(e)(ii) War crime of attacking objects or persons using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions 8(2)(e)(iii) War crime of attacking personnel or objects involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission 8(2)(e)(iv) War crime of attacking protected objects 8(2)(e)(v) War crime of pillaging 8(2)(e)(vi)-1 War crime of rape 8(2)(e)(vi)-2 War crime of sexual slavery 8(2)(e)(vi)-3 War crime of enforced prostitution 8(2)(e)(vi)-4 War crime of forced pregnancy 8(2)(e)(vi)-5 War crime of enforced sterilization 8(2)(e)(vi)-6 War crime of sexual violence 8(2)(e)(vii) War crime of using, conscripting and enlisting children 8(2)(e)(viii) War crime of displacing civilians 8(2)(e)(ix) War crime of treacherously killing or wounding 8(2)(e)(x) War crime of denying quarter 8(2)(e)(xi)-1 War crime of mutilation 8(2)(e)(xi)-2 War crime of medical or scientific experiments 8(2)(e)(xii) War crime of destroying or seizing the enemy's property 1. Pursuant to article 9, the following Elements of Crimes shall assist the Court in the interpretation and application of articles 6, 7 and 8, consistent with the Statute. The provisions of the Statute, including article 21 and the general principles set out in Part 3, are applicable to the Elements of Crimes. 2. As stated in article 30, unless otherwise provided, a person shall be criminally responsible and liable for punishment for a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court only if the material elements are committed with intent and knowledge. Where no reference is made in the Elements of Crimes to a mental element for any particular conduct, consequence or circumstance listed, it is understood that the relevant mental element, i.e., intent, knowledge or both, set out in article 30 applies. Exceptions to the article 30 standard, based on the Statute, including applicable law under its relevant provisions, are indicated below. 3. Existence of intent and knowledge can be inferred from relevant facts and circumstances. 4. With respect to mental elements associated with elements involving value judgement, such as those using the terms "inhumane" or "severe", it is not necessary that the perpetrator personally completed a particular value judgement, unless otherwise indicated. 5. Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility or the absence thereof are generally not specified in the elements of crimes listed under each crime. 6. The requirement of "unlawfulness" found in the Statute or in other parts of international law, in particular international humanitarian law, is generally not specified in the elements of crimes. 7. The elements of crimes are generally structured in accordance with the following principles: - As the elements of crimes focus on the conduct, consequences and circumstances associated with each crime, they are generally listed in that order; - When required, a particular mental element is listed after the affected conduct, consequence or circumstance; - Contextual circumstances are listed last. 8. As used in the Elements of Crimes, the term "perpetrator" is neutral as to guilt or innocence. The elements, including the appropriate mental elements, apply mutatis mutandis to all those whose criminal responsibility may fall under articles 25 and 28 of the Statute. 9. A particular conduct may constitute one or more crimes. 10. The use of short titles for the crimes has no legal effect. Article 6 Genocide With respect to the last element listed for each crime: - The term "in the context of" would include the initial acts in an emerging pattern; - The term "manifest" is an objective qualification; - Notwithstanding the normal requirement for a mental element provided for in article 30, and recognizing that knowledge of the circumstances will usually be addressed in proving genocidal intent, the appropriate requirement, if any, for a mental element regarding this circumstance will need to be decided by the Court on a case-by-case basis. Article 6 (a) Genocide by killing Elements 1. The perpetrator killed one or more persons. 2. Such person or persons belonged to a particular national, ethnical, racial or religious group. 3. The perpetrator intended to destroy, in whole or in part, that national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such. 4. The conduct took place in the context of a manifest pattern of similar conduct directed against that group or was conduct that could itself effect such destruction. Article 6 (b) Genocide by causing serious bodily or mental harm 1. The perpetrator caused serious bodily or mental harm to one or more persons. Article 6 (c) Genocide by deliberately inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about physical destruction 1. The perpetrator inflicted certain conditions of life upon one or more persons. 4. The conditions of life were calculated to bring about the physical destruction of that group, in whole or in part. 5. The conduct took place in the context of a manifest pattern of similar conduct directed against that group or was conduct that could itself effect such destruction. Article 6 (d) Genocide by imposing measures intended to prevent births 1. The perpetrator imposed certain measures upon one or more persons. 4. The measures imposed were intended to prevent births within that group. Article 6 (e) Genocide by forcibly transferring children 1. The perpetrator forcibly transferred one or more persons. 4. The transfer was from that group to another group. 5. The person or persons were under the age of 18 years. 6. The perpetrator knew, or should have known, that the person or persons were under the age of 18 years. 7. The conduct took place in the context of a manifest pattern of similar conduct directed against that group or was conduct that could itself effect such destruction. 1. Since article 7 pertains to international criminal law, its provisions, consistent with article 22, must be strictly construed, taking into account that crimes against humanity as defined in article 7 are among the most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole, warrant and entail individual criminal responsibility, and require conduct which is impermissible under generally applicable international law, as recognized by the principal legal systems of the world. 2. The last two elements for each crime against humanity describe the context in which the conduct must take place. These elements clarify the requisite participation in and knowledge of a widespread or systematic attack against a civilian population. However, the last element should not be interpreted as requiring proof that the perpetrator had knowledge of all characteristics of the attack or the precise details of the plan or policy of the State or organization. In the case of an emerging widespread or systematic attack against a civilian population, the intent clause of the last element indicates that this mental element is satisfied if the perpetrator intended to further such an attack. 3. "Attack directed against a civilian population" in these context elements is understood to mean a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in article 7, paragraph 1, of the Statute against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack. The acts need not constitute a military attack. It is understood that "policy to commit such attack" requires that the State or organization actively promote or encourage such an attack against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (a) Crime against humanity of murder 2. The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. 3. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (b) Crime against humanity of extermination 1. The perpetrator killed one or more persons, including by inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population. 2. The conduct constituted, or took place as part of, a mass killing of members of a civilian population. 3. The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. 4. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (c) Crime against humanity of enslavement 1. The perpetrator exercised any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over one or more persons, such as by purchasing, selling, lending or bartering such a person or persons, or by imposing on them a similar deprivation of liberty. 3. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (d) Crime against humanity of deportation or forcible transfer of population 1. The perpetrator deported or forcibly transferred, without grounds permitted under international law, one or more persons to another State or location, by expulsion or other coercive acts. 2. Such person or persons were lawfully present in the area from which they were so deported or transferred. 3. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established the lawfulness of such presence. 4. The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. 5. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (e) Crime against humanity of imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty 1. The perpetrator imprisoned one or more persons or otherwise severely deprived one or more persons of physical liberty. 2. The gravity of the conduct was such that it was in violation of fundamental rules of international law. 3. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established the gravity of the conduct. Article 7 (1) (f) Crime against humanity of torture 1. The perpetrator inflicted severe physical or mental pain or suffering upon one or more persons. 2. Such person or persons were in the custody or under the control of the perpetrator. 3. Such pain or suffering did not arise only from, and was not inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions. Article 7 (1) (g)-1 Crime against humanity of rape 1. The perpetrator invaded the body of a person by conduct resulting in penetration, however slight, of any part of the body of the victim or of the perpetrator with a sexual organ, or of the anal or genital opening of the victim with any object or any other part of the body. 2. The invasion was committed by force, or by threat of force or coercion, such as that caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression or abuse of power, against such person or another person, or by taking advantage of a coercive environment, or the invasion was committed against a person incapable of giving genuine consent. Article 7 (1) (g)-2 Crime against humanity of sexual slavery 2. The perpetrator caused such person or persons to engage in one or more acts of a sexual nature. Article 7 (1) (g)-3 Crime against humanity of enforced prostitution 1. The perpetrator caused one or more persons to engage in one or more acts of a sexual nature by force, or by threat of force or coercion, such as that caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression or abuse of power, against such person or persons or another person, or by taking advantage of a coercive environment or such person's or persons' incapacity to give genuine consent. 2. The perpetrator or another person obtained or expected to obtain pecuniary or other advantage in exchange for or in connection with the acts of a sexual nature. Article 7 (1) (g)-4 Crime against humanity of forced pregnancy 1. The perpetrator confined one or more women forcibly made pregnant, with the intent of affecting the ethnic composition of any population or carrying out other grave violations of international law. Article 7 (1) (g)-5 Crime against humanity of enforced sterilization 1. The perpetrator deprived one or more persons of biological reproductive capacity. 2. The conduct was neither justified by the medical or hospital treatment of the person or persons concerned nor carried out with their genuine consent. Article 7 (1) (g)-6 Crime against humanity of sexual violence 1. The perpetrator committed an act of a sexual nature against one or more persons or caused such person or persons to engage in an act of a sexual nature by force, or by threat of force or coercion, such as that caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression or abuse of power, against such person or persons or another person, or by taking advantage of a coercive environment or such person's or persons' incapacity to give genuine consent. 2. Such conduct was of a gravity comparable to the other offences in article 7, paragraph 1 (g), of the Statute. Article 7 (1) (h) Crime against humanity of persecution 1. The perpetrator severely deprived, contrary to international law, one or more persons of fundamental rights. 2. The perpetrator targeted such person or persons by reason of the identity of a group or collectivity or targeted the group or collectivity as such. 3. Such targeting was based on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in article 7, paragraph 3, of the Statute, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law. 4. The conduct was committed in connection with any act referred to in article 7, paragraph 1, of the Statute or any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court. 5. The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. 6. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (i) Crime against humanity of enforced disappearance of persons 1. The perpetrator: (a) Arrested, detained or abducted one or more persons; or (b) Refused to acknowledge the arrest, detention or abduction, or to give information on the fate or whereabouts of such person or persons. 2. (a) Such arrest, detention or abduction was followed or accompanied by a refusal to acknowledge that deprivation of freedom or to give information on the fate or whereabouts of such person or persons; or (b) Such refusal was preceded or accompanied by that deprivation of freedom. 3. The perpetrator was aware that: (a) Such arrest, detention or abduction would be followed in the ordinary course of events by a refusal to acknowledge that deprivation of freedom or to give information on the fate or whereabouts of such person or persons; or 4. Such arrest, detention or abduction was carried out by, or with the authorization, support or acquiescence of, a State or a political organization. 5. Such refusal to acknowledge that deprivation of freedom or to give information on the fate or whereabouts of such person or persons was carried out by, or with the authorization or support of, such State or political organization. 6. The perpetrator intended to remove such person or persons from the protection of the law for a prolonged period of time. 7. The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. 8. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (j) Crime against humanity of apartheid 1. The perpetrator committed an inhumane act against one or more persons. 2. Such act was an act referred to in article 7, paragraph 1, of the Statute, or was an act of a character similar to any of those acts. 3. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established the character of the act. 4. The conduct was committed in the context of an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any other racial group or groups. 5. The perpetrator intended to maintain such regime by that conduct. 6. The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. 7. The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population. Article 7 (1) (k) Crime against humanity of other inhumane acts 1. The perpetrator inflicted great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health, by means of an inhumane act. 2. Such act was of a character similar to any other act referred to in article 7, paragraph 1, of the Statute. The elements for war crimes under article 8, paragraph 2 (c) and (e), are subject to the limitations addressed in article 8, paragraph 2 (d) and (f), which are not elements of crimes. The elements for war crimes under article 8, paragraph 2, of the Statute shall be interpreted within the established framework of the international law of armed conflict including, as appropriate, the international law of armed conflict applicable to armed conflict at sea. With respect to the last two elements listed for each crime: :: There is no requirement for a legal evaluation by the perpetrator as to the existence of an armed conflict or its character as international or non-international; :: In that context there is no requirement for awareness by the perpetrator of the facts that established the character of the conflict as international or non-international; :: There is only a requirement for the awareness of the factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict that is implicit in the terms "took place in the context of and was associated with". Article 8 (2) (a) (i) War crime of wilful killing 2. Such person or persons were protected under one or more of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. 3. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established that protected status. 5. The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (a) (ii)-1 War crime of torture 2. The perpetrator inflicted the pain or suffering for such purposes as: obtaining information or a confession, punishment, intimidation or coercion or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind. 3. Such person or persons were protected under one or more of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. 4. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established that protected status. 5. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an international armed conflict. 6. The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (a) (ii)-2 War crime of inhuman treatment 4. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an international armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (a) (ii)-3 War crime of biological experiments 1. The perpetrator subjected one or more persons to a particular biological experiment. 2. The experiment seriously endangered the physical or mental health or integrity of such person or persons. 3. The intent of the experiment was non-therapeutic and it was neither justified by medical reasons nor carried out in such person's or persons' interest. 4. Such person or persons were protected under one or more of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. 5. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established that protected status. 6. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an international armed conflict. 7. The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (a) (iii) War crime of wilfully causing great suffering 1. The perpetrator caused great physical or mental pain or suffering to, or serious injury to body or health of, one or more persons. Article 8 (2) (a) (iv) War crime of destruction and appropriation of property 1. The perpetrator destroyed or appropriated certain property. 2. The destruction or appropriation was not justified by military necessity. 3. The destruction or appropriation was extensive and carried out wantonly. 4. Such property was protected under one or more of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Article 8 (2) (a) (v) War crime of compelling service in hostile forces 1. The perpetrator coerced one or more persons, by act or threat, to take part in military operations against that person's own country or forces or otherwise serve in the forces of a hostile power. Article 8 (2) (a) (vi) War crime of denying a fair trial 1. The perpetrator deprived one or more persons of a fair and regular trial by denying judicial guarantees as defined, in particular, in the third and the fourth Geneva Conventions of 1949. Article 8 (2) (a) (vii)-1 War crime of unlawful deportation and transfer 1. The perpetrator deported or transferred one or more persons to another State or to another location. Article 8 (2) (a) (vii)-2 War crime of unlawful confinement 1. The perpetrator confined or continued to confine one or more persons to a certain location. Article 8 (2) (a) (viii) War crime of taking hostages 1. The perpetrator seized, detained or otherwise held hostage one or more persons. 2. The perpetrator threatened to kill, injure or continue to detain such person or persons. 3. The perpetrator intended to compel a State, an international organization, a natural or legal person or a group of persons to act or refrain from acting as an explicit or implicit condition for the safety or the release of such person or persons. Article 8 (2) (b) (i) War crime of attacking civilians 1. The perpetrator directed an attack. 2. The object of the attack was a civilian population as such or individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities. 3. The perpetrator intended the civilian population as such or individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities to be the object of the attack. Article 8 (2) (b) (ii) War crime of attacking civilian objects 2. The object of the attack was civilian objects, that is, objects which are not military objectives. 3. The perpetrator intended such civilian objects to be the object of the attack. Article 8 (2) (b) (iii) War crime of attacking personnel or objects involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission 2. The object of the attack was personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. 3. The perpetrator intended such personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles so involved to be the object of the attack. 4. Such personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles were entitled to that protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict. 5. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established that protection. Article 8 (2) (b) (iv) War crime of excessive incidental death, injury, or damage 1. The perpetrator launched an attack. 2. The attack was such that it would cause incidental death or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment and that such death, injury or damage would be of such an extent as to be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated. 3. The perpetrator knew that the attack would cause incidental death or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment and that such death, injury or damage would be of such an extent as to be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated. Article 8 (2) (b) (v) War crime of attacking undefended places 1. The perpetrator attacked one or more towns, villages, dwellings or buildings. 2. Such towns, villages, dwellings or buildings were open for unresisted occupation. 3. Such towns, villages, dwellings or buildings did not constitute military objectives. Article 8 (2) (b) (vi) War crime of killing or wounding a person hors de combat 1. The perpetrator killed or injured one or more persons. 2. Such person or persons were hors de combat. 3. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established this status. Article 8 (2) (b) (vii)-1 War crime of improper use of a flag of truce 1. The perpetrator used a flag of truce. 2. The perpetrator made such use in order to feign an intention to negotiate when there was no such intention on the part of the perpetrator. 3. The perpetrator knew or should have known of the prohibited nature of such use. 4. The conduct resulted in death or serious personal injury. 5. The perpetrator knew that the conduct could result in death or serious personal injury. Article 8 (2) (b) (vii)-2 War crime of improper use of a flag, insignia or uniform of the hostile party 1. The perpetrator used a flag, insignia or uniform of the hostile party. 2. The perpetrator made such use in a manner prohibited under the international law of armed conflict while engaged in an attack. Article 8 (2) (b) (vii)-3 War crime of improper use of a flag, insignia or uniform of the United Nations 1. The perpetrator used a flag, insignia or uniform of the United Nations. 2. The perpetrator made such use in a manner prohibited under the international law of armed conflict. 3. The perpetrator knew of the prohibited nature of such use. Article 8 (2) (b) (vii)-4 War crime of improper use of the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions 1. The perpetrator used the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions. 2. The perpetrator made such use for combatant purposes in a manner prohibited under the international law of armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (b) (viii) The transfer, directly or indirectly, by the Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies, or the deportation or transfer of all or parts of the population of the occupied territory within or outside this territory (a) Transferred, directly or indirectly, parts of its own population into the territory it occupies; or (b) Deported or transferred all or parts of the population of the occupied territory within or outside this territory. 2. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an international armed conflict. 3. The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (b) (ix) War crime of attacking protected objects 2. The object of the attack was one or more buildings dedicated to religion, education, art, science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals or places where the sick and wounded are collected, which were not military objectives. 3. The perpetrator intended such building or buildings dedicated to religion, education, art, science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals or places where the sick and wounded are collected, which were not military objectives, to be the object of the attack. Article 8 (2) (b) (x)-1 War crime of mutilation 1. The perpetrator subjected one or more persons to mutilation, in particular by permanently disfiguring the person or persons, or by permanently disabling or removing an organ or appendage. 2. The conduct caused death or seriously endangered the physical or mental health of such person or persons. 3. The conduct was neither justified by the medical, dental or hospital treatment of the person or persons concerned nor carried out in such person's or persons' interest. 4. Such person or persons were in the power of an adverse party. Article 8 (2) (b) (x)-2 War crime of medical or scientific experiments 1. The perpetrator subjected one or more persons to a medical or scientific experiment. 2. The experiment caused death or seriously endangered the physical or mental health or integrity of such person or persons. 3. The conduct was neither justified by the medical, dental or hospital treatment of such person or persons concerned nor carried out in such person's or persons' interest. Article 8 (2) (b) (xi) War crime of treacherously killing or wounding 1. The perpetrator invited the confidence or belief of one or more persons that they were entitled to, or were obliged to accord, protection under rules of international law applicable in armed conflict. 2. The perpetrator intended to betray that confidence or belief. 3. The perpetrator killed or injured such person or persons. 4. The perpetrator made use of that confidence or belief in killing or injuring such person or persons. 5. Such person or persons belonged to an adverse party. Article 8 (2) (b) (xii) War crime of denying quarter 1. The perpetrator declared or ordered that there shall be no survivors. 2. Such declaration or order was given in order to threaten an adversary or to conduct hostilities on the basis that there shall be no survivors. 3. The perpetrator was in a position of effective command or control over the subordinate forces to which the declaration or order was directed. Article 8 (2) (b) (xiii) War crime of destroying or seizing the enemy's property 1. The perpetrator destroyed or seized certain property. 2. Such property was property of a hostile party. 3. Such property was protected from that destruction or seizure under the international law of armed conflict. 4. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established the status of the property. 5. The destruction or seizure was not justified by military necessity. Article 8 (2) (b) (xiv) War crime of depriving the nationals of the hostile power of rights or actions 1. The perpetrator effected the abolition, suspension or termination of admissibility in a court of law of certain rights or actions. 2. The abolition, suspension or termination was directed at the nationals of a hostile party. 3. The perpetrator intended the abolition, suspension or termination to be directed at the nationals of a hostile party. Article 8 (2) (b) (xv) War crime of compelling participation in military operations 1. The perpetrator coerced one or more persons by act or threat to take part in military operations against that person's own country or forces. 2. Such person or persons were nationals of a hostile party. 3. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an international armed conflict. 4. The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (b) (xvi) War crime of pillaging 1. The perpetrator appropriated certain property. 2. The perpetrator intended to deprive the owner of the property and to appropriate it for private or personal use. 3. The appropriation was without the consent of the owner. Article 8 (2) (b) (xvii) War crime of employing poison or poisoned weapons 1. The perpetrator employed a substance or a weapon that releases a substance as a result of its employment. 2. The substance was such that it causes death or serious damage to health in the ordinary course of events, through its toxic properties. Article 8 (2) (b) (xviii) War crime of employing prohibited gases, liquids, materials or devices 1. The perpetrator employed a gas or other analogous substance or device. 2. The gas, substance or device was such that it causes death or serious damage to health in the ordinary course of events, through its asphyxiating or toxic properties. Article 8 (2) (b) (xix) War crime of employing prohibited bullets 1. The perpetrator employed certain bullets. 2. The bullets were such that their use violates the international law of armed conflict because they expand or flatten easily in the human body. 3. The perpetrator was aware that the nature of the bullets was such that their employment would uselessly aggravate suffering or the wounding effect. Article 8 (2) (b) (xx) War crime of employing weapons, projectiles or materials or methods of warfare listed in the Annex to the Statute [Elements will have to be drafted once weapons, projectiles or material or methods of warfare have been included in an annex to the Statute.] Article 8 (2) (b) (xxi) War crime of outrages upon personal dignity 1. The perpetrator humiliated, degraded or otherwise violated the dignity of one or more persons. 2. The severity of the humiliation, degradation or other violation was of such degree as to be generally recognized as an outrage upon personal dignity. Article 8 (2) (b) (xxii)-1 War crime of rape Article 8 (2) (b) (xxii)-2 War crime of sexual slavery Article 8 (2) (b) (xxii)-3 War crime of enforced prostitution Article 8 (2) (b) (xxii)-4 War crime of forced pregnancy Article 8 (2) (b) (xxii)-5 War crime of enforced sterilization Article 8 (2) (b) (xxii)-6 War crime of sexual violence 2. The conduct was of a gravity comparable to that of a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions. Article 8 (2) (b) (xxiii) War crime of using protected persons as shields 1. The perpetrator moved or otherwise took advantage of the location of one or more civilians or other persons protected under the international law of armed conflict. 2. The perpetrator intended to shield a military objective from attack or shield, favour or impede military operations. Article 8 (2) (b) (xxiv) War crime of attacking objects or persons using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions 1. The perpetrator attacked one or more persons, buildings, medical units or transports or other objects using, in conformity with international law, a distinctive emblem or other method of identification indicating protection under the Geneva Conventions. 2. The perpetrator intended such persons, buildings, units or transports or other objects so using such identification to be the object of the attack. Article 8 (2) (b) (xxv) War crime of starvation as a method of warfare 1. The perpetrator deprived civilians of objects indispensable to their survival. 2. The perpetrator intended to starve civilians as a method of warfare. Article 8 (2) (b) (xxvi) War crime of using, conscripting or enlisting children 1. The perpetrator conscripted or enlisted one or more persons into the national armed forces or used one or more persons to participate actively in hostilities. 2. Such person or persons were under the age of 15 years. 3. The perpetrator knew or should have known that such person or persons were under the age of 15 years. Article 8 (2) (c) (i)-1 War crime of murder 2. Such person or persons were either hors de combat, or were civilians, medical personnel, or religious personnel taking no active part in the hostilities. 4. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an armed conflict not of an international character. Article 8 (2) (c) (i)-2 2. The conduct was neither justified by the medical, dental or hospital treatment of the person or persons concerned nor carried out in such person's or persons' interests. 3. Such person or persons were either hors de combat, or were civilians, medical personnel or religious personnel taking no active part in the hostilities. 4. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established this status. 5. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an armed conflict not of an international character. Article 8 (2) (c) (i)-3 War crime of cruel treatment Article 8 (2) (c) (i)-4 Article 8 (2) (c) (ii) Article 8 (2) (c) (iii) 4. Such person or persons were either hors de combat, or were civilians, medical personnel or religious personnel taking no active part in the hostilities. 5. The perpetrator was aware of the factual circumstances that established this status. 6. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an armed conflict not of an international character. Article 8 (2) (c) (iv) War crime of sentencing or execution without due process 1. The perpetrator passed sentence or executed one or more persons. 2. Such person or persons were either hors de combat, or were civilians, medical personnel or religious personnel taking no active part in the hostilities. 4. There was no previous judgement pronounced by a court, or the court that rendered judgement was not "regularly constituted", that is, it did not afford the essential guarantees of independence and impartiality, or the court that rendered judgement did not afford all other judicial guarantees generally recognized as indispensable under international law. 5. The perpetrator was aware of the absence of a previous judgement or of the denial of relevant guarantees and the fact that they are essential or indispensable to a fair trial. Article 8 (2) (e) (i) Article 8 (2) (e) (ii) 3. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an armed conflict not of an international character. Article 8 (2) (e) (iii) Article 8 (2) (e) (iv) Article 8 (2) (e) (v) Article 8 (2) (e) (vi)-1 Article 8 (2) (e) (vi)-2 Article 8 (2) (e) (vi)-3 Article 8 (2) (e) (vi)-4 2. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an armed conflict not of an international character. Article 8 (2) (e) (vi)-5 Article 8 (2) (e) (vi)-6 2. The conduct was of a gravity comparable to that of a serious violation of article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventions. Article 8 (2) (e) (vii) War crime of using, conscripting and enlisting children 1. The perpetrator conscripted or enlisted one or more persons into an armed force or group or used one or more persons to participate actively in hostilities. Article 8 (2) (e) (viii) War crime of displacing civilians 1. The perpetrator ordered a displacement of a civilian population. 2. Such order was not justified by the security of the civilians involved or by military necessity. 3. The perpetrator was in a position to effect such displacement by giving such order. Article 8 (2) (e) (ix) 1. The perpetrator invited the confidence or belief of one or more combatant adversaries that they were entitled to, or were obliged to accord, protection under rules of international law applicable in armed conflict. Article 8 (2) (e) (x) Article 8 (2) (e) (xi)-1 4. Such person or persons were in the power of another party to the conflict. Article 8 (2) (e) (xi)-2 2. The experiment caused the death or seriously endangered the physical or mental health or integrity of such person or persons. Article 8 (2) (e) (xii) 2. Such property was property of an adversary. 5. The destruction or seizure was not required by military necessity. 