%%%TREATIES BETWEEN TWO OR MORE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|

Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Working Group on a Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal Court New York 27 November-8 December 2000 Proposal submitted by Spain Article 16 Paragraph 1: Delete. Paragraph 2: Delete the words "on a reimbursable basis," Add a new paragraph, which reads as follows: "2. Upon the request of the Court, the United Nations may provide, subject to availability, other facilities or services as may be required for the work of the judicial bodies of the Court." Article 18 Replace with the following text: "1. The United Nations and the Court recognize the desirability of establishing close budgetary and financial relationships so as to ensure that administrative management is carried out as efficiently and economically as possible with maximum coordination and harmonization. "2. As far as may be practicable and appropriate and subject to the relevant decisions which may be adopted by the Assembly of States Parties, the Court agrees to conform to the common budgetary and financial practices and norms used by the United Nations. "3. The United Nations, upon the request of the Court, may provide advice on financial and budgetary questions of interest to the Court with a view to promoting coordination and harmonization in such matters. "4. A separate agreement between the United Nations and the Court shall specify the terms under which the Organization, subject to approval by the General Assembly, may provide funds to the Court pursuant to the provisions of article 115 of the Statute. "5. The United Nations and the Court agree that the costs and expenses resulting from cooperation or the provision of services pursuant to the present Agreement shall be subject to separate arrangements between the United Nations and the Court." Article 18 (bis). Other agreements concluded by the Court Include the text of a new article: "1. Prior to the conclusion of an agreement with a specialized agency or other intergovernmental organization of the United Nations system, the Court shall inform the United Nations of the nature and scope of the agreement and shall subsequently notify the Organization of its conclusion of such agreement. "2. The United Nations and the Court shall consult, when necessary, on the registration by the United Nations of agreements concluded by the Court with States or international organizations." 