%%%CRIME VICTIMS|JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS|

Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Working Group on Rules of Procedure and Evidence concerning Part 2 of the Statute New York 13-31 March 2000 12-30 June 2000 27 November-8 December 2000 * The present paper, although pertaining to rules of procedure and evidence related to Part 2 of the Rome Statute, is the product of negotiations which were conducted in the Working Group on rules of procedure and evidence related to Parts 5 and 6 of the Statute. ** The rules relating to Part 4 of the Statute may contain provisions on the Registrar's management of victims who have expressed an intention to participate in proceedings before the Court. The following provision could be considered: "For fulfilment of the functions set forth in rule 2.7, paragraph (a), and rule 2.18, paragraph (a), the Registrar may keep a special register for victims who have expressed their intention to participate in relation to a specific investigation." Other views in respect of the necessity of this provision and its content were also expressed. Discussion paper submitted by the Coordinator regarding Part 2 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, on Jurisdiction, Admissibility and Applicable Law* Provisions on participation of victims in proceedings under Part 2 of the Statute** Rule 2.7 Procedure for authorization by the Pre-Trial Chamber of the commencement of the investigation under article 15 (a) When the Prosecutor intends to seek authorization from the Pre-Trial Chamber to initiate an investigation pursuant to article 15, paragraph 3, the Prosecutor shall inform victims, known to him or her or to the Victims and Witnesses Unit, or their legal representatives, unless the Prosecutor decides that doing so would pose a danger to the integrity of the investigation or the life or well-being of victims and witnesses. The Prosecutor may also give notice by general means in order to reach groups of victims if he or she determines in the particular circumstances of the case that such notice could not pose a danger to the integrity and effective conduct of the investigation or to the security and well-being of victims and witnesses. In performing these functions, the Prosecutor may seek the assistance of the Victims and Witnesses Unit as appropriate. (b) A request by the Prosecutor shall be in writing. Following information given in accordance with paragraph (a), victims may make representations in writing to the Pre-Trial Chamber within such time limit as set forth in the Regulations. (c) The Pre-Trial Chamber, in deciding on the procedure to be followed, may request additional information from the Prosecutor and from any of the victims who have made representations, and, if it considers it appropriate, may hold a hearing. (d) The Pre-Trial Chamber shall issue its decision, including its reasons, as to whether to authorize the commencement of the investigation in accordance with article 15, paragraph 4, with respect to all or any part of the request by the Prosecutor. The Chamber shall provide notice of the decision to victims who have made representations. (e) The above procedure shall also apply to a new request to the Pre-Trial Chamber pursuant to article 15, paragraph 5. Rule 2.18 Participation in proceedings pursuant to article 19, paragraph 3 (a) For the purpose of article 19, paragraph 3, the Registrar shall inform the following of any question or challenge of jurisdiction or admissibility which has arisen pursuant to article 19, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3: (i) Those who have referred a situation pursuant to article 13; (ii) The victims who have already communicated with the Court in relation to that case or their legal representatives. (b) The Registrar shall provide those referred to in paragraph (a), in a manner consistent with the duty of the Court regarding the confidentiality of information, the protection of any person and the preservation of evidence, with a summary of the grounds on which the jurisdiction of the Court or the admissibility of the case has been challenged. (c) Those receiving the information, as provided for in paragraph (a), may make representations in writing to the competent Chamber within such time limit as it considers appropriate. 