%%%INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS|

Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Working Group on Rules of Procedure and Evidence concerning Part 4 of the Statute New York 13-31 March 2000 12-30 June 2000 27 November-8 December 2000 Discussion paper proposed by the Coordinator regarding Part 4 of the Rome Statute, concerning composition and administration of the Court 4.1 Rules relating to situations that may affect the functioning of the Court Removal from office and disciplinary measures The Judges, the Prosecutor, the Deputy Prosecutors, the Registrar and a Deputy Registrar shall be removed from office or shall be subjected to disciplinary measures in such cases and with such guarantees as are established in the Statute and these Rules. Definition of serious misconduct and serious breach of duty 1. Serious misconduct For the purposes of article 46, paragraph 1 (a), "serious misconduct" shall be constituted by conduct that: (a) If it occurs in the course of official duties, involves the exercise of an activity that is incompatible with official functions, that causes or is likely to cause serious harm to the proper administration of justice before the Court or the proper internal functioning of the Court, such as: (i) Disclosing facts or information that a person has acquired in the course of his or her duties, where such disclosure is seriously prejudicial to the judicial proceedings or to any person, or disclosing facts or information on a matter which is sub judice; (ii) Concealing information or circumstances of a nature sufficiently serious to have precluded him or her from holding office; (iii) Abuse of judicial office in order to obtain unwarranted favourable treatment from any authorities, officials or professionals; or (b) If it occurs outside the course of official duties, is of a grave nature that causes or is likely to cause serious harm to the standing of the Court. 2. Serious breach of duty For the purposes of article 46, paragraph 1 (a), a "serious breach of duty" shall be taken to have occurred where a person has been grossly negligent in the performance of his or her duties or has knowingly acted in contravention of those duties. This may include, inter alia, situations where the person: (a) Fails to comply with the duty to request to be excused, knowing that there are grounds for doing so; (b) Repeatedly causes unwarranted delay in the initiation, prosecution or trial of cases, or in the exercise of judicial powers. Definition of misconduct of a less serious nature 1. For the purposes of article 47, "misconduct of a less serious nature" shall be constituted by conduct that: (a) If it occurs in the course of official duties, causes or is likely to cause harm to the proper administration of justice before the Court or the proper internal functioning of the Court, such as: (i) Interfering in the exercise of functions by a person referred to in this rule; (ii) Repeatedly failing to comply with or ignoring the requests made by the Presiding Judge of the Chamber or by the Presidency of the Court in the exercise of their lawful authority; (iii) Failing to enforce the disciplinary measures to which the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar and other officers of the Court are subject when a judge knows or should know of a serious breach of duty on their part; or (b) If it occurs outside the course of official duties, causes or is likely to cause harm to the standing of the Court. 2. Nothing in this rule precludes the possibility of the conduct set out in paragraph 1 (a) constituting "serious misconduct" or "serious breach of duty" for the purposes of article 46, paragraph 1 (a). Receipt of complaints 1. For the purposes of article 46 (1) and article 47, any complaint concerning any conduct characterized under these rules as serious misconduct, serious breach of duty or misconduct of a less serious nature shall include the grounds on which it is based, the identity of the complainant and any relevant evidence, if available. The complaint shall remain confidential. 2. All complaints shall be transmitted to the Presidency, which may also initiate proceedings on its own motion, and which shall, pursuant to the Regulations of the Court, set aside anonymous complaints or manifestly unfounded complaints and transmit the other complaints to the competent organ. The Presidency shall be assisted in this task by one or more judges, appointed on the basis of automatic rotation, in accordance with the Regulations of the Court. Procedure1 Common provisions on the rights of the defence 1. In any case in which removal from office under article 46 or disciplinary measures under article 47 is under consideration, the person concerned shall be so informed in a written statement. 2. The person concerned shall be afforded full opportunity to present and receive evidence, to make written submissions and to supply answers to any questions put to him or her. 3. The person may be represented by a lawyer during the process established under this rule. Procedure in the event of a request for removal from office 1. In the case of a judge, the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar, the question of removal from office shall be put to the vote at a plenary session of the Court. 2. The Presidency shall advise the President of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties in writing of any recommendation adopted in the case of a judge, and any decision adopted in the case of the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar. 1 One delegation expressed the view that for the application of article 48 (5) on the waiver of privileges and immunities, the person concerned should be entitled to make his or her observations and be assisted by a counsel. 3. The Prosecutor shall advise the President of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties in writing of any recommendation he or she makes in the case of a Deputy Prosecutor. 4. Where the conduct is found not to amount to serious misconduct or serious breach of duty, it may be decided in accordance with article 47 that the individual concerned has engaged in misconduct of a less serious nature and a disciplinary measure imposed. Procedure in the event of a request for disciplinary measures 1. In the case of a judge, the Registrar or the Deputy Registrar, any decision to impose a disciplinary measure shall be taken by the Presidency. 2. In the case of the Prosecutor, any decision to impose a disciplinary measure shall be taken by an absolute majority of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties. 3. In the case of a Deputy Prosecutor: (a) Any decision to give a reprimand shall be taken by the Prosecutor; (b) Any decision to impose a pecuniary sanction shall be taken by an absolute majority of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties upon the recommendation of the Prosecutor; 4. Reprimands shall be recorded in writing and shall be transmitted to the President of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties. 5. All decisions shall be taken in accordance with article 47 and rule 4.1. Suspension from duty 2 One delegation expressed the view that the words "without loss of remuneration" should not be included in the text. Where an allegation against a person who is the subject of a complaint is of a sufficiently serious nature, the person may be suspended from duty without loss of remuneration2 pending the final decision of the competent organ. Sanctions 1. Removal from office Once removal from office has been pronounced, it shall take effect immediately. The person concerned shall cease to form part of the Court, inter alia, for unfinished cases in which he or she was taking part. 2. Disciplinary measures The disciplinary measures that may be imposed are: (a) A reprimand; or (b) A pecuniary sanction that may not exceed six months of the salary paid by the Court to the person concerned. Excusing of a judge, of the Prosecutor or of a Deputy Prosecutor 1. A judge, the Prosecutor or a Deputy Prosecutor seeking to be excused from a function under the Statute shall make a request in writing to the Presidency, setting out the grounds upon which he or she should be excused. 2. The Presidency shall treat the request as confidential and shall not make public the reasons for its decision without the consent of the individual concerned. Disqualification of a judge, of the Prosecutor or of a Deputy Prosecutor 3 It was generally understood that, under certain circumstances, nationality could be taken into consideration as a ground on which the person's impartiality might reasonably be doubted. 1. In addition to the grounds established in article 41, paragraph 2, and article 42, paragraph 7, of the Statute, which apply to judges and to the Prosecutor or a Deputy Prosecutor respectively, the grounds for disqualification shall include, inter alia, the following:3 (a) Personal interest in the case, including a spousal, parental or other close family, personal or professional relationship, or a subordinate relationship, with any of the Parties; (b) Involvement, in his or her private capacity, in any legal proceedings initiated prior to his or her involvement in the case, or initiated by him or her subsequently, in which the person being investigated or prosecuted was an opposing party; (c) Performance of functions, prior to taking office, during which he or she could be expected to have formed an opinion on the case in question, on the parties or on their representatives that, objectively, could adversely affect the required impartiality of the individual concerned; (d) Expression of opinions, through the communications media, in writing or in public actions, that, objectively, could adversely affect the required impartiality of the individual concerned. 2. Subject to the provisions set out in article 41, paragraph 2, and article 42, paragraph 8, each request shall be made in writing as soon as there is knowledge of the grounds on which it is based. The request shall state the grounds and attach any relevant evidence, and shall be transmitted to the individual concerned, who shall be entitled to present written submissions. 3. Any question relating to the disqualification of the Prosecutor or a Deputy Prosecutor shall be decided by a majority of the judges of the Appeals Chamber. Duty of a judge, the Prosecutor or a Deputy Prosecutor to request to be excused Where a judge, the Prosecutor or a Deputy Prosecutor has reason to believe that a ground for disqualification exists, he or she shall make a request to be excused and shall not wait for a request for disqualification to be made in accordance with article 41, paragraph 2, or article 42, paragraph 7, and rule 4.1.6. The request shall be made, and the Presidency shall deal with the request, in accordance with rule 4.1.5. Death of a judge, the Prosecutor, a Deputy Prosecutor, the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar The Presidency shall notify the President of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties in writing of the death of a judge, the Prosecutor, a Deputy Prosecutor, the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar. Resignation of a judge, the Prosecutor, a Deputy Prosecutor, the Registrar or the Deputy Registrar 1. A judge, the Prosecutor, a Deputy Prosecutor, the Registrar or a Deputy Registrar shall communicate his or her decision to resign in writing to the Presidency, which shall inform the President of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties in writing. 2. The judge, Prosecutor, Deputy Prosecutor, Registrar or a Deputy Registrar shall endeavour to give, at least six months in advance, notice of the date on which his or her resignation will take effect. Before the resignation of a judge takes effect, he or she shall make every effort to discharge his or her responsibilities in relation to unfinished business. 