%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|POLICE|JUDICIAL SYSTEM|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|TRUST FUNDS|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|ILLICIT TRAFFIC|

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 19 of Security Council resolution 1305 (2000) of 21 June 2000, by which the Security Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for a further 12 months until 21 June 2001. It details the Mission's progress since my report of 2 June 2000 (S/2000/529) and reviews activities conducted jointly by UNMIBH and other parts of the United Nations system in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2. The Mission continues to be led by my Special Representative and Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Jacques Paul Klein. The Mission's International Police Task Force (IPTF) is led by Commissioner Vincent Coeurderoy. Owing mainly to continued requirements in Kosovo and elsewhere, actual IPTF strength has remained below the authorized number of 2,057; the current strength is 1,776 (see annex). II. Activities of the Mission 3. To provide a clear focus for the fulfilment of the mandate with a target date of the end of 2002 as suggested by my Special Representative (see S/2000/529, para. 34 and S/PV.4154 and Corr.1, p. 6), all UNMIBH units have participated in the development of a comprehensive Mandate Implementation Plan as a working document that will evolve according to changing circumstances. The Plan divides the Mission's work into six core programmes, each with specific objectives, projects and time-frames. The six core programmes are: police reform; police restructuring; police and criminal justice cooperation; institution-building and inter-police force cooperation; public awareness; and general support for the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the United Nations system, in particular United Nations peace operations. These programmes address comprehensively the three levels of law enforcement: the individual police officer, organizational structures of the police forces and the required support for democratic policing in society at large. 4. It is intended that the Plan should assist the Mission to evaluate progress and to review internal resource allocation and necessary resource levels. An initial survey has indicated that considerable progress had been made by the Mission in the past 18 months in establishing the Brcko District police force and in providing basic training for local police officers. At the same time, the average strength of IPTF has fallen from 1,959 during 1998/1999, to 1,709 for the 12-month period ending 30 June 2000. Taking these factors into account, the Mission believes that a force of 1,850 IPTF officers is a realistic figure for necessary IPTF strength for the period 2001/2002. Police reform 5. The goal of police reform is to ensure that all law enforcement personnel meet international standards of personal integrity and professional competence by, inter alia, screening the background of police officers and providing adequate training. 6. The Mission is addressing this issue through the establishment of a transparent Law Enforcement Personnel Registry. Phase 1 of this project, in which personnel are screened to determine whether they meet minimum professional criteria to exercise police powers, is almost complete. Of the 20,120 personnel registered by 20 November, over 6,200 have been provisionally authorized and have received UNMIBH identification cards, but over 1,000 were refused provisional authorization because they were administrative staff, or had lied about their qualifications, or had criminal records. Only some hundreds of personnel, including prison guards and court police in three cantons, remain to be interviewed. In phase 2 of this project, UNMIBH, with the assistance of other organizations, will conduct detailed checks of wartime background and other character-related issues to weed out individuals suspected of war crimes or other offences before granting final certification. Phase 2 is expected to take about 18 months. 7. An essential component of police integrity is full compliance with the law. The Law Enforcement Personnel Registry therefore identifies the current residence of each police officer, and UNMIBH has placed stringent obligations on police to vacate voluntarily property that they illegally occupy. This undertaking is made particularly difficult by the very low monthly police salaries (around US$ 150) which limits their ability to rent accommodation. Nevertheless, over 300 police have now vacated illegally occupied properties. While this addresses the legal aspects of the issue, it opens up another problem, namely, the complex process of finding permanent housing solutions for possibly thousands of displaced police officers. 8. The UNMIBH training programme to raise standards of basic competence is almost complete. Of the five compulsory courses, the human dignity and transitional training courses have reached over 95 per cent of police personnel; traffic awareness and community policing courses have reached more than 50 per cent of the targeted audience, and the supervisory skills course will be completed by March 2001. Several specialist courses in areas such as surveillance, intelligence reporting and crime scene investigation have also been completed. Senior management courses have begun, with 70 senior police officers to be fully trained by December 2000. The Federation's Anti-Terrorist Unit is fully trained, and the equivalent unit of the Republika Srpska's unit will complete training by March 2001. Under new IPTF guidelines, providing further on-the-job training and advice is a part of the duty statement of all IPTF monitors co-located at local police stations. 9. In some areas, police performance has shown marked improvement. Local police, under IPTF monitoring and advice, were able to ensure that no security incidents marred the general elections on 11 November 2000. Following passiveness during the Bratunac riots in May (see S/2000/529, para. 14), excellent police security planning enabled 3,500 Bosniacs to attend without incident the fifth Srebrenica commemoration in Potocari on 11 July. In Brcko, police acted responsibly during pre-election street violence fuelled by extremist agitators and subsequently made 26 arrests. In Banja Luka on 2 October, a joint police-customs operation seized 166 kilograms of cocaine. In Prijedor in November, 35 women victims of trafficking, including several minors, were freed during a police raid on local nightclubs. In particularly sensitive cases, however, such as the investigation into the assassination of Federation Deputy Minister of the Interior, Jozo Leutar, political interference has hampered investigations. Nonetheless, four suspects have been arrested, including one in Croatia. Police restructuring 10. Police restructuring aims to rationalize the size, structure and resources of police forces to international standards, as well as to change their ethnic composition so that they better reflect the society they serve. Between July and September 2000, UNMIBH completed the essential task of determining the maximum strength and targeted ethnic composition of local police forces, in accordance with the 1996 Bonn-Petersberg Agreement for the Federation and the 1998 Framework Agreement for the Republika Srpska on police restructuring. The revised maximum strength takes account of the transfer of border functions from the ministries of the interior to the State Border Service. The total number of police officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina may not exceed 18,438, comprising 7,835 in the Republika Srpska and 10,603 in the Federation. These levels are subject to further review in the light of changing circumstances. 11. The UNMIBH police commissioner project is a major institutional initiative to create a professional police service. Its specific goal is to place police organizations under a single chain of command led by an experienced police professional and to limit political interference in police work. Steady progress has been made. In canton 9 (Sarajevo), necessary legislation has been passed and an independent selection and review board has been formed to review the applications of 18 candidates. In cantons 1, 5 and 6, political consensus has been reached and initial steps are under way to establish the new posts. The next priority is to extend this project to the Federation Ministry of the Interior and to the Republika Srpska. 12. Changing the ethnic composition of local police forces takes place in three ways: cadet entry; voluntary redeployment of serving officers; and retraining of prewar officers. Since the founding of the two police academies in 1999, 225 cadets belonging to minorities have graduated and a further 321 cadets are at present in training. It is encouraging to note that more than 1,000 applications have been received for the next class of the Federation Police Academy. Substantial progress has been made with regard to the UNMIBH voluntary redeployment initiative, which commenced in May. Some 250 officers have applied for redeployment; the first 30 have been processed and are now working in the area of their pre-war residences. The ministries of the interior of both entities are fully engaged in this process. In canton 10, however, the Ministry of the Interior has been exceedingly slow in beginning to live up to the agreement and has delayed providing contracts to 17 minority Serb police officers wishing to be redeployed. With respect to former police officers, 18 minority candidates are attending a six-week refresher course in the Federation and 53 non-Serbs have applied to attend a similar course in the Republika Srpska after November 2000. Cooperation between the police and the criminal justice system 13. In its two years of operations, the UNMIBH judicial system assessment programme has produced invaluable analyses and recommendations to begin to remedy some of the deficiencies of the legal and judicial system inherited by Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although this work remains unfinished, the programme will cease operations on 1 December, by which time it will have completed 14 major assessment reports on the structural and procedural weaknesses of the judicial system. The programme has recently focused on monitoring the work of the commissions and councils established to oversee the appointment of judges and prosecutors and to review the qualifications of incumbents. The officers of the programme have also worked to improve the independence of judges and prosecutors through, inter alia, ensuring the implementation of adequate salaries. 14. The Office of the High Representative is creating an Independent Judicial Commission to take over many of the functions previously performed by the UNMIBH judicial system assessment programme and will have a mandate to oversee the process of judicial reform throughout the country. It appears that the Commission may not be in a position to assume its responsibilities in December, which may compromise an effective handover. While the mandate of the assessment programme will have concluded by December 2000, as mentioned in my report of 2 June 2000 (S/2000/529, para. 21), the Mission will retain appropriate expertise within IPTF to assist and advise the Commissioner on the implementation of the mandate with respect to judicial organizations and activities relating to criminal procedures and criminal justice. 15. The absence of mechanisms for the protection of judges and witnesses remains a major impediment to the establishment of the rule of law. This has become even more important as police operations against organized crime and corruption become more effective. Despite 18 months of intensive effort, UNMIBH has made little progress in securing the funding necessary to establish a dedicated court police service. This has necessitated an internal review of other options for providing court protection, including the use of regular police for this purpose, despite the objections of judicial officials. The Mission is currently working closely with local authorities and the judiciary in three cantons (1, 6 and 7) to develop an operational plan, as well as the local budgetary requirements for the establishment of such a service. If funding is not available, UNMIBH will review the entire project and seek alternative means to provide court and judicial security. State Border Service and inter-police force cooperation 16. Since the inauguration of the State Border Service at Sarajevo airport on 6 June 2000, the magnitude of illegal migration through Bosnia and Herzegovina to Western Europe has become apparent. Between 1 January and 26 October of this year, 24, 850 nationals from eight foreign countries arrived at Sarajevo airport but only 5,488 citizens of the same countries departed via the airport, leaving 19,362 unaccounted for. During the same period, Croatian police returned to Bosnia and Herzegovina over 2,578 attempted illegal entrants. At least 28 people have died while attempting to illegally cross the Sava river into Croatia. UNMIBH fears that further such fatalities during winter are highly probable. 17. The lack of local and international funding has made it impossible to expand the State Border Service beyond the current four border entry points. State funding at current levels is barely sufficient to meet the salaries and operational costs of the 376 officers (189 Bosniacs, 117 Serbs and 70 Croats) currently working in the Service. The planned deployment of a further eight Service units comprising an additional 908 posts before the end of this year is highly doubtful and may not be possible even in 2001 owing to the dire financial situation of entity and state budgets. The progress that has been achieved to date has only been possible thanks to the generous training, equipment and budgetary support provided by donors, including Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and the European Commission. 18. The past months have also witnessed a dramatic increase in the number of women victims of trafficking seeking UNMIBH assistance. Since March 1999, UNMIBH has assisted 364 such victims, mostly from Moldova, Romania and Ukraine. Of these, 216 requested and qualified for repatriation with the assistance of the International Organization for Migration (IOM); 80 of these cases have arisen since June 2000. As more police raids are conducted on nightclubs and bars suspected of being run by traffickers, the number of known victims is expected to increase. It is of deep concern that, owing to lack of funding, IOM is substantially reducing its operations in this vital humanitarian area. Without the possibility of temporary shelter and repatriation, victims of trafficking are put at even greater risk following their release from local police custody. 19. To begin to address these growing problems and to encourage inter-entity law enforcement cooperation, under the auspices of the Ministerial Consultative Meeting on Police Matters, a Cooperative Law Enforcement Arrangement on Illegal Immigration and Organized Crime, signed on 26 September, has established a Joint Entity Task Force (JTF). The charter of JTF sets out mechanisms for the exchange of intelligence information, coordination of plans to stem the flow of illegal migrants and the pursuit of criminal elements involved in human trafficking. It also enables JTF to assist the Brcko Supervisor in closing the so-called "Arizona Market", a long-standing hotbed of criminal activity. The ministers of the interior of both entities have further agreed to seek entity approval to request the State authorities to establish a centralized intelligence information-gathering mechanism in order to combat illegal activities. Police and public awareness 20. The public information activities of UNMIBH are designed to contribute to public education on police matters and to support the needs of the Mission. The "Your police -- serving you" campaign has helped to increase public awareness of the fundamental principles of democratic policing. The multi-ethnic police recruitment campaign is an essential part of the Mission's minority recruitment programme. Participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in United Nations peace operations 21. The first United Nations civilian police contingent from Bosnia and Herzegovina deployed to East Timor is making an excellent contribution. A second multi-ethnic contingent of 26 officers, including 1 female officer, has concluded training and is awaiting deployment. A training programme for the first contingent of Bosnia and Herzegovina United Nations military observers was set up by the UNMIBH Military Adviser team and donor countries. By the end of 2000, 14 military observers from both entities will have been trained by Germany, Austria and the Netherlands, with further support provided by the Training Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Current planning aims at the deployment of nine military observers to the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea early in 2001. III. Joint activities of the United Nations system 22. The ability of refugees and displaced persons to return is the litmus test of the Dayton Accords. Throughout the present year, improved security conditions, a decrease in political resistance in some areas and country-wide implementation of the property legislation have resulted in very encouraging progress in the hitherto difficult area of the return of minorities to practically all areas of the country. As at 1 October, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had registered 37,083 minority returnees. By August, some 40,000 property cases (of 230,000 repossession claims) had been solved. The success of minority returns is, however, vitally dependent on sufficient funding for the reconstruction of destroyed villages. The gap between the number of returnees in need of shelter and the resources available is increasing at an alarming pace. By the end of August, UNHCR had documented a shortfall of 18,000 housing units. To assess the number of displaced persons still in need of durable solutions, UNHCR has also initiated a nation-wide re-registration exercise that is to be completed by the end of this year. 23. UNMIBH plays a crucial role in supporting returns by monitoring evictions conducted by the local police and assisting in the development of police return security plans and monitoring their implementation. Of nearly 5,000 forcible evictions scheduled throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina between June and October 2000, over 3,700 were executed professionally. Of the 1,212 evictions postponed, only 16 were due to police inaction. Appropriate disciplinary action was taken in these cases. In the difficult area of Srpsko Gorazde, an IPTF special adviser was appointed to the Housing Office for the period from 6 June to 8 August 2000. As a result of this appointment, priority cases were enforced, a registry and electronic database were established, and inter-entity exchanges of information helped to resolve a number of long-standing double occupancy cases. 24. Police performance in addressing incidents related to minority returns in parts of the eastern Republika Srpska and in canton 10 (Herzeg-Bosna), however, remains inadequate. During riots in Drvar and Bijeljina, the police showed a lack of ability or willingness to control crowds protesting minority returns and the implementation of property law. In addressing acts of criminal violence committed against Bosniac properties in Bijeljina, Bratunac and Srebrenica, the police have not carried out effective investigations and perpetrators have not been brought to justice. Non-compliance reports have been issued to officers involved in the incidents, and UNMIBH has insisted on stronger action by the Republika Srpska Minister of the Interior and proper judicial follow-up. In addition, at the request of UNMIBH, Republika Srpska public security centres have developed security plans for return areas. Further interventions with police officials in these areas are, however, being considered. Of particular concern are recent cases in which police have changed their testimony during the trials of suspects. 25. On 22 September, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) launched the second national human development report for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The report gives a sombre assessment of the situation of youth, 62 per cent of whom want to leave the country because of unemployment, and portrays bleak prospects for the future. A national conference will be held later in 2000 to formulate a platform for action. My Special Representative has been actively encouraging foreign universities to enter into collaborative arrangements with local faculties so as to provide internationally recognized tertiary qualifications. 26. UNDP continues to co-chair the Board of Donors for the mine-action programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to provide capacity-building support to the national Mine Action Centre. In the light of the High Representative's recent dismissal of the national Commission for Demining based on evidence of conflict of interest by Commission members, and ongoing investigations into whether any impropriety resulted from such conflict of interest, there is understandable concern about a possible loss of donor confidence. The main functions of the mine-action programme, namely, establishing and maintaining standards, prioritization of demining tasks, technical development and maintaining a database for all activity, continue normally, as does ongoing demining activity. At present, UNDP, in close cooperation with the Office of the High Representative, national authorities and the donor community, is assisting in the development of a new national office that would head the programme and restore confidence. According to the most recent estimates, another 8-10 years of serious investment into mine clearance activities is needed in order to reduce substantially the risks posed to the population in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 27. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has established local expert groups for the reform of literature and language curricula in primary and secondary schools, and will continue to develop curricula for other areas in the humanities. UNESCO has also completed the reconstruction of the dormitories and offices of the Mjedenica school for children with special needs in Sarajevo. In the area of cultural heritage, UNESCO has finished the reconstruction of the Magribija mosque minaret in Sarajevo, and will shortly complete restoration of the Tabacica mosque in Mostar. To support interreligious dialogue and tolerance, my Special Representative has worked closely with the leaders of the four main religious communities to establish an international project for the simultaneous reconstruction of four destroyed historic religious sites. 28. UNMIBH continues to run the Zenica domestic violence project, in conjunction with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and to collaborate closely on issues concerning trafficking in human beings. An IPTF gender officer trains local police officers on domestic violence issues, and a safe house has been established for victims of domestic violence who are testifying against their abusers. In October, an important precedent was set by the first successful local prosecution of a person accused of domestic violence. IV. Trust funds 29. The Trust Fund for the Restoration of Essential Public Services in Sarajevo, which was established in 1993, has so far received contributions and earned interest totalling US$ 26.4 million. Projects totalling US$ 19.7 million have been implemented in the fields of energy, water, sanitation, communications, public transport, health and education. The remaining balance of US$ 6.7 million is being used for many small, quick-impact projects and larger projects being planned in conjunction with the City of Sarajevo. 30. The Trust Fund for the Police Assistance Programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina is now left with only US$ 500,000, which is sufficient to provide only minimal essential equipment to some local police stations. To complete critical elements in the IPTF police programme and the local police assistance programme, in particular the formation of the State Border Service, for which the funding gap for 2001 is over US$ 10 million, it is estimated that additional contributions of US$ 40 million are required. In addressing this funding shortfall, UNMIBH representatives have been active in soliciting contributions. Funding levels foreseen in the near future are, however, only a fraction of the amount required. My Special Representative is deeply concerned that the lack of funding will affect critical areas of the work of UNMIBH and not allow the mission to achieve its targets by the end of 2002. V. Financial aspects 31. The General Assembly, by its resolution 54/273 of 15 June 2000, appropriated an amount of US$ 159 million gross for the maintenance of UNMIBH for the 12month period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001. As at 31 October 2000, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for UNMIBH amounted to US$ 77.8 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to US$ 2,095 million. VI. Observations 32. During the five years since the signing of the Dayton Accords, the international community has made a massive contribution to the cause of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Much has been achieved but progress has been frustratingly slow and difficult, owing mainly to political obstruction by extremist nationalists who refuse to accept the reality of a sovereign and multi-ethnic State where the rights of all citizens are guaranteed not by ethnicity but by rule of law. The recent general elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina demonstrated yet again how nationalist parties are willing to incite inter-ethnic fear and suspicion in order to preserve their power and privileges. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina need to understand that their future in Europe and the continued assistance of the international community depend on the actions that they take together to create a modern, democratic and tolerant society. 33. Progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina is inextricably linked to developments in the region. With the recent historic change in the leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, together with changes earlier in 2000 in the Republic of Croatia, for the first time since the war there is a realistic prospect of constructive bilateral relations based on mutual respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each State, while also developing the "special relations" that are envisaged in the Dayton Accords. The recent visit of President Kostunica to Sarajevo was a first step towards full normalization of bilateral relations. Every effort should continue to be made in order to move this process forward. 34. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina performs a specific but vital role in peace implementation -- to assist the parties to establish the foundations for effective, democratic and sustainable law enforcement agencies. It has continued to make measurable progress in all core areas of its mandate since my most recent report. Political and administrative impediments to the accelerated recruitment of minority police officers have been largely overcome. The State Border Service has been consolidated and detailed plans and budget estimates have been prepared for its full deployment. Police professionalism with regard to the security of returnees has shown considerable improvement except in certain parts of the eastern Republika Srpska and in canton 10 (Herzeg-Bosna), where obstructive officials from the Ministry of the Interior have attempted to block returns. The safe and successful conduct of national elections was testimony not only to the fine work of the Organization for Cooperation and Security in Europe, but also to the competence of local police forces in managing complex security situations. 35. These developments have enabled the Mission to draw up the Mandate Implementation Plan with a proposed timetable of December 2002 for the completion of the core mandate of UNMIBH, subject to changes in internal or external circumstances. I would request the Council to support the Mission's assessment that the authorized strength of UNMIBH for the period 2001/2002 may be reduced to 1,850 IPTF officers. Meeting the Mission's timetable to complete its core mandate by December 2002 will, however, depend on the provision by international donors of the necessary financial resources to enable UNMIBH to complete its work. The voluntary redeployment programme for minority police officers, which has 250 applicants, is nearly stalled because of insufficient funding for reconstruction of police housing. Local funding of the State Border Service is barely sufficient to pay existing salary and operating costs. Representatives of the International Monetary Fund doubt that the State budget for 2001 will be able to meet even these costs for the full year. In addition, many police stations still lack basic facilities and equipment to be able to perform their functions in a professional manner. 36. Given the serious implications of this situation, I appeal to Member States to contribute generously to the priority projects of UNMIBH and to the Trust Fund for the Police Assistance Programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina. European Member States in particular should bear in mind that Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a major transit point for illegal migration, trafficking in human beings and trade in illicit and stolen goods by well-organized criminal networks. A professional and fully deployed Bosnia and Herzegovina State Border Service is an essential preventive investment against illegal migration and an important humanitarian instrument for the victims of trafficking. Equally important in sustaining and increasing the return process is housing reconstruction funding for minority police officers so as to be able to provide confidence and security in areas of return. Without additional funding, the important work UNMIBH is carrying out in these areas will remain incomplete. 37. The legacy of Srebrenica also continues to be of deep concern. It was gratifying that the commemoration of the fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre in July 1995 took place in dignity and security. The High Representative has exercised his authority to end the stalemate over the location of a permanent burial site for the remains of the victims and a memorial, and has established a trust fund for this purpose. This has helped to clear the way for concerted efforts at reconciliation, as well as to address the many problems of the families of the victims who wish to return and the situation of local Serb residents who are themselves mainly displaced persons and who wish to reclaim their own homes elsewhere or to remain in the area. Following representations from former President Izetbegović, I have requested my Special Representative to examine ways in which the United Nations, in cooperation with the other principal organizations, can play a special role in helping the people of Srebrenica. I urge the international community to contribute generously to enable two-way returns and rehabilitation of infrastructure in Srebrenica. 38. UNMIBH continues to require an effective presence of the multinational stabilization force (SFOR) in order to ensure secure conditions for its responsibilities, personnel and property. The need for security is likely to increase as local police, advised by IPTF, have begun to undertake robust operations against local and international organized criminal groups involved in prostitution, drug trafficking and illegal migration. The continued presence of war criminals and war crimes suspects in the Mission area is an added threat not only to the success of the peace implementation process, but also to international personnel in the event that arrests become more frequent. In recent weeks, the state of alert in parts of the Mission area has been heightened in response to credible threats from criminal elements associated with bars that have been raided, and pre-election political extremism. Current actions to close the infamous "Arizona Market" could not have been undertaken without SFOR back-up and support. Any review of the presence or mission of SFOR will need to take full account of the security requirements of UNMIBH. 39. In conclusion, I should like to express my appreciation to the men and women of UNMIBH for their continued dedicated work for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The excellent results achieved in many areas by the local police forces are a testimony to the sterling work and expertise of the Mission, in particular IPTF, in monitoring and advising them on best international standards. Composition of the International Police Task Force as at 22 November 2000 Argentina Austria Bangladesh Bulgaria Canada Chile Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France Germany Ghana Greece Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Jordan Kenya Malaysia Nepal Netherlands Nigeria Norway Pakistan Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation Senegal Spain Sweden Switzerland Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Vanuatu Total 