%%%PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION|INTERNAL SECURITY|HUMAN RIGHTS|ELECTIONS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|MAPS|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|YUGOSLAVIA|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|POLICE|JUDICIAL SYSTEM|RULE OF LAW|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|RECONSTRUCTION|DEMOCRATIZATION|CIVIL SOCIETY|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for an initial period of 12 months. In paragraph 20 of that resolution, the Council requested me to report at regular intervals on the implementation of the mandate of UNMIK. The current report covers the activities of UNMIK and developments in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, since my report of 18 September 2000 (S/2000/878). During this period, the Council also received regular briefings by my Special Representative, Bernard Kouchner, and by the Secretariat (see S/PV.4200, S/PV.4225 and S/PV.4232). II. Overview A. Political situation 2. The key achievement of UNMIK over the reporting period was the holding on 28 October of municipal elections throughout Kosovo. A total of 913,179 Kosovo residents were eligible to vote for 5,500 candidates competing for 920 seats in 30 municipal assemblies. Turnout was massive, with 721,260 voters (79 per cent of the electorate) casting their ballots. However, Kosovo Serbs did not participate in the municipal elections and voter turnout for Romas and Turks was low to negligible. Other minority participation was, however, encouraging, especially among the Kosovo Bosniac and Gorani communities. However, the out-of-Kosovo vote was relatively small, with 21,756 mail-in ballots and 686 in-person ballots cast in Montenegro, Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, at polling sites organized by the International Organization for Migration (IOM). 3. Voting proceeded in a generally calm fashion. Heavy turnout early in the day caused some logistical setbacks and resulted in initial delays in voter processing at some polling centres. The overall security situation was good, the number of violent incidents falling well below the normal daily average. 4. On 7 November, my Special Representative certified the results of the municipal elections, except in the three northern municipalities of Leposavic, Zubin Potok and Zvecan. In these Kosovo Serb majority municipalities, voter turnout was negligible and the Central Elections Commission therefore recommended against certification. In the 27 municipalities where my Special Representative certified the results, the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) won approximately 58 per cent of the vote, the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) 27 per cent and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) 8 per cent. The rest of the parties competing in the election each obtained less than 1 per cent of the vote. LDK won in 21 municipalities, PDK in six municipalities, mainly in the Drenica Valley, and AAK enjoyed some success in western Kosovo, where it was placed second in the three municipalities of Pec, Djakovica and Decani. A number of parties and other organizations which obtained elected seats in the municipal assemblies -- in particular AAK and the Bosniac Party of Democratic Action of Kosovo -- requested seats in the Kosovo Transitional Council, arguing that electoral results proved their popular support. UNMIK intends to expand the membership of the Council in the coming weeks to reflect the political, religious and ethnic diversity of Kosovo. 5. Major progress was also made in establishing functioning municipal assemblies. On 11 November, more than 800 members of the new assemblies took their oath of office. Following those ceremonies, 26 of the 27 elected municipal assemblies selected their Presidents and Deputy Presidents. In all but two cases the Presidency and Deputy Presidency were going to the party that had garnered the most votes. The failure of the local parties to arrive at a power-sharing arrangement in a number of these municipalities was symptomatic of the ongoing political tension between the two principal Kosovo Albanian political parties. 6. UNMIK has made every effort to ensure that all of Kosovo's communities are represented in the new municipal structures. To this end, my Special Representative appointed representatives of minority communities to elected assemblies in areas where they lived. To date, minority appointees have been incorporated into assemblies in approximately two thirds of Kosovo's municipalities. Most of these appointees were drawn from non-Kosovo-Serb minority communities and include Kosovo Turks, Bosniacs, Roma, Ashkalija and Egyptians. 7. The integration of Kosovo Serb appointees into the 27 elected municipal assemblies has proceeded at a slower pace, owing to demands from some Kosovo Serb leaders that they be allowed to set up their own municipal structures separate and apart from the elected assemblies. This issue proved particularly contentious in the municipalities of Mitrovica and Strepce, where Kosovo Serbs have refused to participate in the elected assemblies altogether. 8. While the full incorporation of Kosovo Serbs into these elected bodies remained a challenge, UNMIK appointed assemblies in the three northern municipalities of Leposavic, Zubin Potok and Zvecan. In these areas, Assembly members were selected by my Special Representative subsequent to his decision not to certify the results of the elections. In each of the three municipalities, the assemblies consisted of 18 seats, two of which were reserved for Kosovo Albanians. These two Kosovo Albanian seats remained vacant in both Zvecan and Leposavic, where Kosovo Albanian leaders showed little interest in identifying potential appointees. The Kosovo Serb members of the assemblies were drawn from various political parties associated with the Democratic Opposition of Serbia, as well as the Socialist Party of Serbia, the Serb Movement for Renewal and the Yugoslav United Left. A number of appointees had no clear political affiliation, but were selected because of their prominence. 9. The Interim Administrative Council has met weekly to address major issues of political relevance, as well as to endorse several important regulations. Following the results of the municipal elections, Professor Qosja of the United Democratic Movement (LBD) submitted his resignation to the Council on 21 November, citing a personal obligation as a result of the outcome of the elections. 10. UNMIK has continued to deliberate on the reconfiguration of existing central bodies as part of its effort to build local capacity for self-governance. Work has also continued to elaborate an interim legal framework, which would define substantial autonomy and establish the basis for central elections. To this end, my Special Representative will establish a working group that will include local legal experts. The first step in the development of this interim legal framework will be to draft a package of regulations, starting with one on a revised Central Elections Commission and followed by a regulation on the formula for the central elections. 11. In addition to the Kosovo Transitional Council and the Interim Administrative Council, the local population continued to be involved in the interim administration of Kosovo throughout the other entities of the Joint Interim Administrative Structure (JIAS). Apart from the Department of Culture, all administrative departments have been established by regulation. Minority participation at the senior level within the departments was enhanced, with two Kosovo Serbs, one Kosovo Bosniac and one Kosovo Turk occupying co-head positions. Efforts continued to mainstream minority representation throughout the staffing of the administrative departments. 12. In an effort to increase shared administrative responsibility, my Special Representative decided to meet on a regular basis with a council of co-heads from the 20 administrative departments. The Council will allow my Special Representative more direct access to the daily work of the departments and will provide a forum through which the senior leadership of UNMIK and the co-heads can improve the coordination of the administrative aspects of the interim administration, enhance transparency between departments and increase the involvement of the co-heads in policy making. 13. The changes in the Government in Belgrade at the beginning of October have influenced Kosovo's political life. Kosovo Albanian leaders have welcomed these changes as a positive contribution to the development of the region, but raised some scepticism as to whether they alone would place the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its constituent Republic of Serbia squarely on the path to true democracy. They are also clearly concerned about a perceived shift in the attention and priorities of the international community within the region, and at the prospect of increased competition for international political and financial support. In addition, Kosovo Albanian leaders have perceived President Kostunica's victory as a threat to their aspirations for independence for the province. This perception could further radicalize some Kosovo Albanian nationalist elements and may place Kosovo's minorities under increased threat. 14. With respect to the Kosovo Serb community, the representatives of the Serb National Council of Gracanica (SNC-G) view the recent changes as having created the conditions for a constructive political dialogue on the future of Kosovo and have continued to support UNMIK in its mandate to create institutions for substantial autonomy in the province. While SNC-G remains the sole representative of Kosovo Serbs in JIAS, the recent decision of an influential member of the Council, Father Sava Janic, to withdraw from political life could lead to a decreasing role for the organization in Kosovo Serb politics. For their part, the representatives of the Serb National Council of Mitrovica (SNC-M) expressed optimism that changes in Belgrade would trigger a process through which Kosovo could be reintegrated into Serbia proper. In addition, SNC-M indicated a willingness to improve its relations with UNMIK, but shied away from accepting my Special Representative's proposal to join the Kosovo Transitional Council in the immediate future. 15. In general, with their attention focused on Belgrade, Kosovo Serb political groups have not articulated a clear policy on a number of critical issues, including future participation of Kosovo Serbs in JIAS. Nevertheless, a more constructive attitude towards UNMIK was increasingly evident. In addition, representatives of the Serb National Assembly of Kosovo met with my Special Representative in November to express their desire to be included in the political process in Kosovo. Comprising political parties and individuals with close ties to the former ruling coalition, the Serb National Assembly of Kosovo had traditionally been uncooperative in its relations with UNMIK. B. Security situation 16. In the reporting period, UNMIK continued to place primary emphasis on combating politically motivated violence. A Political Violence Task Force, staffed jointly by senior staff of UNMIK police and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), established a Kosovo-wide network of officials to coordinate activities between UNMIK police and KFOR at the local, regional and central levels. The Task Force worked in tandem with the Information Coordination Group (see S/2000/878, para. 14). Security responses by UNMIK police and KFOR ranged from the provision of military and police patrols to personal protection for high-risk individuals. 17. The pre-election period saw a significant drop in the level of politically motivated violence. In the post-election period, however, the number of attacks returned to a level comparable to that of mid-summer 2000. On 22 November, the house of the senior representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in Kosovo, Ambassador Vucikevic of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Committee for Cooperation with UNMIK, was bombed by unknown extremists, resulting in the death of a Serb security guard and the injury of three other persons. The following day, a senior LDK politician was murdered in central Pristina by masked gunmen. Although the arrest and prosecution of the perpetrators of these crimes were a critical priority for UNMIK police, a common theme throughout all these cases remained the reluctance of the local population to step forward and assist in the identification of suspects. 18. Joint security operations between UNMIK police and KFOR evolved over the reporting period to become a cornerstone of both KFOR military and UNMIK civilian law enforcement mandates. This cooperation was clearly illustrated in the Pristina region where joint security operations were conducted regularly to prevent and interdict terrorist and organized crime operations. In a pre-emptive joint operation late in September, three Kosovo Serb males were arrested in Gracanica and a significant quantity of weapons and bomb-making equipment was discovered. On 14 October, UNMIK police and KFOR conducted a joint operation in Pristina where 13 premises were cordoned off and searched. Twenty-seven Kosovo Albanians were arrested, three of whom were suspects in major crimes, 17 weapons were seized and $50,000 in cash confiscated. On 17 November a major operation against trafficking in illegal weapons and drugs was organized in Kosovo Polje, with five major arrests made of persons allegedly involved in the trafficking of women. A similar operation carried out in Pristina on 18 November resulted in the arrest of six persons. 19. UNMIK has continued to implement its strategy for broadening control over northern Kosovo. This strategy, prepared jointly with KFOR, emphasizes the importance of parallel progress in political and security programmes, as well as bolstering stability through the provision of administration and public services. As a result, the security situation in Mitrovica has improved significantly, as has the provision of judicial and detention services. However, little or no progress has been made in returns of displaced Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians to their homes on respective sides of the Ibar River. In this regard, considerably more work remains to be done in building confidence between communities. 20. In the run-up to the Serbian elections in the latter part of December, UNMIK and KFOR will again undertake joint security responses in order to prevent attempts to destabilize the province. Although initial assessments have not predicted a significant increase in violence over the election period, KFOR and UNMIK have re-established joint planning groups to ensure the maintenance of security during the Serbian election process. Presevo Valley 21. In mid-November, there was an escalation of armed confrontation between the Serbian security forces and the self-styled Liberation Army of Presevo, Medveda and Bujanovac (UCPMB) in the ground safety zone. Initially limited to harassing fire against the static Serbian Ministry of the Interior police (MUP), the attacks increased in size, duration, sophistication and aggressiveness. On 23 November, three MUP officers were killed in attacks some 5 kilometers south-west of Bujanovac. The clashes triggered an influx of almost 5,000 displaced persons from the ground safety zone and other locations into Kosovo. While the number of those displaced was relatively small, the potential implications for peace and stability in the region were quite serious. 22. After monitoring movements of internally displaced persons into Kosovo and speaking with ethnic Albanians in southern Serbia proper, UNHCR reported that internally displaced persons had fled out of fear of being caught between firing lines, and one of a general concern about the build-up of police and military forces in Presevo Valley. While ethnic Albanian representatives claimed not to be disturbed by local police from southern Serbia proper, they indicated that the presence of security forces previously stationed in Kosovo served as a major source of intimidation. It should be noted that there have been no reports of atrocities being committed or of property being damaged recently, although some ethnic Albanians did complain of intimidation and harassment by MUP inside the ground safety zone. 23. The KFOR response to armed activity in Presevo Valley was designed to constrain the freedom of action of UCPMB. Successful operations were mounted by KFOR to interdict UCPMB operations financially and logistically. Where possible, KFOR garnered support among key Kosovo Albanian leaders, encouraging them to exert their influence to moderate the activities of Albanian extremists. By the beginning of December, the situation had begun to calm, with some 2,000 internally displaced persons returning to their homes. 24. In early December the Special Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees travelled to Belgrade and southern Serbia proper to assess the humanitarian situation. The government officials with whom the Special Envoy met in Belgrade were eager to find a solution to the problem in Presevo Valley and expressed a commitment to the return of internally displaced persons to their homes. The authorities agreed that the ethnic Albanians had been the victims of social and institutional discrimination and accepted that confidence-building measures, such as the inclusion of ethnic Albanians in the local police force and increased representation in political structures, would go a long way towards decreasing tensions and towards longer-term stability in the region. 25. All concerned have requested the presence of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other international organizations in and around the ground safety zone in order to help ease conditions and build confidence among the local ethnic Albanian population. Renewed efforts are urgently needed to help facilitate safe and secure United Nations humanitarian operations in southern Serbia. C. Status of the Mission 26. The Executive Committee, comprising my Special Representative, his Principal Deputy and Deputy Special Representatives, continued to meet on a daily basis. The Executive Committee's Joint Planning Group continued its activities and established a number of working groups and task forces to address issues of concern, including the Working Group on Returns and the Joint Interim Administration Task Force. The Joint Planning Group was recently augmented through the establishment of a secretariat, which was created as an ad hoc body to ensure a robust and collaborative policy development process. This addition capitalized on earlier successes in collaborative planning by extending and reinforcing the representation of the Planning Group throughout UNMIK. Coordination with KFOR and other international agencies on security issues was maintained by the Military Liaison Office. The Office of Gender Affairs made significant progress in mainstreaming gender issues throughout UNMIK, including in JIAS, as well as within local community and municipal structures. III. UNMIK police 27. By the end of the reporting period, UNMIK police strength was approaching 4,400 officers from 53 countries, representing more than 90 per cent of the total authorized strength for the Mission. These personnel were deployed in the field as follows: 801 in the Pristina region; 536 in the Mitrovica region; 392 in the Prizren region; 408 in the Gnjilane region; 285 in the Pec region; 221 in UNMIK border police; 933 in 8 special police units; 246 in UNMIK police main headquarters; 331 in Kosovo Police Service development; and 50 in an internal training centre. In my previous report (S/2000/878), I provided details of the responsibilities of UNMIK police, which include the protection of persons at risk, for example a growing number of international judicial personnel, key UNMIK partners from minority communities, and visiting dignitaries and other high-profile individuals. 28. Joint security operations conducted by UNMIK police and KFOR continued to be developed throughout Kosovo. KFOR and UNMIK police cooperated in the security management of major public events, countering political violence, and providing special security measures for threatened minority communities. Joint planning and the sharing of criminal intelligence were the main responsibilities of joint operations centres. 29. UNMIK police have concentrated on activities designed to ensure that all UNMIK police and Kosovo Police Service trainees have a practical knowledge of international human rights standards for law enforcement. Upon arrival in the Mission, all international police officers are provided with training in international human rights standards and the local applicable law. Particular attention is paid to the rights of juveniles. 30. The UNMIK community policing initiative has strengthened ties with the local community. Community policing officers are based in every police station in Kosovo to promote awareness among the local community of the work of the UNMIK police. In particular, UNMIK community policing officers have concentrated on building links with vulnerable minority communities. 31. Eight of the planned 10 special police units have now been deployed, providing an essential component of the UNMIK police capability. Special police units conducted special protection measures in minority community areas, as well as providing security for major events, essential protection for the Zvecan lead smelter, UNMIK facilities and the internationally staffed courthouse in Mitrovica. Their formed-unit capability made them particularly effective in joint security operations with KFOR, such as weapon searches and seizures. Special police units supported UNMIK customs and provided support to UNMIK police special operations teams. 32. A total of 2,516 Kosovo Police Service cadets have graduated from the Kosovo Police Service School and have subsequently been deployed with UNMIK police field training officers throughout Kosovo. Kosovo Police Service field trainees have been sent to all major units within UNMIK police, with the exceptions of the Central Criminal Investigation Unit and special operations. Over 500 Kosovo Police Service trainees have qualified to the level of independent patrol training. 33. In order to reach its goal of training 4,000 police, the Kosovo Police Service School stepped up its training schedule. UNMIK police and the School continued to achieve success in the recruitment of minority and female candidates. Current minority representation in the Kosovo Police Service stands at 17 per cent, with female representation at 22 per cent. 34. The institution building pillar works closely with UNMIK police to develop a training programme for Kosovo Police Service trainees who will serve as supervisors. The training includes a two-week course of basic instruction in supervisory responsibilities. As part of a transition strategy aimed at establishing an independent police institution, preparations are under way for the transfer of responsibilities from the Kosovo Police Service School and UNMIK police to the Kosovo Police Service. In addition, specialized training programmes for Kosovo police trainees are being developed in the following areas: basic driving, criminal investigation, traffic accident investigation, drug identification and a re-qualification programme covering fire arms, defensive tactics and first aid. Three new regional police training centres were set up at Prizren, Gnjilane and Pec, and two additional training centres were established at the Kosovo Police Service School in Pristina. In addition, the refurbishment of School premises was completed during the reporting period. IV. Protection of minority communities and human rights A. Situation of minority communities 35. Adequate security remained the key issue for Kosovo's minorities, who continued to be the target of threats, intimidation and violence. For some communities, such as Kosovo Roma in western Kosovo, there were significantly fewer serious incidents over the current reporting period compared to the previous period. However, the situation remained precarious for many others, with an escalation in the seriousness -- if not the frequency -- of ethnically motivated attacks. Long periods of relative calm were sometimes brutally interrupted by incidents of violence and a lack of security continued to restrict freedom of movement. Attacks against the Ashkalija community were particularly pronounced in recent weeks, with the murder of four returnees on 8 November in Srbica (Mitrovica region). In Pristina and Mitrovica regions, Ashkalija community members stated that they wished to leave Kosovo. No concrete plans to do so, however, were made. In cooperation with the institution building pillar, the OSCE Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights in Warsaw established a project focusing on Kosovo Roma, Ashkalija and Egyptian communities. The project concentrated on the training of mediators and the situation of women within those communities. 36. The influx of 5,000 ethnic Albanian internally displaced persons from the Presevo Valley into eastern Kosovo affected minority communities living in the area. With stricter controls at the boundary, many Kosovo Serbs were unable to reach Serbia proper where they can access medical care and other vital services. In addition, fears of minority properties being occupied also rose, with reports from a Croatian community in Vitina municipality and Roma living in Gnjilane town that Kosovo Albanians had been checking empty houses and, in some cases, intimidating community members. 37. UNMIK continued to develop measures to improve conditions in various minority communities across Kosovo. For example, in the western and south-eastern areas of the province, special security measures, joint patrols by UNMIK police and KFOR and the establishment of a hotline appeared to have eased the situation. B. Human rights 38. Violations of human rights continued to be of serious concern to UNMIK. Problems surrounding residential property, incidents of illegal evictions and illegal construction continue to be reported. Some of the difficulties in this regard stem from the lack of financial and staffing resources for the Housing and Property Directorate. 39. Trafficking victims subject to deportation orders continued to receive assistance through the institution building pillar's shelter programme. The pillar worked with UNMIK police and IOM to overcome problems involved in repatriating women. However, trafficking against women continued to be an issue of grave concern. In October alone, 25 cases of trafficking of women were discovered, most of which originated in Eastern Europe. 40. The Mission's effort to create mechanisms for ensuring respect for human rights took a step forward with the establishment of the ombudsperson institution on 21 November. Although established by UNMIK, the ombudsperson institution is an independent body. It was created to investigate and mediate complaints from individuals, groups and organizations regarding human rights violations and other abuses of power by the authorities. Together with the Council of Europe, the institution building pillar organized workshops in October on case-handling procedures to share the experience of various national and international human rights organisations in human rights investigating and reporting and the admissibility of complaints in order to create the basis for the ombudsperson institution. In addition, a public awareness campaign was carried out throughout Kosovo to inform the public of the institution's role. C. Detained and missing persons 41. There are approximately 800 Kosovo Albanians now held in a number of prisons in Serbia proper. In addition, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), 3,476 cases of missing persons from Kosovo remain unresolved, of whom approximately 600 are ethnic Serbs and Roma. In order to coordinate the activities of the principal agencies involved in these issues, and to provide greater support to the families, UNMIK established a Bureau for Detainees and Missing Persons in early October. To facilitate the work of the Bureau, two resource centres were opened, one in Pristina and the other in Gracanica. Co-located with these resource centres are representatives from UNMIK police, the institution building pillar's Missing Persons Unit and the International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC). In addition, a mobile team visits the more remote communities, especially the minority communities, who may not have easy access to the resource centres. 42. The issue of Kosovo Albanians detained in Serbia proper once again came to the fore following riots in prisons throughout Serbia. Concern for Kosovo Albanian detainees caught up in these riots led to large-scale peaceful demonstrations, marches and hunger strikes throughout Kosovo over a period of approximately 10 days. Those activities culminated in a general strike on 14 November. Throughout this period, UNMIK was in constant contact with the Special Envoy on Persons Deprived of Liberty in connection with the Kosovo crisis in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Ambassador Henrik Amneus, who visited the central Belgrade and other prisons in Serbia and obtained a list of Kosovo Albanian detainees in these centres. UNMIK officials also met with senior officials of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia in Pristina on 15 November, which led to a number of concrete initiatives concerning the welfare and safety of detainees. Representatives of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia also provided the first official list of Kosovo Albanian detainees in their prisons. They informed UNMIK that a draft amnesty law covering political prisoners detained in Serbia proper would be presented to the Parliament of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as soon as possible. Since the meeting, follow-up contacts have continued regarding a number of issues, including arrangements for family visits to prisoners and delivery of welfare packages. 43. The Victims Recovery and Identification Commission assisted in preparations for the re-burial of 250 unidentified bodies. These bodies remained in a central location until identification was made. Presentations of photographs of clothing to the families of the missing continued throughout the reporting period. The institution building pillar's Missing Persons unit carried out capacity-building programmes for local staff of the Commission to ensure a sustainable, highly trained and professional identification capacity. V. Establishment of the judicial system and the rule of law A. Judicial system 44. On 17 October, the institution building pillar published its six-month review of the criminal justice system in Kosovo. The report found that substantial progress had been made during 2000 in establishing a functioning justice system. However, it concluded that significant problems remained. These included a lack of clarity among local judges as to whether international human rights standards were the supreme law in Kosovo, a continued application of laws which could be in breach of international standards, and evidence of bias on the part of the local judiciary against minorities -- both as victims of crime and as defendants. In response, the UNMIK Department of Justice established a joint working group with the institution building pillar to study the report and develop ways to implement its recommendations. 45. The refurbishment and winterization of the court buildings continued. Security assessments for the court buildings were completed and the results are being implemented in coordination with UNMIK police. The refurbishment of the Kosovo prisons and detention centres, which were in very poor condition, has also been a high priority for the UNMIK Department of Justice. Donor funding was obtained for the initial stages of financing for an independent forensic institute. This project is being coordinated with several other departments within UNMIK. The objective is to build up the local forensic capacity. 46. Ten international judges and three international prosecutors are currently serving throughout Kosovo. One of the international judges has been appointed to the Supreme Court of Kosovo. Collectively, these international legal professionals completed a total of 35 trials and investigations. Another 45 trials and investigations were ongoing at the time of writing of this report. Further recruitment of international judges and prosecutors is under way. B. Penal system 47. Since September, significant progress has been made in strengthening the Kosovo Correctional Service. The Mitrovica prison facility was taken over by the Service in September and the Pec prison facility was taken over from KFOR in October as planned. The refurbishment and improvement of the Dubrava prison complex is under way and the training and deployment of Kosovo correctional service personnel continue. A total of 673 staff -- including 594 correctional officers and 169 civilian personnel -- have been trained since the system was established. C. Rule of law activities 48. The institution building pillar has revised its strategy to focus more on legal community support, through the provision of advocacy and legal aid. The initial emphasis of the Rule of Law Division was to set up the ombudsperson institution and build up the judiciary. The latter was carried out through material assistance to the courts and by providing the newly appointed judges with training and legal material. With its new focus, the pillar, after consultations with the Kosovo Bar Association, is in the process of establishing an office of the defence. 49. In the second round of a programme designed to strengthen the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law in Kosovo, a series of two-day induction courses were held for 70 new judges and prosecutors. This training gave an introduction to the rule of law and focused on the Kosovo criminal procedure, as well as providing a substantive overview on property issues. 50. The opening ceremony of the new school year at the Law Faculty was held on 23 October for students in their first two years of studies. The law students will now follow the modernized curriculum, mapped out by the Kosovo Law Centre, which will provide them with the opportunity of obtaining the degrees of Bachelor of Law and Master of Law, after three and five years of studies respectively. The Kosovo Law Centre, an independent institute established by the institution building pillar, also continued its scholarship programme. Five students were selected for studies at Utrecht University (Netherlands) between January and June 2001. Furthermore, the Centre provided law students of the Pristina Law Faculty with the opportunity to receive adequate computer training. VI. Humanitarian activities 51. Although the humanitarian affairs pillar of UNMIK was phased out, in practice UNMIK continued to work closely with UNHCR on minority protection and broader regional issues pertaining to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Through the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for Kosovo, UNMIK monitored closely the situation for vulnerable populations, both majority and minority, and responded to any remaining needs that may have fallen through the gap between last year's massive humanitarian assistance programme and this year's reconstruction and social welfare scheme. Finally, UNMIK cooperated closely with other United Nations partners such as the World Food Programme (WFP), the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), as well as IOM, ICRC and over 250 international and 45 local non-governmental organizations. A. Returns 52. As the security situation remains precarious for many minority communities, it has become increasingly important to strike the proper balance between supporting activities that hold promise for sustainable return and not pushing the process too far too soon. When the UNHCR Special Envoy met with President Kostunica in mid-November, they agreed on the need to find a balance between hope and caution with respect to Kosovo Serb returns. However, as there were some small-scale spontaneous returns to a number of existing Kosovo Serb communities around Kosovo, a system was put in place to track the returns so that assistance can be delivered. As many as 2,000 Kosovo Serbs may have returned to their places of origin over the course of 2000. An additional number of displaced persons were displaced again, to other parts of Kosovo. During the last three months, UNHCR, with the support of UNMIK, KFOR and the Steering Committee of the Joint Committee on Returns, organized a number of advance visits for displaced Serbs to various locations in Kosovo, including the Osojane Valley, in Istok municipality, and Klina municipality. In addition, the Steering Committee organized assistance for several returnee locations, including the villages of Grace in Vucitrn municipality and Slivovo in Pristina municipality. 53. At the end of September, the Joint Committee on the Return of Kosovo Serbs met for the third time, to review the progress made by the Steering Committee since July and to examine future strategies for the return process. The meeting, which was chaired by my Special Representative, was particularly welcome in that it included the participation of both Oliver Ivanovic and Bishop Artemije, representing the two Serb National Councils of Kosovo. During the meeting, it was agreed that, aside from security, housing reconstruction should be the top priority, so as to sustain current minority populations and to create favourable conditions for further returns of Kosovo Serbs to their homes. It was also agreed that a comprehensive plan of action would be drawn up through which the Committee could prepare the ground for Kosovo Serb returns in 2001. The first outline was presented to the Joint Committee on Returns in November. 54. From 1 January to the end of November 2000, more than 92,000 Kosovo Albanians returned to the province. Although the vast majority (over 80,000) came back voluntarily, over 12,000 were forcibly returned. During the month of October, UNMIK released a revised version of the policy paper on the repatriation of Kosovo Albanians. The paper, which was drafted by the Working Group on Returns with the input of UNHCR, was presented to major asylum States. In the paper, UNMIK appealed for a moratorium on forced and induced repatriation during the winter months. UNMIK also encouraged asylum States to continue to concentrate on supporting efforts to further develop the conditions that need to be in place in Kosovo for the return of the Kosovo Albanians to be a durable solution. B. Remaining humanitarian needs 55. In mid-November, the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for Kosovo released the results of a humanitarian risk survey, revealing that some 42,000 families may be in need of firewood and coal and some 6,000 families in need of temporary emergency shelter for the winter. While last year's emergency relief efforts and ongoing reconstruction support improved the majority of people's lives in Kosovo, a substantial number of vulnerable families continued to require aid. According to the survey, some 20,000 families could be at risk of suffering severe exposure this winter if coal and firewood were not provided. At the end of the reporting period, there were some 2,500 places available in temporary community shelters for emergency needs this winter, and bilateral aid agencies were beginning to respond with some assistance for these vulnerable communities. UNHCR was also assisting through host family programmes and by providing winter stoves, blankets and other non-food items for vulnerable populations. The Humanitarian Coordinator has appealed for emergency humanitarian assistance to help the 20,000 families survive the winter. C. Mine action 56. The UNMIK Mine Action Programme, under the leadership of the UNMIK Mine Action Coordination Centre, estimated that the task of clearing Kosovo would be completed by December 2001. The Centre has prepared an exit strategy to address the transfer of responsibilities, including continuing clearance of any residual threat, mine awareness and victim assistance, to the appropriate JIAS departments. The success of the programme was reflected in the declining rate of civilian casualties, which numbered five in August. A total of 103 persons have been killed and 394 persons injured in mine or unexploded ordnance incidents since June 1999. Incidents involving NATO-dropped cluster munitions diminished dramatically as a result of a change in strategy that greatly increased the speed with which the easily accessed cluster bomb units were being cleared. Mine clearance activities continued throughout the period under review. To date, 4,586 anti-personnel mines, 4,315 anti-tank mines, 4,932 cluster bombs and 5,853 items of unexploded ordnance have been cleared by teams coordinated by the Centre. VII. Sectoral developments A. Reconstruction 57. With donor support, some 20,000 houses have been rebuilt so far this year for vulnerable families whose houses were badly damaged or destroyed during the conflict. A similar number have been rebuilt by members of the local population themselves, either wholly unaided or with limited donor input. Altogether, nearly half of all families whose houses had been damaged or destroyed are in decent accommodations. 58. International donors, particularly the European Union and its member States, have provided extensive support for reconstruction efforts. To ensure that the best possible use was made of donor contributions, regular donor coordination was developed to avoid duplication and inconsistent donor activities. To guide new donor commitments this year, UNMIK prepared Kosovo: Reconstruction 2000 -- a public reconstruction and investment programme that directed donors towards JIAS priorities. The new public reconstruction and investment programme 2001-2003, which will soon be completed, will outline a clear medium-term road map for donors, refining and building on the priorities set out in Kosovo: Reconstruction 2000. B. Health and social welfare 59. Improvements in the delivery of health-care services continued over the reporting period. The UNMIK interim health policy was modified to take into account the recommendations of a task force composed of local and international health professionals. In accordance with regulation No. 2000/45 of 11 August 2000, municipalities began to assume responsibility for primary health care. The Licensing Board of Health Professionals reviewed the credentials of the approximately 750 local health workers who had graduated from the informal parallel medical education system maintained by Kosovo Albanians prior to the establishment of UNMIK. As part of the review, the Board administered a licensing examination for the graduates and it was determined that approximately 200 would need additional training. The organization of this training is already under way. Similarly, the Department's Specialization Board reviewed the qualifications of all specialist doctors of the former parallel system. Of the 1,096 specialists who applied, 293 were approved. With the support of the Government of Finland, a major project to train nurses was launched, through which some 1,200 nurses were expected to improve their skills in family medicine. Together with doctors currently undergoing family medicine training, they will form the core of the family medicine teams and will serve as the backbone of the future health-care system. 60. Significant progress was made in refurbishing and re-equipping health-care institutions throughout Kosovo. A noteworthy development in this area was the construction of three community mental health centres as part of a plan to shift the focus in the mental health field from hospitals to community-based care. Finally, a polio immunization programme was successfully carried out in cooperation with WHO, UNICEF, KFOR and many non-governmental organizations. As part of the programme, 69,579 children were immunized. C. Education 61. Education comprises the biggest sector under the Joint Interim Administrative Structure, with some 30,000 employees and 400,000 students in over 800 institutions. Education accounted for over 26 per cent of the Kosovo consolidated budget. Reform of the education system continued as part of a World Bank project on technical assistance. The hiring of education staff was completed and employment contracts were issued to teachers and administrative staff. Since September, over 100 schools have been rehabilitated and most "tent schools" had been converted into interim "container schools" for the winter months. New centres for vocational training are also being opened. In addition, the process of devolving responsibilities for the administration of the education system to the municipalities has also begun. Programmes for minorities were implemented, especially in the field of distance education and teacher training capacity-building. Over 100 members of the minority community participated in these programmes. D. Transport and infrastructure 62. Major road repair and rehabilitation works were undertaken throughout Kosovo during the reporting period. Those included repairs to the main road connecting Pristina to the border with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia at Blace, and the Pristina-Pec, Pristina-Gnjilane, Pristina-Mitrovica and Mitrovica-Pec roads. Work to repair damaged bridges was also carried out. A project funded by the European Agency for Reconstruction was launched to ease congestion at the Blace border point. Slated for completion by the end of 2001, the project will widen the road and build additional parking lots. Municipal public transport projects were being initiated and are well advanced in most municipalities. Preparations for clearing snow and ice during winter included the pre-positioning of snowploughs at strategic places, provision for spreading salt and grit, and establishing a reliable communications system to respond quickly to emergencies. 63. Significant progress was made in upgrading Pristina Airport. The new SITA system (an airline telecommunication system) was installed and will be available to all carriers. The installation of the flight information display system was under way and improvements were made around the terminal to facilitate storage of ground handling equipment over the winter months. From 1 October onward, the airport was insured. Technical training for 20 air traffic controllers continued, with 12 personnel in France and 8 in Italy. Commercial activity remained at a high level for passenger traffic and a total of 328,000 passengers were recorded this year. E. Post and telecommunications 64. Postal services in Kosovo improved significantly as a result of training for postal staff in computerized operations. The training was funded by the European Agency for Reconstruction. International parcel mail service was launched on 2 October, permitting parcels weighing up to 20 kilograms to be sent to and from Kosovo. 65. The expansion of the Global System for Mobile network to cover more areas of Kosovo continued. Base stations for the network were installed in Podujevo, Urosevac and Pec by the Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo and Monaco Telecom/ Alcatel. The network had some 54,000 subscribers and 6,200 roamers. A microwave link between Pristina and Skopje was installed with the help of the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. F. Agriculture 66. A field presence, staffed by locals, was established to revitalize agricultural activity at the municipal level. This process included the privatization of the veterinary profession and the establishment of a Veterinary Board and a code of conduct for veterinary doctors. A Kosovo Forestry Authority was established. In addition, a number of regulations and administrative instructions were issued to regulate various areas of the agriculture sector, including the import of live animals and logging. G. Environmental protection 67. Efforts were made to strengthen local capacities for environmental protection. The Environmental Unit of the Institute for Scientific Research and Development associated with the Kosovo Electrical Company (INKOS-KEK) and the Kosovo Hydro-Meteorological Institute were provided with resources and are functioning. A regulatory framework for environmental protection and other environment-related regulations, including regulations for waste management, are in preparation. The administration of natural parks was accorded a high priority, as was the management of the Sharr Natural Park, the principal source of biological diversity in Kosovo. Environmental auditing and assessments were under way to assess and reduce industrial pollution. 68. In order to minimize air and water pollution resulting from waste disposal activities, a 2-billion lire project financed by the Government of Italy was initiated. The project will be executed by the United Nations Office for Project Services and is to be implemented by municipalities in the Pristina and Gnjilane regions. In addition, the cleaning and "greening" of city parks will assist in the creation of a better environment. 69. Significant effort was channelled into the promotion of public awareness regarding environmental issues. Campaigns targeting children and women were carried out and the promotion of recycling was encouraged through the establishment of a recycling task force. H. Youth and sports 70. Over the reporting period, the Department of Youth implemented programmes in the area of non-formal education, community service and student exchange and scholarship. Plans were under way to open a satellite office in Gracanica to serve the Kosovo Serb community. Contacts were established with European institutions dealing with youth issues. A Youth Week to promote tolerance was held from 1 to 7 October with the active participation of the municipalities and non-governmental organizations. A Volunteer Community Service Programme for students was launched. 71. The Department of Sports initiated reforms of the local sports associations and federations to ensure that those bodies function in an increasingly democratic and transparent manner. The process will be completed in the coming months. In an effort to promote sport activities, a number of training programmes were conducted. A special effort was made to encourage the participation of women and minorities in these programmes. I. Culture 72. With the assistance of the Department of Culture, the local theatre, orchestra and folkloric ballet were reactivated and began performing throughout Kosovo. The orchestra and theatre held regular concerts, while the Shota Folkloric Ballet travelled throughout Kosovo giving performances. UNMIK supported many cultural festivals and activities, including a festival of Serbian song and dance in Leposavic (Mitrovica region). J. Civil security and emergency preparedness 73. The Department of Civil Security and Emergency Preparedness was formally established on 9 November through UNMIK regulation No. 2000/61. The Department is responsible for the management and administration of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), as well as the planning, coordination and execution of emergency response to natural or other disasters. During the reporting period, a preliminary risk assessment overview for Kosovo was finalized and the process of risk assessment began in all the regions. An emergency plan for the Trepca industrial complex in Mitrovica was designed to respond to technical or environmental emergencies. The plan was put into operation during the emergency caused by the leakage of sulphuric acid at the Trepca Battery Factory in southern Mitrovica in September. 74. The second phase of Kosovo Protection Corps training covering the period from August 2000 to June 2001 is well under way. The training is coordinated by IOM and includes specialized programmes on the planning and management of emergency operations. During the reporting period, two groups of KPC members were trained abroad: 15 members attended a course on post-accident radiation monitoring techniques in Ukraine and 6 senior members attended a course on civil protection management in Brussels. A School of Civil Protection in Kosovo was opened on 2 October 2000. 75. Training for Kosovo Protection Corps members continued to be combined with humanitarian work projects. By the end of September, 76 work projects involving 2,257 KPC members were completed across Kosovo. These included road repair, reconstruction of schools, houses, fences and bridges, as well as the cleaning of parks, rivers and other public places. Another 36 projects employing 395 KPC members are continuing and an additional 46 projects were developed for the future. Most of these projects were executed in cooperation with KFOR and non-governmental organizations. 76. Efforts continued to recruit members of the minority communities into KPC. A disciplinary code and joint compliance enforcement framework for the Kosovo Protection Corps was finalized and a regulation to create a KPC corps of inspectors was being studied jointly by UNMIK, KFOR and KPC. These inspectors would deal with cases of non-compliance within the Corps. K. Public services 77. The Department of Public Services paid salaries from the Kosovo consolidated budget to 58,300 local staff employed by the various JIAS Departments. Payments to date totalled DM 131.2 million. Following the promulgation of regulation No. 2000/45 on self- government of municipalities, the Department was restructured to provide for greater decentralization of activities and a sharper focus on programmes for training and capacity-building of Kosovo public officials. To this end, civil registration was fully integrated into municipal structures, the Department retaining policy guidance, technical support and monitoring and oversight responsibilities. A pilot project was launched in Urosevac municipality and four additional municipal civil registration centres became functional on 29 November in Vucitrn, Klina, Suva Reka and Lipljan municipalities respectively. Other areas were identified for decentralization, including procurement, certification of expenditure and payroll management. At the same time, training programmes for local staff were developed and implemented in areas such as procurement, personnel management and human resource development, expenditure certification and civil registration. A new vehicle registration centre opened in the Kosovo Serb community of Gracanica, bringing the total number of vehicle registration centres throughout Kosovo to 11. 78. The Department of Public Services was also involved in the re-burial of bodies exhumed by the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. A Kosovo-wide re-burial operation began on 25 September and was concluded on 18 October. A total of 786 identified bodies were returned to families for re-burial and 220 unidentified bodies have been buried at a temporary central holding cemetery in Suva Reka. L. Housing and property 79. Regulation No. 2000/60 on the residential property claims and the rules of procedure and evidence of the Housing and Property Directorate and the Housing and Property Claims Commission was promulgated on 31 October 2000. The Pristina and Gnjilane offices of the Housing and Property Directorate are functional and property claims are already being registered. Furthermore, mobile teams operating in the Pristina and Gnjilane regions facilitated the registration of 300 claims, particularly for minority groups. An additional regional office will be opened in Mitrovica. Further expansion of the work and capacity of the Directorate will be essential if it is to cope with the thousands of property claims expected to be registered. This in turn will require adequate financial and human resources. The Kosovo Cadastral Agency commenced the restoration of property records throughout Kosovo. In addition, efforts were made to raise awareness concerning gender discrimination and in property rights. M. Banking and payments authority 80. The Banking and Payments Authority of Kosovo continued to fulfil the role of a central bank, including the issuance of currency. It regulated banking activity and licences and supervised banks in accordance with standards that meet international criteria. Owing to its exacting standards, only one commercial bank was granted a final licence to operate, while six others have been granted preliminary licences. This rigorous approach will ensure that Kosovo is not threatened by financial fragility. The Banking and Payments Authority will be assuming responsibility from the civil administration pillar for the regulation and supervision of insurance companies in Kosovo. N. Labour 81. One of Kosovo's major problems continued to be unemployment, currently estimated to be around 60 per cent. To meet this challenge, UNMIK undertook a major revitalization of labour market services. As part of this effort, employment offices were fully staffed. The training for employment office personnel and the provision of essential technical equipment was also launched. The availability of labour market services will have an increasing role in fighting unemployment, particularly among women and young people. In the absence of an unemployment insurance system, the social assistance scheme was widened to cover the most needy unemployed. As part of the scheme, significant efforts were made to include eligible members of minority communities. O. Trade and industry 82. To foster the development of the private sector, regulations covering business organizations, foreign investment, sales contracts and secured transactions were drafted and should be issued before the end of the year. A regulation on bankruptcy is also in preparation. Extensive efforts to assist the courts to deal with these new regulations, and to develop the necessary administrative procedures and registries to implement them, are also under way. Steps were taken to commercialize viable socially owned enterprises. Seven regional teams were set up to assist such enterprises in attracting foreign investment partners and in arranging leases or management contracts to bring the operating assets of the companies under private management. Questions of ownership or privatization will be left for later resolution. For small and medium-sized private enterprises a programme of technical assistance was launched to help draw up business plans, assist with financing, and improve management. In addition, a women's business association assisted women to identify and develop opportunities in the private sector. 83. Building upon the experience of the long-term leasing transaction for the Sharr Cement Factory, UNMIK launched a commercialization programme to rejuvenate the enterprise sector. Through commercialization of former socially owned enterprises, UNMIK will offer long-term lease or management contracts to the private sector for all potentially viable enterprises. 84. As noted in my previous report, UNMIK had assumed administrative and operational responsibility for the Zvecan lead smelter in the Mitrovica region. The Mission's progress in rehiring workers for the smelter and the absence of any major security incidents, with the exception of a fire at the transformer plant within the smelter, indicates that UNMIK continued to make progress towards building confidence with the plant's Kosovo Serb employees. P. Public utilities 85. The reconstruction challenges in the energy sector have proved to be less tractable than originally thought. The negligence of the previous 10 years had caused widespread dilapidation in the coalmines, the power plants and the distribution network. Over the course of the last winter, the amount of electricity generated increased steadily, but the distribution was frequently interrupted because of the frailty of the system. The summer and autumn have been used to undertake extensive overhauling, repairs and maintenance throughout the power sector, including the district heating facilities in Pristina and Djakovica. This should ensure that more energy will be generated and distributed more reliably this winter than last. Nonetheless, domestic generation will have to be supplemented by imports. Import contracts were signed with Bulgaria and Montenegro to ensure that dependable additional sources of energy are available to supplement domestic generation. In total, the amount of energy supplied this autumn was about double that of a year ago and load-shedding was much less frequent. Furthermore, the power company, KEK, was well on the way to repaying the debt to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for last winter's power imports. 86. Efforts continued to transform KEK into a financially sound and efficient company serving the interests of all its customers. Following the appointment of new Executive Directors of KEK in July, the recruitment of the next level of managers was completed and a new Chairman was appointed. Restructuring will continue with a thorough analysis of employment needs in KEK. Financial reporting has greatly improved, and preparations are under way to install a more modern accounting system. Revenue collection has picked up, though it still remains much too low. 87. War damage to the water supply was minor, but lack of attention and funding had left the sector in a poor state. In mid-1999, fewer than 30 per cent of urban dwellers had a regular service, there were no operational systems in rural areas and the quality of water posed a threat to public health. One year later, half the population and 80 per cent of the urban population has been supplied with chlorinated water. Services continued to be upgraded and improved. Q. Local administration 88. The Department of Local Administration closely monitored the transfer of powers to fully functioning municipal assemblies and related structures. To this end, the Department identified several benchmarks as crucial to this process. These included the establishment of the three mandatory assembly committees -- on policy and finance, communities and mediation. These committees were successfully initiated in several assemblies. The appointment of a Chief Executive Officer and a Board of Directors on the basis of a recommendation by an independent panel will also be an important step in promoting the development of a professional municipal civil service, as well as to safeguard it from undue political pressure. The system will be based on a fair, transparent and non-discriminatory recruitment policy. 89. The existing local community offices will be fully integrated into the municipalities and their administrative structures to ensure the continuous provision of equal access to public services at the municipal level and the protection of community rights. To date, there are 24 such offices in municipalities where a minority community forms a substantial part of the population. The appointment of the head of each office as an ex-officio member of the Board of Directors of the municipality will facilitate the institutionalization of these structures. 90. The transfer of authority to the municipalities will, to a large extent, depend on the existence of adequate budgetary and financial management systems and on the capacity and capability of the municipal civil service to implement effective financial procedures and controls, as certified by an independent auditor. As the political and administrative process unfolds, UNMIK, in the area of local administration, will monitor progress in the consolidation of municipal self-governing institutions; ensure that efficient ways are made available to the municipalities to build sustainable administrative capacity through technical assistance and training programmes; promote inter-municipal cooperation; and coordinate the relevant activities of United Nations and other international agencies. In this regard, municipalities received assistance and funding for small and medium-size economic development projects from several development agencies and donors, including UNDP, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and the European Agency for Reconstruction, as well as from bilateral cooperation agencies and non-governmental organizations. VIII. Democracy and civil society A. Democratization 91. The Institute for Civil Administration, an independent institution established by the institution building pillar as the official training body for the public sector, was formally opened in Uroevac on 20 September, to provide training to the public sector of Kosovo. Thirty graduates from the first four-week medium-term training programme for senior municipal officials received training in law, economics, public finance, human resource management and conflict resolution. The second class of a medium-term training programme graduated on 11 October in the northern municipality of Zvecan. The course had been provided to Kosovo Serb municipal employees. By the end of November, the pillar had concluded the third 20-day medium-term course for 30 Kosovo Albanian senior municipal staff, including six women, in the municipalities of Pec, Istok, Klina and Decani. 92. The institution building pillar worked on a variety of levels to promote and support the development of democratic political parties in Kosovo. In the run-up to the elections, advice and assistance were provided on the registration of political parties. During this period, all registered political parties made extensive use of the pillar's political party service centres, which provided training and logistical support. Political parties were further assisted through the distribution of a media fund allowing them to finance their own electoral campaigns. In addition, seminars for women candidates were held throughout Kosovo. In total, 500 women candidates participated in training to run an electoral campaign and strengthen their understanding of municipal governance and electoral campaigning. 93. Post-election municipal assembly training seminars were delivered in each municipality between 20 November and 1 December for all new municipal assembly members, both elected and appointed. The seminars dealt with UNMIK documents on municipal regulation; a model municipal statute and rules of procedure; and model financial procedures for municipalities. 94. In order to create a favourable environment for non-governmental organization and civil society structures in Kosovo, the institution building pillar opened its ninth non-governmental organization resource centre in Kosovo Polje, providing information, technical equipment and assistance, as well as a meeting point for local community non-governmental organizations. In October and November, it also began working more closely with local women's organizations. 95. Efforts were also directed at minorities. A minority skills assessment survey was conducted in the Kosovo Serb communities to assess the skills of the local populace and help tailor potential projects. Approximately 600 individuals were interviewed. According to the survey, an overwhelming majority looked to UNMIK as a source of assistance. The pillar coordinated a three-week peace-building and reconciliation workshop in Austria for 24 Kosovo youths including Kosovo Albanians, Serbs, Bosniacs, Turks and Ashkalija. B. Media affairs 96. Throughout the run-up to elections, the institution building pillar worked to ensure that access to the media was fair and equitable for all political parties and candidates and that the local media were equipped and trained to cover the elections professionally. To this end, media access support teams were deployed to each of the five regions to make contact with local political entities and media outlets, mediate complaints regarding fair and balanced coverage of campaigning and resolve disputes on an informal basis. During the electoral campaign, the pillar also monitored the media to ensure that both print and broadcast media complied with the electoral rule on equitable coverage. 97. Following the conclusion of the electoral campaign, the temporary Media Commissioner reported that, while few breaches of the rules governing the broadcast media were reported, coverage of the various political entities was not always equitable. These problems, however, were usually rectified following intervention by media monitoring teams. With regard to the print media, the Commissioner announced that their coverage of the election campaign was generally balanced. Notable exceptions included two high-profile daily newspapers, Bota Sot and Rilindja, as well as the student newspaper Epoka e Re and the news agency Kosova Press. In order to enforce the print code of conduct, the Commissioner fined Bota Sot DM 50,000 on 1 December. IX. Preparations for municipal elections 98. The successful outcome of the municipal elections was the result of extensive preparations on the part of the entire UNMIK structure, but particularly the hard work and dedication of the institution building pillar. 99. By late September, review and inquiry investigations were finalized in all five regional centres. In addition, over 38,000 voter packs were mailed to registered voters living outside Kosovo to enable them to cast their ballot by mail. The proportion of registrants not finding their name on the final voters list was approximately 4 per cent. The registrants, whose details could be checked against the central database, were added to a supplementary voters list. 100. A special needs voters programme was set up to enable special categories of voters, including those homebound by fear, the hospitalized, the mentally handicapped, the elderly and prison inmates, to register and vote simultaneously. In addition, technical preparations were made to allow the Kosovo Police School and polling station staff to vote during the special needs voting period. 101. As part of the technical preparations for the elections, municipal election commissions were established, which assisted with the technical administrative issues of the elections within each municipality. As part of the public information campaign, over a quarter of a million posters on a wide range of election issues were disseminated to increase awareness. This was supplemented by an intensive voter awareness campaign, which guided the voter through the ballot. 102. To run the election itself, 1,019 international supervisors seconded by OSCE member States were deployed to Kosovo and 319 supervisors were recruited locally. Over 10,000 polling station committee members were trained between 15 and 25 October on polling and counting procedures for the municipal elections. Additionally, some 4,886 representatives of political parties, coalitions, citizens' initiatives and independent candidates, as well as 1,305 representatives of non-governmental organizations, were accredited as domestic observers for the municipal elections, bringing the total of domestic observers to 6,186. X. Financial situation A. Kosovo consolidated budget 103. The Kosovo consolidated budget for 2001 will be finalized by the end of the year. The major spending priorities remain health, welfare, education and justice, additional resources going to support revenue collection and improvements to primary health and the Kosovo Police Service. The overall costs of the civil service will be held down through controls on salaries and overall numbers. Furthermore, for 2001, the Central Fiscal Authority expects to raise the revenue collected from local sources from 50 per cent to nearly 70 per cent of the yearly budget. This will be accomplished via a range of taxes, including a value added tax, border taxes and taxes on business. 104. As a part of this new range of taxes, the first collection under the tax on presumed turnover for businesses was due on 1 October. Voluntary compliance was just over 50 per cent, total collections to date being in excess of DM 8 million, which was more than double the amount forecast. Revenue from customs collections continued at a rate slightly higher than expected into November, the weekly collection reaching DM 7 million. Current collections are generally a little under DM 6 million per week. Together with all donors having fulfilled their pledges, this has ensured the revenue for the Kosovo consolidated budget for 2000. B. UNMIK Trust Fund 105. As at 30 November, contributions received under the UNMIK Trust Fund totalled US$ 35,369,737. The approved value of quick-impact projects to be paid from the UNMIK Trust Fund as at November totalled $4,809,770. A total of 22 approved projects (with a value of $555,099) were transferred to the Central Fiscal Authority for payment under the Kosovo consolidated budget. There were 182 quick-impact projects being implemented or completed, with a total value of $1,868,039. Some $14,457,713 was withdrawn from the Trust Fund for the payment of stipends to Kosovo civil servants and $10 million was withdrawn for the winterization programme. XI. Observations 106. The holding of successful municipal elections marked a watershed in the Mission's achievements in Kosovo. Since 28 October, UNMIK has moved quickly to implement the municipal election results and to establish functioning provisional municipal assemblies. Significant progress has been made in this regard. However, the ongoing development of these structures depends upon the continued commitment of the people of Kosovo and their political leaders to respect the results of the municipal elections. All parties and sectors of Kosovo society must be prepared to work within and with these municipal structures, which have been mandated to undertake tasks and responsibilities in the interest of the community as a whole. Democracy must take root at the municipal level, and the support and commitment of all the people of Kosovo is essential for this process to continue to be successful. I therefore join with my Special Representative in urging local leaders from across the political spectrum, as well as the people of Kosovo, to support and participate in the business of daily government at the municipal level. 107. The lack of significant violence during the pre-election period, as well as the virtually incident-free day of elections, was a laudable achievement of UNMIK, KFOR and, above all, of the people of Kosovo. However, I note with dismay the increasing reports of violence subsequent to the elections. Extremists cannot be allowed to undermine the achievements made so far in providing the basis for substantial autonomy and democratic self-governance. Continued implementation of substantial autonomy depends upon the existence of security, respect for security and human rights and democratic development. None of these conditions can be met unless Kosovo's leaders and the general population commit themselves to ensuring that they are upheld. In short, increased responsibility in the arena of self-governance is linked to mature political and civic behaviour, which is not demonstrated by these violent acts. Words alone do not reverse this counter-productive behaviour, but only concrete actions by all communities in Kosovo, particularly their leaders, through which they must show that they do not accept such violent acts. 108. UNMIK has, from the beginning, been dedicated to the progressive involvement of the local population in the bodies of the interim administration. Part of this process is the development of a "pact" for Kosovo society (see S/2000/878, para. 9), which will develop the framework for the general elections, and the structure of the provisional Kosovo institutions pending a final settlement of Kosovo's status. UNMIK believes that the international community must actively pursue the process of defining substantial autonomy and developing institutions of self-government, with population of Kosovo sharing more and more responsibility in the administration of the province. UNMIK will work closely with Member States and representatives of the local population to formulate this framework, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). 109. UNMIK has continued its efforts to consolidate and further strengthen the existing joint interim administrative structures. I welcome the significant progress that has been achieved so far in setting up functioning departments that provide services to all people in Kosovo. These departments must continue to resist a politicization of their functions, and to focus on institution-building, capacity-building and the improved provision of services to all communities in Kosovo. The international community, for its part, must ensure that the appropriate interim administrative framework is in place for the future democratic sustainability of the provisional institutions. 110. Kosovo will continue to need donor assistance for some time to come. However, the province should prepare for the time when that support is phased out. The continuing development of a vibrant private sector through private investments is therefore critical. Sustained private sector growth, however, cannot be achieved without a proper legal and institutional framework. This framework must allow for the reorganization of State and socially owned enterprises, including the resolution of pre-existing liabilities. It must also introduce basic concepts and tenets of commercial law that can ensure effective judicial protection for contract and property rights, as well as providing the basic requirements for banking and lending operations. Without these elements, investors will not provide financing for the province's enterprises. At this time, Kosovo's judiciary does not have the capacity to elaborate and implement such a framework. Accordingly, international support and expertise will be needed if sound legal foundations for a thriving private sector are to be developed. 111. The international community has welcomed recent changes in the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In addition to renewed hope for the people of the Republic, these changes have provided UNMIK with a new opportunity to improve its consultations with Federal authorities, and to engage in a constructive dialogue on issues of mutual concern. A major issue of concern in UNMIK is the situation of the Kosovo Albanian detainees in Serbia proper, as well as those members of all communities who have gone missing in Kosovo during and after the conflict. I urge the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to release those detainees immediately for the sake of the detainees and their families, and as a gesture of goodwill towards the province's population. 112. Another major concern is the realization of returns of Kosovo Serbs and enhanced cooperation between the Kosovo Serb community and the Mission. To this end, the increasing dialogue between the new Government in Belgrade and key elements of the Kosovo Serb community is welcome. I join my Special Representative in urging the Kosovo Serb community to strengthen their participation in the Joint Interim Administration, including the province's provisional municipal assemblies. 113. The continuing conflict in the Presevo Valley in southern Serbia proper serves to destabilize the region, undermines relations between Kosovo and the Federal authorities, and poses a serious threat to both the local population and to community relations inside Kosovo. UNMIK welcomes the level of moderation and control exhibited by the Federal authorities in their recent handling of the situation in the region. It is a positive sign for the future development of relations between the people of Kosovo and Serbia proper. For its part, UNMIK, with the assistance of KFOR, will do all it can to prevent the export of violence from the province, and UNHCR is considering what practical measures can be taken to assist the local population. Meanwhile, I call on local leaders and the population inside Kosovo to cooperate with the efforts of the international community in this regard. 114. In conclusion, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Bernard Kouchner, for his exceptional commitment and hard work in meeting the tasks entrusted to him by resolution 1244 (1999). His imagination and inspiring leadership were instrumental in steering this most challenging and unique mission during its most difficult period. I wish him well in his future endeavours. His successor, Mr. Hans Haakkemp, will assume his responsibilities in mid-January 2001. I also commend the international and local staff of UNMIK for their continued dedication to and support for United Nations activities in Kosovo. Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (as at 12 November 2000) Country Civilian police Special police unit Argentina Austria Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bulgaria Cameroon Canada Cte d'Ivoire Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France Gambia Germany Ghana Greece Hungary Iceland India Italy Jordan Kenya Kyrgyzstan Lithuania Malawi Malaysia Nepal Niger Nigeria Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation Senegal Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States of America Zambia Zimbabwe Total Composition and strength of the military element of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (as at 1 December 2000) Number of military liaison officers Bolivia Chile Ireland 3a New Zealand 2b a Including two non-commissioned officers. b Including the Chief Military Liaison Officer. Kosovo consolidated budget (Millions of deutsche marks) Expected versus actual revenue (as at 18 November 2000) Domestic revenue Estimated Actual Balance Taxes-Customs Excise Sales Hotel, food and beverage Presumptive Vehicle Total domestic 