%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|ARMED INCIDENTS|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|METOHIJA (SERBIA)|YUGOSLAVIA|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|

Letter dated 12 April 2000 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have been instructed by my Government to lodge a strong protest at the commission of yet another brutal crime in Kosovo and Metohija, the autonomous province of the Yugoslav constituent Republic of Serbia, by ethnic Albanian terrorists: in Gnjilane, on 9 April 2000, they shot and killed Dragoljub Stojanovic, 46, a Serb, in the presence of his wife. The crime took place at 10 a.m. on Mr. Stojanovic's doorstep in Ive Lole Ribara Street, in which only a few other houses are still occupied by Serbs, unknown ethnic Albanians having moved in into the rest of them by force. Mr. Stojanovic was a resident of Gnjilane, employed as dredgeman in the local quarry, and was the father of two children. There is no doubt that the aim of this heinous crime, the third in a row in the last two months, was to intimidate and drive the last remaining Serbs out of Gnjilane and of Kosovo and Metohija altogether. On behalf of the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, I call on the Security Council to institute a vigorous investigation of the crime so that its perpetrators can be apprehended, tried and punished. I also call on the Council to see to it that the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) begin to implement their obligations under Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 relative to ensuring a secure environment to all residents of Kosovo and Metohija, in particular to Serbs and other non-Albanians who are threatened by ethnic Albanian terrorism and, to that end, to finally demilitarize and disarm the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Vladislav Jovanovic Chargé d'affaires a.i. 