%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|NEGOTIATION|PEACEBUILDING|TAJIKISTAN|TAJIKISTAN SITUATION|

Letter dated 26 May 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to refer to my interim report on the situation in Tajikistan (S/2000/214) of 14 March 2000 in which I stated my intention, which members of the Security Council supported (S/PRST/2000/9), to inform the Council, at a later stage, on a role for the United Nations in the period of post-conflict peace-building and consolidation in Tajikistan. As members of the Security Council are aware, the peace process in Tajikistan has progressed considerably and has brought about restoration of normalcy to a large degree. However, the deep-seated roots of the civil conflict in Tajikistan have not yet been fully addressed. The potential for renewed upheaval remains, owing to domestic factors and in view of the unstable situation in the region, notably in Afghanistan. In view of those circumstances, Tajikistan requires continued support from the international community. I therefore propose that a United Nations Peace-building Support Office be established in Tajikistan for a limited time to pursue the objectives of post-conflict peace-building and consolidation of peace. The Government of Tajikistan has been consulted on this proposal and supports it. The Office would be entrusted with the following mandate: (a) To provide the political framework and leadership for post-conflict peace-building activities of the United Nations system in the country. This would include supporting the efforts of the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations system, including the Bretton Woods institutions, in promoting an integrated approach to the development and implementation of post-conflict peace-building programmes aimed at national reconstruction, economic recovery, poverty alleviation and good governance; (b) To mobilize, in close cooperation with the United Nations country team, international support for the implementation of targeted programmes aimed at strengthening the rule of law, demobilization, voluntary arms collection and employment creation for former irregular fighters; (c) To help in creating an enabling environment for consolidating peace, democracy and the rule of law; (d) To liaise with the Government, political parties and other representatives of civic society in broadening national consensus and reconciliation. In the light of the above, I recommend that the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Tajikistan be headed by a Representative of the Secretary-General at the D-2 level who will be assisted by a small team of internationally recruited professional and support staff. The Peace-building Support Office in Tajikistan would be established for an initial period of one year from 1 June 2000. I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan 