%%%DISPUTES|BOUNDARIES|NEGOTIATION|ERITREA|ETHIOPIA|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|

Letter dated 5 June 2000 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Ethiopia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit herewith a press release on the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict issued by the Organization of African Unity on 1 June 2000. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Fesseha A. Tessema Chargé d'affaires a.i. Press release on the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict issued on 1 June 2000 The First Organization of African Unity (OAU) Ministerial Meeting on the Establishment of the African Union and the Pan-African Parliament, meeting in Tripoli, on 1 June 2000, has taken note with appreciation the information conveyed to the meeting by the leader of the Great Al-Fatah Revolution, Brother Muammar Ghaddafi, on the communications he has received from the Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, H.E. Mr. Meles Zenawi, and the President of the State of Eritrea, H.E. Mr. Isaias Afewerki, concerning the current situation with respect to the conflict that has taken place between the two countries. The ministerial meeting welcomed the resumption of the proximity talks taking place in Algiers under the auspices of the current Chairman of the OAU aimed at the implementation of the OAU peace plan. The ministerial meeting expressed its relief at the ending of the war between the two sister States. It commends the efforts of the current Chairman of the Organization and the Secretary-General aimed at ending the conflict between the two countries on the basis of the decisions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government. It further commends efforts made by other African leaders in support of the efforts of OAU. The ministerial meeting expressed its confident hope that with the cooperation and support of both countries, a definitive end to the unfortunate conflict will be realized, and it pledged its full support to the realization of that goal as well as to all the other efforts aimed at providing humanitarian assistance to all victims of this conflict. 