%%%SLOVENIA|STATE REPRESENTATION|MONTENEGRO|SOVEREIGNTY|YUGOSLAVIA|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|

Letter dated 24 June 2000 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have been instructed by my Government to lodge the strongest protest over your decision to allow the circulation of a non-paper of a self-styled representative of a federal unit of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a Member State of the United Nations, through the offices of the Republic of Slovenia, another Member State of the United Nations, as a document of the Security Council. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is represented at the United Nations only by its Permanent Mission, so that it is absolutely unacceptable and contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and international law to allow any part of a sovereign country to communicate with the Security Council and have documents circulated, as that right is reserved exclusively for independent sovereign States. Making it possible for the Republic of Slovenia to circulate in the annex to its letter of 21 June 2000 (S/2000/611) the non-paper of the self-styled representative of Montenegro constitutes a most drastic violation of the principle of the Charter of the United Nations and the rules of procedure of the Security Council. In that way, the Republic of Slovenia has interfered directly in the internal affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which is a dangerous provocation for peace and security in the region and beyond. There is no reason, and it is entirely unacceptable, for the Republic of Slovenia to figure as a "representative" of Montenegro which is an equal federal unit of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This act is also directed against the people of Montenegro which, at a referendum, opted for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a common State with the Republic of Serbia. Slovenia is not the mother country of the Montenegrin people to have a justified interest in the internal question of Serbia and Montenegro. It is a question of interest, as well as of great concern, as to who has authorized the self-styled representative of Montenegro to violate the Constitution of Montenegro by raising the issue through the offices of a foreign State. Montenegro has sufficient mechanisms to protect its interests at Republic and Federal levels. In accordance with the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and international law, diplomatic and consular missions of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia represent it in other countries and in the United Nations and other international organizations. It is evident that the Republic of Slovenia has been most blatantly instrumentalized for the destabilization of Montenegro and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It serves the war-mongering goals of the United States of America and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), contrary to the interest of the Montenegrin people, as well as all the peoples of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. What is involved is an altogether transparent and recognizable scenario which was also implemented to break up the previous Yugoslavia. Bearing that in mind, the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia calls upon the Security Council to prevent its own abuse for interference in the internal affairs of the Member States of the United Nations, contrary to the basic provisions of its Charter. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Vlasdislav Jovanovic Chargé d'Affaires a.i. 