%%%TROOP WITHDRAWAL|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|UGANDA|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|

Letter dated 4 July 2000 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Acting on instructions from my Government, I have the honour to remind you of the relevance of Order No. 116 dated 1 July 2000 made by the International Court of Justice on the request for the indication of provisional measures in the case concerning Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Uganda). My Government notes that the Court has done well in basing itself on the devastating consequences of the aggression and on the explosive nature of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to demand that the provisional measures which it indicated in its Order be observed immediately. The Court enjoined Uganda, inter alia, to: 1. Refrain from action which might prejudice the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the whole of its property and natural resources and its rights, respect for the rules of international humanitarian law and the instruments concerning the protection of human rights. 2. Take, forthwith, all measures necessary to comply with the Charter of the United Nations, the Charter of the Organization of African Unity and with Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), which demands that Ugandan troops and all other forces immediately and completely withdraw from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter). My Government, fully recognizing the relevant and timely nature of this Order, wishes to pay a well-deserved tribute to the Court for its work and to point out to the Council, in particular, that it is responsible as the United Nations organ charged with the maintenance of international peace and security: 1. For seeing to it that the decisions of the International Court of Justice are respected and facilitating the prompt enforcement thereof, particularly in the present case where the order is one indicating provisional measures. 2. For making sure that delays in enforcing decisions of the Court stemming from the case of the aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo of which it remains seized do not create an unfortunate precedent which might bring the Court, the highest judicial body of the United Nations system, into disrepute. 3. For reaffirming its resolution 1304 (2000) and expediting implementation thereof in order to comply with Order No. 116 of the International Court of Justice, which calls for the immediate withdrawal of Uganda from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo pending a decision by the Court, which remains seized of the matter, on the merits. My Government requests that you have this letter circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) André M. Kapanga Ambassador Permanent Representative 