%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|ABKHAZIA (GEORGIA)|GEORGIA|MILITARY PERSONNEL|RUSSIAN FEDERATION|GEORGIA SITUATION|

Letter dated 25 July 2000 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit the text of a communiqué issued on 25 July 2000 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation concerning the unfriendly remarks about the Russian Federation made by the Georgian Deputy Minister of State, Mr. T. Isakadze, in his statement at a meeting of one of the working bodies of the Economic and Social Council (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) G. Gatilov Chargé d'affaires a.i. Communiqué issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation At a recent meeting in New York of one of the working bodies of the Economic and Social Council, the head of the Georgian delegation, the Deputy Minister of State, Mr. T. Isakadze, made unfriendly remarks about the Russian Federation to the effect that the Russian Federation was involved in the outbreak of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict and that the Russian peacekeepers deployed in the zone separating the sides, in words of the Georgian representative, are not carrying out their mission in an effective manner. The statement by Mr. Isakadze, who holds a high government post in Georgia, was received with bewilderment in Moscow. Over the past few years, the Russian leaders have been making vigorous and consistent efforts to help Tbilisi and Sukhumi reach an agreement with one another and to find a mutually acceptable formula for reconciliation. In this connection, we cannot help recalling that, pursuant to a decision by the Council of Heads of State of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Russian Federation, and no one else, sent peacekeepers to the conflict zone. At times these peacekeepers lay down their lives in order to prevent new outbreaks of violence between the sides. The fact that the conflict between Tbilisi and Sukhumi has not yet been settled is evidence that the sides themselves have by no means done everything to restore lost confidence and convince each other of the desirability and possibility of living in one common home. Moscow flatly rejects the accusations made by the high-ranking Georgian representative as groundless and detrimental to Russian-Georgian relations. 