%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|ARMED INCIDENTS|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|YUGOSLAVIA|

Letter dated 14 August 2000 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have been instructed by my Government to lodge the strongest protest on its behalf and to request an urgent meeting of the Security Council at the armed attack on and the usurpation of the RMHK Trepča Shareholding Corporation by the Kosovo Force (KFOR). In the night between 13 and 14 August 2000, massive KFOR forces carried out an unprovoked brutal attack on Trepča near Kosovska Mitrovica and occupied it. In doing so, they violated the KFOR mandate and Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 in the most flagrant way so far. KFOR used armed force against peaceful employees and the management of Trepča and the official state representatives, as well as the peaceful Serbian population in that part of the Province. Even though the basic task of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR under Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) is to guarantee physical and property security of residents and to provide a secure environment in the Province, by this attack they have openly aligned themselves before the eyes of the entire world with ethnic Albanian separatists and terrorists. The attack on and the occupation of Trepča by KFOR constitutes the most drastic violation of its mandate and the provisions of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) so far. This is a unique case of forces acting under a mandate of the United Nations being massively engaged against a peaceful population for the protection of which they have been dispatched by the Security Council and accepted by the Government of my country. The goals of the demonstration of the armed force of KFOR are very clear indeed: the intimidation and expulsion of the Serbian population, continuation of the ethnic cleansing of Serbs and other non-Albanians and an illegal usurpation of Trepča and of national, economic and natural resources. ** Second reissue for technical reasons. The alleged concern of Bernard Kouchner for the protection of the environment is yet another cynical and transparent attempt to hoodwink world public opinion and the Security Council, which confirms that the KFOR action is completely unfounded and represents the most flagrant and brazen violation of the decisions of the Security Council and the norms of international law in general. Behind the deception are those who are responsible for the aggression on my country last year, for the loss of thousands of human lives, for the humanitarian, economic and environmental catastrophe, as well as for the escalation of terrorism and separatism in South-East Europe and in other parts of the world. They are those who sowed over 30,000 bombs with depleted uranium all over Kosovo and Metohija during the three-month aerial bombardment, the consequences of which are unforeseeable. The action of KFOR and UNMIK is without precedent and constitutes an attempt to abuse and manipulate the Security Council. This is a blow to the inviolability of property rights and an attempt to occupy natural and economic assets of a sovereign country illegally and by force. Bearing in mind the gravity of the situation and the consequences that may arise from such acts, the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia demands energetically that the Security Council condemn the takeover of Trepča and bring a decision to return the situation to the status quo ante, so as to enable Trepča and its employees to continue normal work. The Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia wishes to point out that it will not recognize the consequences of this violent act, nor the situations that have arisen on the basis of the acts of KFOR and UNMIK. Alongside the armed action against Trepča, KFOR has carried out vandal raids against the only remaining organs in the Serbian language in Kosovo and Metohija, Radio S at Zvečan and the newspaper Jedinstvo in Priština. Their offices and equipment have been smashed and destroyed, while brute force has been used against journalists and other personnel. The vandal suppression of the Serbian-language media with the use of armed military force constitutes an unprecedented act and is part of the extended collaboration of KFOR and UNMIK with ethnic Albanian separatists and terrorists for the realization of the concept of ethnic cleansing. The aforementioned is a clear confirmation that the overall activity of UNMIK and KFOR serves goals that are in full contrast to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and that they are conducive to the further exacerbation of the situation with the unforeseeable consequences. The Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia expects therefore that the Security Council will take, without further delay, concrete and energetic measures to finally put under control the activities of its representatives and to end their policy of fait accompli, which threatens peace and stability in the region. It is only in this way that it will be possible to stop a further erosion of the authority of the United Nations and pave the way to a peaceful political solution, as provided for by Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Vladislav Jovanović Chargé d'affaires a.i. 