%%%ANGOLA SITUATION|SANCTIONS|PORTUGAL|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|

Letter dated 4 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government and further to the information provided previously to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola, I have the honour to inform you, in accordance with part A, paragraph 4, of Security Council resolution 1295 (2000) of 18 April 2000 and bearing in mind the deadline referred to in part A, paragraph 3, of the same resolution, of the following: As a member of the European Union (EU), Portugal is bound by EU regulation 1705 of 28 July 1998, which incorporates into community law the Security Council resolutions imposing sanctions on the União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA), including those on trade/provision of services and freezing of funds. Armament trade -- arms and/or military equipment. Export from and transit through the national territory require previous authorization by the Ministry of Defence, upon consultation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Violation of this procedure is subject to a fine in an amount to be determined bearing in mind the nature of the materiel involved. The export authorization is conditioned to the submission of a document confirming the final destination, certified by the authorities in the country of import. There is no record concerning any export of arms to UNITA. Trade and provision of services. Besides the mandatory norms contained in the above-mentioned regulation, mention should also be made of the following: Aircraft (prohibition of flights, supply of spare parts, insurance and maintenance services). The competent national bodies were officially notified of the provisions of the relevant resolutions. No violations of these provisions have been detected. Diamonds. There is no diamond market or industry on Portuguese territory. Petroleum or petroleum products. This matter is not relevant, since Portugal is not a neighbouring country. Freezing of funds -- funds and financial measures. Following appropriate notification to the competent national bodies (Ministry of Finance, Bank of Portugal and Institute of Insurance), assets and bank accounts were officially frozen. In the insurance area, there is no record concerning any violation of the established procedure. Circulation restrictions/political intervention of representatives/leaders of UNITA. The office of UNITA in Lisbon was closed in November 1997 and its members prevented from making political propaganda. Finally, I wish to inform you, in accordance with part G, paragraph 27, of resolution 1295 (2000), that the Portuguese Government established an inter-ministerial Working Group, involving the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Portugal, the Institute of Insurance and the Ministry of Economy, which is currently preparing a regime to sanction cases of violation of the regimes established by international law. Security Council resolution 1295 (2000) was published in the Portuguese official journal on 21 June 2000. I should be grateful if you would have text of the present letter circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) António Monteiro Ambassador Permanent Representative of Portugal to the United Nations 