%%%AERIAL BOMBINGS|AIRSPACE|IRAQ|AIRCRAFT|UNITED STATES|UNITED KINGDOM|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Identical letters dated 11 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 10 October 2000 from Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq. The Minister calls attention to the ongoing wanton aggression against Iraq by United States and British aircraft in the unlawful no-flight zones and to the fact that in the period from 1 to 8 October 2000 they carried out 268 sorties, 124 of them from Saudi Arabia, 78 from Kuwait and 66 from Turkey. The Minister urges intervention with the governments of the United States and the United Kingdom and with the countries participating in this aggression, namely Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey, with a view to inducing them to halt their aggression and to respect the norms of international law and the sovereignty of Iraq. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Saeed H. Hasan Ambassador Permanent Representative I should like to inform you that United States and British warplanes based in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey have continued to violate the airspace of the Republic of Iraq. They carried out 268 sorties in the period from 1 to 8 October 2000, 124 of them from Saudi Arabia, 78 from Kuwait and 66 from Turkey, as shown hereunder. 1. In the northern region 66 sorties were flown at speeds of 720 to 780 kilometres per hour and at altitudes of 6,000 to 12,000 metres, as follows: (a) At 1300 hours on 1 October 2000, United States and British F-15 and F-16 aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out six missions from Turkish territory, were supported by an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Dohuk, Amadiyah and Zakho areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1310 hours, drove them off. (b) At 1145 hours on 3 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 20 missions from Turkish territory, were supported by an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Dohuk, Amadiyah, Tall Afar, Ayn Zalah, Aqrah, Irbil and Rawanduz areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1445 hours, drove them off. (c) At 1000 hours on 6 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 20 missions from Turkish territory, were supported by an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Amadiyah, Aqrah, Zakho, Baibo, Irbil and Rawanduz areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1300 hours, drove them off. (d) At 1035 hours on 7 October 2000, United States and British F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 20 missions from Turkish territory, were supported by an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Amadiyah, Aqrah, Zakho, Dohuk, Dokan, Baibo, Irbil and Rawanduz areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1340 hours, drove them off. 2. In the southern region 202 sorties were flown at speeds of 720 to 780 kilometres per hour and at altitudes of 9,000 to 13,000 metres, as follows: (a) At 1030 hours on 1 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 44 missions, 26 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 18 from Kuwaiti territory with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Amarah, Artawi, Salman, Samawah, Nasiriyah, Jalibah, Nukhayb and Lasaf areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1400 hours, drove them off. (b) At 0950 hours on 2 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 40 missions, 26 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 14 from Kuwaiti territory with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Shinafiyah, Diwaniyah, Hayy, Afak, Samawah, Amarah, Ali al-Gharbi, Shaykh Sa`d, Ukhaydir, Artawi, Nasiriyah and Lasaf areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1210 hours, drove them off. (c) At 1055 hours on 4 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 24 missions, 20 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and four from Kuwaiti territory with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Samawah, Salman, Nasiriyah, Amarah, Qurnah, Jalibah, Shinafiyah, Qal`at Sukkar, Qal`at Salih, Najaf, Lasaf, Ashbajah and Ukhaydir areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1310 hours, drove them off. (d) At 1055 hours on 5 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 28 missions, 10 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 18 from Kuwaiti territory with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Samawah, Salman, Lasaf, Diwaniyah, Nasiriyah, Amarah, Jalibah, Rifa`i and Shinafiyah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1300 hours, drove them off. (e) At 0835 hours on 6 October 2000, United States and British F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out six missions, were supported by an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and overflew the Amghar and Ma`aniyah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1030 hours, drove them off. (f) At 0930 hours on 7 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 36 missions, 22 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 14 from Kuwaiti territory with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Jalibah, Salman, Ashbajah, Nasiriyah, Lasaf, Amarah, Qal`at Sukkar, Samawah, Shinafiyah, Ukhaydir, Diwaniyah, Nu`maniyah and Najaf areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1240 hours, drove them off. (g) At 0935 hours on 8 October 2000, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 24 missions, 14 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 10 from Kuwaiti territory with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Salman, Ashbajah, Nasiriyah, Lasaf, Qal`at Salih, Samawah, Shinafiyah, Nukhayb South, Mashkhab, Rumaythah, Shatrah, Rifa`i, Qurnah and Ma`aniyah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 0945 hours, drove them off. This aggression illustrates the bellicose attitude being maintained by the United States of America and the United Kingdom towards Iraq. Since 1992, it has become a fixed policy aimed at undermining the country's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and at the systematic and concerted destruction of Iraqi lives, infrastructure and civilian installations. It is a policy that has been affirmed in successive statements made by United States and British officials seeking to defend the measures being taken to enforce the no-flight zones. The Government of Iraq categorically rejects the two so-called no-flight zones, which were imposed by unilateral decision of the United States of America and the United Kingdom and lack any legal basis. Iraq rejects all the consequences of this illegal decision and, in particular, the flimsy excuses and pretexts used by these countries in an attempt to justify their military aggression against our country. The logistic support provided by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey to the Americans and the British makes these countries key partners in the aggression being committed against Iraq, so that they bear international responsibility for actions that are deleterious to the people of Iraq. The Government of Iraq, condemning these acts of aggression against civilian targets and Iraqi civilian installations, urges the Security Council to perform its assigned duties with respect to the maintenance of international peace and security by intervening with the governments of the countries in question with a view to inducing them to halt, end and desist from any resumption of their constant and unwarranted aggression against an independent, sovereign State. (Signed) Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq 