%%%RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS EP Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme Distr. GENERAL UNEP/GC.21/7/Add.1 8 December 2000 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Twenty-first session Nairobi, 5-9 February 2001 Item 9 of the provisional agenda GLOBAL MINISTERIAL ENVIRONMENT FORUM PROGRAMME, THE ENVIRONMENT FUND AND ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER BUDGETARY MATTERS ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER BUDGETARY MATTERS Report of the Executive Director Addendum DRAFT RESOURCE MOBILIZATION STRATEGY OF THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME Note by the Executive Director The annex to the present note contains the draft resource mobilization strategy of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), which has been prepared in consultation with Governments and other relevant parties, in pursuance of Governing Council decision 20/33, and is submitted for consideration by the Council. CONTENTS Page Background: 3 A. Mandate 3 B. Objective 3 Introduction 3 I. Funding of UNEP activities from traditional sources 4 A. Major responsibilities of Governments and UNEP 4 B. Recommended actions 5 II. Mobilization of additional resources from non-traditional sources 6 A. Responsibilities of UNEP in private- sector fund-raising 6 B. Recommended actions 6 III. Institutional arrangements 7 A. Mechanism for achieving objectives 7 B. Recommended actions 7 IV. Targets for the mid-term period 2002-2005 10 Annexppendix I. Guidelines on cooperation between the United Nations and the business community 11 A. The nine principles of the "Global Compact" 16 B. Explanatory background note on the use of the name and emblem 17 A. Mandate . The development of this resource mobilization strategy for UNEP was prompted by General Assembly resolution 50/227 of 24 May 1996, which stated that the governing bodies of all funds and programmes should take decisions on their own funding arrangements, and stressed the importance of keeping Member States informed about financing the programmes. . The other key components of the legislative authority for the development of the UNEP resource mobilization strategy are provided by Governing Council decisions 19/23 of 7 February 1997 on ensuring adequate and predictable funding for UNEP and 20/33 of 4 February 1999 on stable, adequate and predictable funding for UNEP, the Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of UNEP of 7 February 1997 and, finally, the Malmö Ministerial Declaration of 31 May 2000, in which the Council called for the financial base of UNEP to be broadened and funding made more predictable. B. Objective . The purpose of this strategy is to facilitate the mobilization of adequate resources for UNEP and thereby increase the Programme's capacity to implement its mandate. The objectives of the strategy are as follows: (a) To stabilize, increase and make more predictable the financing of UNEP activities from traditional sources; (b) To broaden the donor base within the governmental and non-governmental sectors; (c) To stimulate creative fund-raising, including through collaboration with the business community and the general public and the use of the Internet. . Chapter I describes the traditional means of mobilizing contributions in support of UNEP programme activities. Chapter II describes innovative approaches to resource mobilization with new potential donors. Chapter III clarifies the responsibilities and the issues of coordination of resource mobilization within UNEP. Chapter IV identifies the main targets in resource mobilization for the mid-term period 2002-2005. INTRODUCTION . Resource mobilization has become an increasingly important activity for UNEP, because the Programme's core income has stagnated in recent years. This has happened at a time when UNEP is expected to undertake a growing variety of activities. The following are some of the factors involved in mobilizing funds from various sources and ensuring a broader donor base and stable, adequate, predictable funding for UNEP: (a) Adequate delivery of the mandate of UNEP; (b) Building of donor confidence through efficient delivery of the UNEP programme, more efficient use of available funds, and global promotion of UNEP activities and its achievements; (c) Delivery of definite and identifiable outputs; (d) Making UNEP products, such as programme initiatives, international agreements, environmental reports, publications, campaigns, etc., more visible, competitive and attractive to the public around the world; (e) Strategic, continuous dialogue with major donors, granting recognition to donors for their contributions; (f) Direct involvement of the Executive Director, the Deputy Executive Director and other senior managers in discussing funding issues and negotiating programme and project support with ministers and senior government officials, as well as the chief executive officers of major private sector companies; (g) Better reporting and information on implementation of projects to Governments, especially donors; (h) Broader participation of Governments in the planning and financing of UNEP programme activities; (i) More active involvement of non-State actors, such as non-governmental organizations, foundations and the business community, in the planning, implementation and financing of UNEP initiatives; (j) Effective use of creative approaches and innovative resource mobilization techniques with non-traditional donors. . As UNEP is an intergovernmental organization, the bulk of its funding must comprise contributions from Governments. In most countries there are two sources of government funding. The first is usually secured by the fixed articles in the budgets of foreign affairs or environment ministries, and is related to a voluntary contribution to the UNEP Environment Fund. The second, which consists of earmarked contributions, is mostly paid from different budget lines in various ministries or national development agencies. There is no conflict or competition between these two different types of contributions in support of UNEP activities, and Governments and UNEP should work together to mobilize these resources. To implement its mandate more fully, however, and to broaden its activities, UNEP should actively develop another distinct base of support comprising non-State actors. There is an urgent need to strengthen UNEP resource mobilization activities with: non-governmental organizations; major groups, including private sector corporations, banks and small businesses; and non-profit organizations, foundations, service organizations and individuals who believe that UNEP is well placed to promote environmental protection and sustainable development at the global level. . Funding for UNEP should be further diversified, with a view to increasing the financial support from industrializing developing countries and countries with economies in transition, and include mutually beneficial business partnerships which facilitate the promotion of UNEP, raising environmental awareness and encouraging contributions. I. FUNDING OF UNEP ACTIVITIES FROM TRADITIONAL SOURCES . Governments will continue to be the most important players in the long-term process of ensuring adequate, stable and predictable financial resources for UNEP. The priority here is to secure increased contributions from Governments to the Environment Fund. This will ensure that UNEP has the capacity to implement its work programme. Additional earmarked contributions by donor Governments in support of priority areas of the work programme and selected complementary projects should also be encouraged. A. Major responsibilities of Governments and UNEP . As an intergovernmental body, UNEP implements programmes agreed upon by Governments. Governments are responsible for making decisions on realistic budget allocations to core, supplementary and special or emergency programme activitiess, and for ensuring adequate contributions to finance the implementation of approved programmes within approved budgets. Governments' decisions are based on recommendations prepared by the UNEP secretariat in consultation with the United Nations Office at Nairobi, all major partners and donors. . UNEP is responsible for the efficient implementation of the approved programme, the timely delivery of expected results, and accurate reporting to Governments on programme achievements and the use of resources provided. . Information on the use of resources for individually sponsored projects and on the results of such projects should be provided to donor countries directly by UNEP and the United Nations Office at Nairobi. Through efficient work, timely reporting, transparency and accountability in the management of human and financial resources, UNEP will further enhance donor confidence as well as donor interest in its work. B. Recommended actions . As measures designed to mobilize additional funds from traditional sources, it is recommended that UNEP should: (a) Organize strategic meetings and ensure continuous dialogue between UNEP and Governments on the financing of programme activities; (b) Encourage Governments to increase voluntary payments to the Environment Fund and to ensure adherence to pledges made. Governments which are not able to make advance pledges should communicate information on their contributions to the secretariat once their budgetary processes are complete, if possible no later than by April of each year; (c) Broaden the donor base within the governmental sector and stimulate contributions to the Environment Fund from Governments which have temporarily suspended their payments or which have never paid before; (d) Encourage groups of countries , such as the European Union, to commit themselves collectively, and ensure that their voluntary contributions will meet a certain percentage target set for the programme budget approved by the Governing Council; (e) Generate other types of donor Government support, such as long-term earmarked contributions and payments to trust funds. The strategy encourages the creation of trust funds with Governments and stimulates their counterpart (earmarked) contributions in support of priority and other selected UNEP project activities. Other types of support may include strategic contributions in kind for the organization of meetings, special events, funding of Junior Professional Officer posts, etc.; (f) Organize consultations with countries willing to consider additional earmarked contributions in support of selected UNEP projects aimed at complementing the biennial work programme; (g) Seek an increase in appropriations for UNEP from the United Nations regular budget; (h) Strategically plan and systematize financial and programme partnerships with regional and global funding mechanisms. Relevant mechanisms operated by intergovernmental structures include the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships, the United Nations Development Account and certain regional funds; (i) Consider the use of appropriate innovative approaches in mobilizing resources through collaboration with relevant governmental and non-governmental bodies, including through the polluter-pays principle and debt-for-nature swap mechanisms. II. MOBILIZATION OF ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FROM NON-TRADITIONAL SOURCES . One of the major goals of this resource mobilization strategy is to broaden the donor base of UNEP. Fund-raising from non-governmental sources is becoming more important, although it should be seen as supplementing government contributions and not as a substitute for them. . UNEP needs additional funding to implement its mandate more fully and to broaden its activities. To increase contributions from non-traditional sources, UNEP should actively develop new approaches towards and seek support from non-State actors, on the basis of some of the successful strategies undertaken by other international organizations, such as the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). This would mean strengthening UNEP resource mobilization activities involving non-governmental organizations, major groups, private sector corporations, banks, small businesses, non-profit organizations, foundations, service organizations and individuals in a position to assist UNEP to achieve its mandate. These activities will stimulate awareness of UNEP and the environment, and facilitate new contributions in support of the organization. A. Responsibilities of UNEP in private- sector fund-raising . In its private- sector fund-raising efforts, UNEP should follow the relevant decisions of the Governing Council and rules and regulations of the United Nations, including those pertaining to the use of the UNEP emblem and the guidelines for issued by the Secretary-General relating to cooperation between the United Nations and the business community, a copy of which may be found in annex I.the appendix below. . Fund-raising with the private sector is a very challenging task. UNEP has to be cautious in developing relations with private donors, and should ensure objective screening of potential sponsors. Before UNEP approaches a potential donor, the following question needs to be asked: Is it appropriate and ethical to develop an alliance with this corporate partner? UNEP should follow the United Nations guidelines in this respect and, as the guidelines provide, collaborate only with reputable business partners which embrace and put into effect a set of universal principles within their sphere of influence in the areas of environment, human rights and labour standards. . In accordance with the guidelines, UNEP should develop in-house capacities and clear lines of responsibility to devise, implement and evaluate cooperative arrangements with business. The Resource Mobilization Unit should coordinate all approaches to potential private sector donors, facilitate the making of contacts and provide the necessary information support. The guidelines should be used as a point of reference when choosing a business partner, and the division directors and regional directors will be responsible for the selection of potential business donor partners. The Deputy Executive Director will be responsible for the final approval of donation agreements which do not exceed $500,000 per annum. Sponsorship initiatives in excess of $500,000 per annum should be approved by the Executive Director. In accordance with rule 203.3 of the Financial Rules of the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme, all voluntary contributions from non-governmental sources in excess of $500,000 may be accepted only with the prior approval of the Governing Council or its subsidiary body. . The fierce competition for private funds means that UNEP must be creative and focus on developing innovative approaches beside its more traditional fund-raising techniques. The new project ideas, which are complementary to the main UNEP programme, have to be developed and packaged in a very competitive way, attracting potential sponsors without compromising the strategic interests of UNEP. . With a view to promoting fund-raising from the non-governmental and private sector, it is recommended that UNEP should: (a) Develop relations with non-governmental partners and potential donors at an early stage of preparing the work programme; (b) Develop programme initiatives and special events that have the potential to attract funds; (c) Employ innovative approaches in fund-raising from the general public; (d) Facilitate the social marketing of projects and products by using campaign logos and names; (e) Organize income-generating activities in collaboration with partners and within the rules and regulations of the United Nations; (f) Mobilize resources and generate support for UNEP special events; (g) Pursue fund-raising efforts on the Internet. III. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS A. Mechanism for achieving objectives . To achieve a higher level of funding stability, UNEP should consider mobilizing resources not only from external sources but also in-house, through better coordination, planning and implementation of programme activities and the fund-raising strategy itself. This includes such crucial elements as the governance of UNEP, transparency and efficiency in using the available financial and human resources, the quality of generated outputs and the ability to focus on identified priorities and emerging important issues. . UNEP needs to clarify its resource mobilization responsibilities and to improve in-house coordination. . With a view to enhancing its in-house resource mobilization, UNEP should: (a) Improve the coordination of its resource mobilization activities and establish a small task force on resource mobilization under the leadership of the Executive Director. The task force will be responsible for consideration of the most important issues and initiatives on resource mobilization and implementation of the fund-raising strategy; (b) Delegate fund-raising initiatives to a wider range of staff members, including division directors and regional directors; (c) Strengthen the Resource Mobilization Unit, by giving it adequate authority and financial and human resources. The Unit is responsible for coordinating resource mobilization activities for the whole of UNEP, working from the office of the Executive Director directly with donors and all divisions, the Communications and Public Information Branch, the regional offices, the Programme Coordination and Monitoring Unit, and the Budget and Financial Fund Management Service of the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and reporting to the Deputy Executive Director; (d) Streamline the development and submission of projects for consideration by potential donors; (e) Improve analytical work and develop a database of donor profiles; (f) Strengthen the organization's potential for innovative fund-raising with non-traditional donors; (g) Harmonize multi-level public awareness and resource mobilization activities, including by promoting the image of UNEP and stimulating global interest in and support for UNEP initiatives; (h) Strengthen the role of the regional offices. IV. TARGETS FOR THE MID-TERM PERIOD 2002-2005 . Over the coming mid-term period 2002-2005, UNEP should focus on achieving a target of a 5-10 per cent annual increase in financial resources for successful implementation of the work programme. . The achievement of strategic targets in resource mobilization will depend on two key factors: donor confidence and the fund-raising capacity of UNEP. . It is vital that UNEP should not only create donor confidence but also increase its own fund-raising capacity, focusing its coordinated resource mobilization activities on a few selected areas which will be most beneficial to it and which will result in increased financial support to the organization. . The capacity of UNEP to raise funds depends on the following factors: (a) Strategic planning and high-level coordination; (b) Efficient networking with donors and supporters of UNEP; (c) Delegation of full authority to the Resource Mobilization Unit for facilitating direct collaboration between donors and programme divisions; (d) Ability and willingness to employ new approaches, initiatives and fund-raising techniques to stimulate aggressive fund-raising. . If UNEP has the necessary capacity to deliver and builds the confidence of its donors, it should be able to achieve stable financial growth. GUIDELINES ON COOPERATION BETWEEN THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY* Issued by the Secretary-General of the United Nations 17 July 2000</div> _PRIVATE__ __ I. BACKGROUND 1. The business community has played an active role in the United Nations since its inception in 1945. A number of UN organizations have a successful history of co-operating with business. Recent political and economic changes have fostered and intensified the search for collaborative arrangements. 2. The efforts of the Secretary-General to renew and reform the United Nations provide the overall rationale for closer cooperation and partnership between the United Nations and non-state actors, including the business community_HYPERLINK \l "1"__[1]_. A broad policy framework for cooperation with the business community has been established, including through joint-statements_HYPERLINK \l "2"__[2]_. 3. The relationship with the business community has become more important as the role of business in generating employment and wealth through trade, investment and finance has grown and as UN member states have increasingly stressed the importance of private investment in development. 4. The business community is increasingly appreciative of the role of the United Nations: Promoting peace and security, providing norms and standards in such diverse areas as trade laws, shipping, aviation, telecommunication, postal services and statistics; addressing issues of vulnerability, poverty, environmental degradation and social conflict. All of this is seen as helping provide a stable and favourable framework for business and development. II. PURPOSE AND RATIONALE 5. Efforts to work with the business community must be seen in the proper institutional context. The United Nations is a global institution accountable to its member states. Non-state actors play an important role in the pursuit of UN goals. Drawing on the expertise and capacities of the business community is increasingly necessary to achieve these goals. 6. The purpose of these guidelines is to facilitate the formulation and implementation of co-operation between the United Nations and the business community in a manner that ensures the integrity and independence of the Organization. 7. These guidelines define "business" as for-profit enterprises. 8. These guidelines are intended to serve as a common framework for all organizations of the UN proper_HYPERLINK \l "3"__[3]_. It may also serve as a framework for the other Organizations of the UN system. 9. UN organizations are encouraged to develop more specific guidelines in accordance with their particular mandates and activities. 10. Cooperation with business can take many forms, such as advocacy, fund-raising, policy dialogue, humanitarian assistance and development cooperation. Guidelines for co-operation are particularly relevant in cases where new forms of partnership are being pursued that do not directly involve active government participation. 11. Cooperation is often situation-specific and must be considered on a case-by-case basis. It is essential that each UN organization develop in-house capacities and clear lines of responsibility to devise, implement and evaluate cooperative arrangements with business. III. CHOOSING A PARTNER 12. The Global Compact, launched by the Secretary-General in 1999_HYPERLINK \l "4"__[4]_, provides an overall value framework for co-operation with the business community. The principles of the compact _HYPERLINK \l "annex1"__(see Annex 1)_ are based on intergovernmental agreements and at the same time are relevant for business. UN organizations should use them as a point of reference when choosing a business partner. a) Business partners should demonstrate responsible citizenship by supporting UN causes and core values as reflected in the Charter and other relevant conventions and treaties. b) Within their sphere of influence, private enterprises should have demonstrated a commitment to meeting or exceeding the principles of the Compact by translating them into operational corporate practice. c) Business entities that are complicit in human rights abuses, tolerate forced or compulsory labour or the use of child labour_HYPERLINK \l "5"__[5]_, are involved in the sale or manufacture of anti-personnel mines or their components, or that otherwise do not meet relevant obligations or responsibilities by the United Nations, are not eligible for partnership. 13. UN organizations are encouraged to develop additional criteria appropriate to their specific mission and advocacy role. IV. GENERAL PRINCIPLES 14. Irrespective of the situation-specific nature of cooperative arrangements, they should be guided by the following general principles: a) Advance UN goals: The objective needs to be articulated clearly and must advance UN goals as laid out in the Charter. b) Clear delineation of responsibilities and roles: The arrangement must be based on a clear understanding of respective roles and expectations, with accountability and a clear division of responsibilities. c) Maintain integrity and independence: Arrangements should not diminish the UN's integrity, independence and impartiality. d) No unfair advantage: Every member of the business community should have the opportunity to propose cooperative arrangements, within the parameters of these guidelines. Cooperation should not imply endorsement or preference of a particular business entity or its products or services. e) Transparency: Cooperation with the business community sector must be transparent. Information on the nature and scope of cooperative arrangements should be available within the Organization and to the public at large. UN organizations should post relevant information on the UN/Business website www.un.org/partners/business. V. USE OF THE UN NAME AND EMBLEM 15. Pursuant to General Assembly Resolution 92 (I) of 7 December 1946, the use of the UN name and emblem is limited to official purposes. The Organization has consistently interpreted this resolution to apply also to the use of the name and emblem of the UN Funds and Programs whose names include the "United Nations" or its acronym (see _HYPERLINK \l "annex2"__Annex 2_ for illustrative examples). 16. Recognizing the evolving new relationship with the business community, the following sets out general principles on the use of the name and emblem of the UN and its Funds and Programmes ("Name and Emblem") by the business community in the context of partnership with the private sector. a) In principle, and subject to the appropriate terms and conditions, a business entity may be authorized to use the name and emblem on a non-exclusive basis. b) The use of the name and emblem must be expressly approved in advance in writing and upon such terms and conditions as may be specified. c) The use of the name and emblem by a business entity may be authorized, even if it involves the making of profit, so long as the principal purpose of such use is to show support for the purposes and activities of the UN, including the raising of funds for the Organization, and the generation of profit by the business entity is only incidental. d) The use of the name and emblem may be authorized for the following purposes: (i) To support the purposes, policies and activities of the organization; (ii) To assist in the raising of funds for the Organization; (iii) To assist in the raising of funds for entities that are not part of the Organization, but which are established to achieve the purposes and policies of the Organization. _HYPERLINK \l "6"__[6]_ e) When authorized, the use of the name and/or emblem shall be in accordance with the written specifications provided by the organization concerned. f) With appropriate written approval, and subject to appropriate conditions on the time, manner and scope of such use, the use of a modified UN emblem may be exclusively authorized to a limited number of business entities in connection with the promotion of a special event or initiative, including fund-raising for such event or initiative._HYPERLINK \l "7"__[7]_ 17. Currently, OLA grants authorization for the use of the name and emblem of the United Nations. VI. MODALITIES 18. Modalities for entering into partnerships with the business community, which are distinct from procurement activities, require flexibility in order to reflect the particular purposes and objectives of the partnerships. a) Direct contribution by the business partner: The modality for direct contribution for specific purposes would be made under a trust fund or special account agreement with the partner. The agreement would be subject to the applicable Financial Regulations and Rules, i.e., the purposes of the contribution would have to be consistent with the policies, aims and activities of the UN and that generally, the contribution would not entail any financial liabilities to the UN. b) Indirect contribution by the business partner through the establishment of a charitable organization or foundation: Under this modality, a relationship agreement would be established between the UN and the charitable organization or foundation, laying out the terms of the relationship, including the issues related to the use of the name and emblem, liability, settlement of disputes and the privileges and immunities of the UN._HYPERLINK \l "8"__[8]_ c) Partnership in technical assistance projects: This modality would involve either two direct bilateral agreements with the business partner and with the government of the country in which the assistance would be carried out, or a tripartite agreement among the business partner, the UN and the government. d) Partnership in promoting the purposes and activities of the UN: This modality, whereby the business partner provides a forum to disseminate information about the UN, would involve direct agreements with the business partner, setting out the terms and conditions of the arrangement, including the UN's control of the information to be disseminated, the issues related to the use of the name and emblem, liability, settlement of disputes and the privileges and immunities of the UN. e) Partnership in cooperative projects: This modality, whereby the UN and a business partner jointly develop a product or service, consistent with and in furtherance of the aims, policies and activities of the UN, would involve agreements with the business partner, setting out the terms and conditions of the arrangement, including the contributions each party could make to the development of the product service, the use of the name and emblem, liability, settlement of disputes and the privileges and immunities of the UN. VII. INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES 19. Cooperative arrangements with the business community have often evolved on an ad hoc basis. UN organizations should further develop the policy frameworks and institutional capacities needed to manage successfully such arrangements. a) Building institutional competencies: UN organizations that engage business in their work should develop the necessary competencies to properly assess and guide the relationship. Within each organization, a focal point should be nominated to ensure transparency, learning and a better understanding of the role and objectives of business and to ascertain whether they are compatible with the goals of the UN. b) Responsibilities of focal points: Focal points will be responsible for developing guidance on contacts with the business community based on rules, regulations and administrative issuances of the UN to ensure transparency in the establishment and maintenance of contacts with the business community. The focal points should post relevant information on the _HYPERLINK "/partners/business"__UN/business website_ c) Exchange experience: Focal points should exchange learning experiences on a regular basis and aim at building shared data banks and problem-solving methodologies and guides. VIII. FUTURE REVIEWS 20. Cooperation with the business community is influenced by changes in the political and economic environment. To remain valid, these guidelines should be critically reviewed regularly and updated in due course. Annex 1 - A The Global Compact's Nine Principles At the World Economic Forum in Davos on 31 January 1999, UN Secretary-General Kofi A. Annan challenged world business leaders to "embrace and enact" a set of universal principles within their sphere of influence in the areas of human rights, labour standards and the environment. Human Rights Principle 1 Support and respect the protection of internationally proclaimed human rights. Principle 2 Business should make sure not to be complicit in human rights abuses. Labour Standards Principle 3 Business should uphold the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining; Principle 4 the elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labour; Principle 5 the effective abolition of child labour; and Principle 6 eliminate discrimination in respect of employment and occupation. Environment Principle 7 Support a precautionary approach to environmental challenges; Principle 8 undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental responsibility; and Principle 9 encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally friendly technologies. Explanatory Background Note on the Use of the Name and Emblem Section V on the name and emblem 1. The general principles set out in section V of the Draft Guidelines on Co-operation between the United Nations and the Business Community ("Guidelines) are based upon the submissions made to the Working Group on Partnership with the Private Sector ("Working Group") by the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) and other UN Offices, including the separate Funds and Programmes, represented in the Working Group, and the discussions in the Working Group on this issue. As indicated in the Legal Counsel's memorandum of 4 December 1997 to the Secretary-General with an accompanying Note to the File (copy attached), the starting point for the policy and practice of the Organization on the use of the UN name and emblem is General Assembly resolution 92(I) of 7 December 1946. While we also draw upon the practice of the Organization over the years, we have focused particular attention in this exercise on recent policy and practice in the area and that the interests and concerns expressed by the Offices participating in the Working Group. 2. The following should be noted with respect to the guiding principles in section V: The guiding principles address only the use of the name and emblem by business entities. The use by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and private not-for-profit entities is, therefore, not addressed although it would appear that similar principles would be applicable to such organizations and entities. With respect to general principle (a) in section V (see para. 16 of the Guidelines), it should be noted that it has been a long-standing policy of the Secretary-General not to authorize the use of the UN emblem by non-UN entities in an unmodified form. Moreover, as far as we are aware, no business entities have ever been authorized to use the UN emblem with the words "United Nations" or "UN" set above the emblem and the words "We Believe" or "Our Hope for Mankind" set below the emblem. Presently, the OLA grants authorization of the use of the name and emblem of the United Nations. The issue as to which Office/Department will be vested with the authority to grant the use of the name and emblem in the future will be reviewed id due course. The principle of non-exclusive use refers to the activities of a business entity on its own behalf and not in situations in which the entity is engaged by the Organization to act on its behalf, e.g., a UN Gift Shop contract (see general principle (a)). Moreover, the principle of non-exclusive use would not bias an office from authorizing only one entity the use of the emblem in all cases, for example, if there was only one company that requests such authorization or in connection with a pilot programme. "Commercial use" of the name and emblem should be distinguished from "use by a commercial entity"(see general principle (c)). The former "implies use in connection with or for furtherance of a profit-making enterprise." The latter would allow the use of the name and emblem by a commercial entity even involving the making of some profit, as long as the principal purpose of such use is to show support for the purposes and activities of the UN, including the raising of funds for the Organization, and the generation of profit by the commercial entity is only incidental. The modified UN emblem in general principle (f) refers to emblems developed for special events and does not refer to the UN emblem modified by placing the words "United Nations" on the top and "We support" or "We believe" on the bottom, which is generally reserved for NGOs. As it is drafted, the "exclusively" referred to in general principle (f) is intended to include more than one business entity. In the case of the UN 50th Anniversary, for example, several (but a limited number of) business entities were authorized to use the UN 50th emblem in connection with the fundraising for the 50th Anniversary. It should be recognized, however, that there may be situations in which only one business entity may, in fact, be authorized to use a modified UN emblem, for example, when only one business entity expresses an interest in using the emblem in relation to some initiative, or because the substantive UN office wishes to limit authorization to only a few or, possibly, one business entity in a pilot programme. Section VI on modalities 3. Modality (b) in section VI would appear to be the preferred method in Member States including the United States in which donors do not enjoy tax deduction in respect of their direct contributions to the United Nations. 4. An example of modality (b) is the relationship agreement between the UN and the United Nations Foundation, Inc. dated 12 June 1998. That agreement contains the following provisions: "Purpose" (Article I); "Trust fund" (Article II); "Identification of projects and activities to be funded" (Article III); "Contributions by the Foundation" (Article IV); "Monitoring and implementation: reporting requirements" (Article V); "Fundraising" (Article VI); "Use of name and official emblem of the United Nations" (Article VII); "Status of parties" (Article VIII); "Review of arrangements"( Article IX); "Resolution of disputes" (Article X); "Privileges and immunities" (Article XI); "Terms of agreement" (Article XII) and "Notices" (Article XIII). 5. Other examples of modality (b) are: the United Nations Foundation, Inc., through which Ted Turner made his contribution; the Net Aid Foundation UK Ltd. through which Cisco Systems Inc. has made its contribution to UNDP; the Foundation for the UN 50th Anniversary through which, inter alia, Goldstar (South Korea) and Swatch (Switzerland) channeled their contributions to the UN. 6. An example of modality (c) is the BOT project (Build, Operate & Transfer) whereby the private sector provides funds and experts for the project, the UN serves as a matchmaker between the government and the business partner and facilitates project implementation, and the government provides necessary assistance and is the ultimate beneficiary of the project. 7. An example of modality (d) is the agreement between the UN and Walt Disney World Co. of 6 August 1999, concerning the UN's participation in the Walt Disney World Millennium Celebration ("the Agreement"). The Agreement consists of the following provisions: "Term of the agreement" (Article 1); "Display of the UN CD" (Article 2); "UN's participation" (Article 3); "UN input/costs" (Article 4); "Operation of the attraction" (Article 5); "Officials not to benefit" (Article 6); "Training of staff" (Article 7); "International communicators" (Article 8); "Insurance and liabilities to third parties" (Article 9); "Copyright, patents and other proprietary rights" (Article 10); "Use of name, emblem or official seal of the United Nations" (Article 11); "Use of names or emblems of Worldco" (Article 12); "Admission to the resort" (Article 13); "Settlement of disputes" (Article 14); "Privileges and immunities" (Article 15); "Notice" (Article 16); "Authority to modify" (Article 17); "UN merchandise" (Article 18) and "Miscellaneous" (Article 19, including a provision on "Indemnification" (Article 19.6)). 8. An example of modality (e) is the "UN/Standard Product and Services Code" ("UN/SPSC"), a universal classification system for goods and services, which was developed jointly by UNDP/IAPSO and Dun & Bradstreet or the NetAid Project, which is designed to bring together the power of the Internet, the global reach of television and radio and the energy and impact of world-renowned artists in the fight against world poverty, established by UNDP, CISCO Systems, Inc., Net Aid Inc., Net Aid Foundation UK Ltd. and Net Aid UK Ltd.] [1] See Action 17 of the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly on UN reform (document A/51/950) Renewing the United Nations: A Programme for Reform. [2] Joint statements between the Secretary-General and business representatives of the International Chamber of Commerce as well as major speeches by the Secretary-General and heads of UN organizations are posted on the UN/Business website: www.un.org/partners/business. [3] UN Secretariat and UN Funds and Programmes, including UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP, UNEP, UNCTAD and Regional Commissions. [4] See _HYPERLINK "http://www.unglobalcompact.com/"__www.unglobalcompact.org_ [5] As defined by ILO Convention 182: Convention Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. [6] For example, these entities include the United Nations Associations, National Committees for UNICEF and for UNDP. [7] For example, the 50th Anniversary of the UN, the International Year of Older Persons, etc. [8] The relationship agreement between the UN and the United Nations Foundation, Inc. dated 12 June 1998 consists of the following provisions: "Purpose" (Article I); "Trust fund" (Article II); "Identification of projects and activities to be funded" (Article III); "Contributions by the Foundation" (Article IV); "Monitoring and implementation: reporting requirements" (Article V); "Fundraising" (Article VI); "Use of name and official emblem of the United Nations" (Article VII); "Status of parties" (Article VIII); "Review of arrangements"( Article IX); "Resolution of disputes" (Article X); "Privileges and immunities" (Article XI); "Terms of agreement" (Article XII) and "Notices" (Article XIII). Environment policy, record. Companies with well defined environmental policies and clean environmental records for the last five years, demonstrating efficient use of natural resources and a positive approach towards renewable sources of power and energy. Companies should promote an environment-oriented business philosophy and management system, encourage development and diffusion of environmental technologies, and be committed to the introduction of ISO14000 including regular environmental assessments and reports. Companies that act within their sphere of influence by incorporating environmental principles in their mission statements and management practices. Commitment/support to sustainable development and quality of products/services. Companies with a record of support to sustainable development, environmental projects and activities, conservation and rational use of natural resources. Examples of such activities may include support to UN, UNEP, UN Specialized Agencies, IUCN, WWF, other credible environment and development oriented NGOs, support to community development and implementation of Agenda 21 principles etc. Companies which provide high quality products and services that facilitate sustainable development and are of long term benefit to the human environment. Public image compatible with UNEP. Companies with a positive public image compatible with UNEP's programme values and good reputation. Openness about company activities including financial transparency. Full compliance with government regulations and controls e.g. taxes, employment. Good public image and media profile of leadership, i.e. a C.E.O., Regional Representative etc. Social responsibility and community involvement. Companies which embrace social responsibility and demonstrate a history of community involvement. Activities by employees may include community education, outreach and awareness raising, donations, organization of special events, campaigns etc. Leadership and influence. Companies that are leaders in terms of their market position, brand recognition, financial stability and profitability, development of new approaches beneficial to consumers and communities. Also, companies with global/regional/national networks which can be used to facilitate UNEP's outreach to the general public, civil society, private sector. Exclusion of those businesses not compatible with UNEP For example, companies found guilty of destruction, heavy pollution or degradation of the environment, manufacturers of armaments, tobacco, and alcohol. UNEP donor partners cannot be companies involved in trade with internationally identified oppressive regimes, pornography, gambling, or those found guilty of unethical business practices, fraud, criminal activities, and corruption. -----[Annex only available as hard copy] 