%%%COMOROS|GEORGIA|REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA|BURUNDI|VOTING|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 122 Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal) I. Introduction 1. The previous recommendations made by the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly under agenda item 122 appear in the reports of the Committee contained in documents A/55/521 and Add.1-3. 2. The Fifth Committee resumed its consideration of the item at its 69th meeting, on 20 July 2001. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.5/55/SR.69). 3. For its further consideration of the item, the Committee had before it a letter dated 5 July 2001 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee, transmitting a letter dated 29 June 2001 from the Chairman of the Committee on Contributions to the President of the General Assembly enclosing sections of the report of the Committee on Contributions on the requests for exemption under Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations of Burundi, the Comoros, Georgia and the Republic of Moldova (A/C.5/55/44). II. Consideration of a draft decision proposed orally 4. At the 69th meeting, on 20 July, following a suspension of the meeting, the Deputy Secretary of the Committee read out the text of a draft decision entitled "Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations", which had been agreed to during informal consultations (see A/C.5/55/SR.69). 5. At the same meeting, on the proposal of the Chairman of the Committee, the Committee adopted the draft decision proposed orally, without a vote (see para. 6). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 6. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decision: The General Assembly: (a) Endorses the recommendations of the Committee on Contributions as transmitted in the letter dated 5 July 2001 from the President of the General Assembly to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee transmitting a letter dated 29 June 2001 from the Chairman of the Committee on Contributions regarding the recommendations of the Committee on Contributions, and decides that the failure of the Comoros, Georgia and the Republic of Moldova to pay the full minimum amount necessary to avoid the application of Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations was due to conditions beyond their control and that they should be permitted to vote in the General Assembly until 30 June 2002; (b) Also decides, welcoming the undertaking and assurances provided by the Permanent Representative of Burundi, to permit Burundi to vote in the General Assembly until 30 June 2002. 