%%%LIAISON OFFICES|BELGRADE (SERBIA)|ZAGREB (CROATIA)|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|MAPS|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|COSTS|STAFFING|TRUST FUNDS|BUDGET CONTRIBUTIONS|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|STATISTICAL DATA|

Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 148 Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina Budget for the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report contains the proposed budget for the 12-month period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 for the maintenance of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including the United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP) and the United Nations liaison offices at Belgrade and Zagreb, which amounts to $143,588,900 gross ($134,704,400 net). Of the total budget, some 78 per cent of resources relate to civilian personnel costs. Operational costs account for 15 per cent of the budget, military personnel costs reflect 1 per cent and staff assessment comprises 6 per cent of the total. Less than 1 per cent of the total resources are related to other programmes. The action to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in paragraph 3 of the report. Paragraphs Page Overview Political mandate of the Missions United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka Operational plan and requirements Zagreb administrative office of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina United Nations liaison office in Belgrade United Nations liaison office in Zagreb Contributions made under the status-of-mission agreement Voluntary contributions and trust funds Voluntary contributions Trust funds Status of reimbursement of troop-contributing Governments Contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment Staff requirements Changes in staffing requirements Current and proposed staffing Annexes I. Cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 A. Summary statement B. Distribution of gross requirements by major cost component C. Supplementary information II. Cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002: analysis A. Standard and mission-specific costs B. Distribution of resources by budgetary cost parameters: standard and mission-specific costs C. Non-recurrent requirements III. Support provided by the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina to United Nations and non-United Nations entities in the mission area in the Mission area IV. Implementation of previous recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions V. Implementation of previous recommendations of the Board of Auditors VI. Organizational charts A. Organizational structure of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina: substantive functions B. Organizational structure of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina: administrative functions C. Organizational structure of the International Police Task Force D. Location structure of the International Police Task Force VII. Map 1. The present report contains the proposed budget for the 12-month period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 for the maintenance of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including the United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP) and the United Nations liaison offices in Belgrade and Zagreb, which amounts to $143,588,900 gross ($134,704,400 net). 2. Estimated requirements for the period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 represent a 4.3 per cent decrease ($6,411,100) in total resources (gross) in relation to the apportionment for the period from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001. The proposed decrease reflects a 24.1 per cent decrease in military personnel costs, a 2.7 per cent decrease in civilian personnel costs, and a 14.9 per cent decrease in operational costs. This is partially offset by a 10.4 per cent increase in staff assessment and a 2.2 per cent increase in other programmes. Table 1 Financial resources (Thousands of United States dollars) Category of expenditure 1990/00 expenditures 2000/01 apportionment 2001/02 cost estimatesa Proposed increase/(decrease) over 2000/01 Amount Percentage Military personnel Civilian personnel Operational requirements Other programmesb Staff assessment Gross requirementsc Total a Information on the distribution of resources by standard and mission-specific costs is contained in annex II.B. b Excluding personnel. c Exclusive of provision for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi. Table 2 Human resources Military and civilian staff resources 1990/00a Increase/(decrease) over 2000/01 Military observers Military contingents Military liaison officers Civilian police International staff National officers Local staff United Nations volunteers a Represents highest level of authorized strength. 3. The action to be taken by the General Assembly is as follows: (a) To appropriate the amount of $143,588,900 gross ($134,704,400 net) for the maintenance of the Mission for the 12-month period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002; (b) To assess the amount set out in paragraph 3 (a) above at a monthly rate of $11,965,741 gross ($11,225,366 net), should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the Mission. II. Political mandate of the Missions A. United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Security Council resolution 1035 (1995) of 21 December 1995) 4. The mandate of UNMIBH is to assist the parties in their obligations to provide a safe and secure environment for all persons in their respective jurisdictions by maintaining civilian law enforcement agencies operating in accordance with internationally recognized standards and with respect for internationally recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms. The Mission consists of an International Police Task Force (IPTF) and a civilian office. 5. The current mandate expires on 21 June 2001 (Security Council resolution 1305 (2000) of 21 June 2000). B. United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (Security Council resolution 779 (1992) of 6 October 1992) 6. The mandate of UNMOP is to monitor the demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula. 7. The current mandate expires on 15 July 2001 (Security Council resolution 1335 (2001) of 12 January 2001). III. Operational plan and requirements 8. The operational requirements of the Mission were set out in the report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council dated 13 December 1995 (S/1995/1031) and his subsequent reports of 9 December 1996 (S/1996/1017), 14 March 1997 (S/1997/224), 10 December 1997 (S/1997/966), 12 March 1998 (S/1998/227 and Corr.1) and 16 December 1998 (S/1998/1174). 9. The authorized strength of UNMIBH, effective 1 July 2001, will be 1,850 police and 5 military liaison officers, who will be deployed at 7 regional offices and 44 police stations. In the recent report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council dated 30 November 2000 (S/2000/1137), it was stated that a force of 1,850 IPTF officers was a realistic figure for necessary IPTF strength for the 2001/2002 period. This recommendation took into account the progress made in the past 18 months in establishing the Brcko District police force and in providing basic training for the local police officers, as well as the fact that the average strength of IPTF had fallen from 1,959 during 1998/1999 to 1,709 for the 12-month period ending on 30 June 2000. Accordingly, the figure of 1,850 officers has been used in the budget estimates. A detailed breakdown of the IPTF location structure is presented in annex VI.D. 10. The civilian staff component of UNMIBH has an authorized strength of 1,809 personnel (382 international, 15 national and 1,412 local). It is proposed that the number of civilian staff be increased to 1,875. The breakdown of UNMIBH staffing requirements by grade level is shown in table 1 in section VIII.B below. 11. The mandate of the Judicial System Assessment Programme, established by the Security Council in resolution 1184 (1998) of 16 July 1998, was concluded in December 2000. The Office of the High Representative is creating an Independent Judicial Commission to take over many of the functions previously performed by the UNMIBH Judicial System Assessment Programme and will have a mandate to oversee the process of judicial reform throughout the country. The Mission, however, will retain appropriate expertise within IPTF to assist and advise the Commissioner on the implementation of the mandate with respect to judicial organizations and activities relating to criminal procedures and criminal justice. For this purpose, it is proposed that 22 of the 42 posts of the former Judicial System Assessment Programme be utilized in connection with the creation of a Criminal Justice Advisory Unit within the office of the IPTF Commissioner. The unit will also contribute to UNMIBH initiatives to encourage cooperation between the police, prosecutors and the courts; act as a liaison between IPTF and judicial officials and the courts; and work on specific projects with IPTF, such as insignia, inspection of judicial institutions, and micro-audits of processes, such as those on amnesty and detention, with respect to the judiciary. The proposed establishment is in accordance with annex II of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina (A/50/790-S/1995/999) which mandates IPTF to monitor, observe, inspect law enforcement activities and advise law enforcement agencies. 12. Additional operational factors taken into account in the preparation of budget estimates are reflected in sections B, C and D below. 13. The operational requirements for UNMOP were set out in the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1995 (S/1995/1028 and Add. 1). 14. UNMOP consists of 28 military observers who maintain a 24-hour presence at its team site on the Ostra peninsula, at Herceg Novi in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Montenegro) and at the headquarters at Cavtat and the team site at Gruda in Croatia. 15. The civilian component of UNMOP is shown in table 2 in section VIII.B below. UNMOP has an authorized strength of 8 personnel (3 international and 5 local) and it is proposed that the number of civilian posts be maintained at the current level. C. Zagreb administrative office of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina 16. Following the relocation of the administrative office to the same premises as those of the United Nations liaison office in Zagreb and the consolidation of some functions, the number of posts authorized for the current fiscal period was decreased from 25 to 6 (1 Field Service and 5 Local level). The Field Service post is being redeployed to the UNMIBH Movement Control Office and the 5 Local level posts have been included under the staffing of the Zagreb liaison office as shown in table 5 in section VIII.B of the report. The 5 local staff, however, will continue to provide outsourcing functions for UNMIBH in the area of movement control/air operations, IPTF rotations and travel. D. United Nations liaison office in Belgrade 17. In paragraph 24 of his report dated 6 February 1996 (S/1996/83), the Secretary-General informed the Security Council of his intention to retain liaison offices in Belgrade and Zagreb which would report to United Nations Headquarters. The cost of maintaining the Belgrade liaison office was incorporated into the UNMIBH budget effective 1 July 1998. 18. The United Nations liaison office in Belgrade has an authorized strength of 17 personnel (7 international and 10 local) respectively. It is proposed that the number of civilian posts be maintained at the current level. The related breakdown of staffing requirements by grade level is shown in table 4 in section VIII.B below. E. United Nations liaison office in Zagreb 19. The cost of maintaining the United Nations liaison office in Zagreb referred to in the report of the Secretary-General dated 6 February 1996 (S/1996/83), was incorporated into the UNMIBH budget as of 16 October 1998. 20. The liaison office currently has an authorized strength of 11 personnel (5 international and 6 local). As indicated in paragraph 16 above, the 5 Local level posts previously reflected under the Zagreb administrative office of UNMIBH, have been included under the staffing of the Zagreb liaison office for the period beginning 1 July 2001. The functional responsibilities of these posts, however, remain unchanged. IV. Contributions made under the status-of-mission agreement (United States dollars) Value Government Contribution 1 July 2000 to 31 July 2001 1 July 2001 to 31 July 2002 Bosnia and Herzegovina Regional office at Banja Luka Land for police station at Tito Drvar Nedzarici facilities (UN House) Land for containerized offices, transport and engineering workshops, maintenance facilities, storage and fuel depot in Sarajevo Sarajevo airport helipad Croatia Offices in Ilica, Zagreb (United Nations liaison office in Zagreb) V. Voluntary contributions and trust funds A. Voluntary contributions Government/organization 1 June 2000 to 30 June 2001 30 June 2002 Stabilization Force Waiver of landing fees at Sarajevo airport Trust fund for the restoration of essential public services in Sarajevo Opening balance as at 30 June 1999 1 July 1999 to 30 June 2000 Income Expenditure Closing balance as at 30 June 2000 Trust fund for the police assistance programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina VI. Status of reimbursement of troop-contributing Governments 21. The authorized strength of UNMIBH consists of military observers, military liaison officers and civilian police only. Hence, there are no reimbursements for troop costs. VII. Contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment 22. No contingent-owned equipment is provided to UNMIBH. A. Changes in staffing requirements Number of posts Current staffing Proposed staffing requirements Net change Under-Secretary-General Assistant Secretary-General D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2/P-1 Subtotal General Service (Principal level) General Service (Other level) Field Service Security Service Total, international staff United Nations Volunteers 23. Changes to the staffing table approved for the period ending 30 June 2001 for a net increase of 65 posts, include: (a) Termination of two P-4, eight P-3, one National Officer and nine local staff in the Judicial System Assessment Programme, owing to the expiration of the Programme's mandate in December 2000. The remaining 22 posts will be utilized in connection with the proposed creation of a Criminal Justice Advisory Unit; (b) Conversion of 85 security guards currently employed on special service agreements to local staff. 24. In addition, the following reclassifications or redeployments will be effected: (a) Exchange of one P-2 post from the Finance Section for one P-3 post in the Office of the Chief of Technical Services. The P-3 post would accommodate the Chief, Payments Unit function (currently supported at the P-2 level) and would align the post with that of the Chief, Accounts Unit, that is classified at the P-3 level; (b) Replacement of 13 General Service posts and nine Field Service posts by 22 Local level posts; (c) Replacement of three Field Service posts in the Communications and Information Technology section of UNMIBH with three National Officer positions to provide for one Development Supervisor, one Senior Programmer and one Network Manager in the same section; (d) Redeployment of one Field Service post from the Zagreb administrative office of the United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Movement and Control Section to accommodate the functions of an Air Operations Officer. This function is currently performed by the incumbent against a post-on-loan; (e) Redeployment of five Local level posts from the Zagreb administrative office of the United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations Liaison Office in Zagreb. 25. In paragraph 11 of its resolution 54/273 of 15 June 2000, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission. In response to that request, UNMIBH has identified 13 General Service posts for replacement by local posts in the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of the United Nations operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina (1), Civilian Police (1), Administrative Services (6) and Technical Services (5). 26. Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of the United Nations operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Following the expiration of the mandate of the Judicial System Assessment Programme in December 2000, 42 posts from that Programme were abolished. It is proposed that 22 of the 42 posts (1 P-5, 7 P-4, 7 National Officers and 7 Local level) be retained in connection with the establishment of the Criminal Justice Advisory Unit described in paragraph 11 above. The Criminal Justice Advisory Unit would fall under the office of the Police Commissioner (IPTF). 27. Civilian Police. The proposed 22 posts for the Criminal Justice Advisory Unit referred to in paragraphs 11 and 26 above consist of: the Head of Office (P-5), seven P-4 posts located in Sarajevo (2), Banja Luka, Bihac, Doboj, Mostar and Tuzla, seven National Officer posts and seven Local level posts. The Head of the Criminal Justice Advisory Unit would be responsible for overall planning and policy decisions, including reporting and liaison with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and other senior staff. Regional teams will be responsible for the provision of advice and assistance to IPTF. 28. Administrative Services. The majority of personnel hired as security guards on Special Service Agreements have been employed by the Mission for a period in excess of 12 months. Since they are performing functions of a continuing nature, it is proposed that these positions be regularized. A total of 85 Local level posts are proposed for this purpose. 29. The detailed breakdown by office is shown in section B below. 1. The proposed budget for the 2001/2002 fiscal period takes into account technical adjustments to the cost parameters based on past expenditure patterns. Emoluments for personnel with appointments of limited duration (300 series) have been calculated based on a new salary scale, effective 1 July 2000. It is estimated that 65 per cent of the staff in the Professional and Field Service categories will be employed as mission appointees. Additionally, common staff costs for international staff have been calculated at 40 per cent of net salaries, which is less than the standard cost. Moreover, international and national staff costs are inclusive of a 10 per cent vacancy rate factor and local staff costs are inclusive of a 7.5 per cent vacancy rate factor. 2. Provisions for travel of military observers and civilian police, vehicle spare parts as well as for some miscellaneous supplies are based on mission-specific parameters, which are lower than standard costs. 3. Finally, provision for non-recurrent items such as vehicles and major equipment is based on standard costs, unless otherwise indicated. Apportionment: $1,825,400; estimate: $1,385,400; variance: ($440,000) 4. The decrease of $440,000 under this heading relates to a decrease in the provision for death and disability compensation. 5. Resources under this heading relate to the provision of subsistence allowance, rotation travel, and clothing and equipment allowance for 28 military observers serving with the United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP) and five military liaison officers assigned to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Death and disability 6. Approximately $2.3 million is currently obligated in the UNMIBH accounts for death and disability compensation. A total of 80 incidents have been reported to date. It is anticipated that the provision of $2.3 million will not be fully utilized to settle any claims that may be submitted in respect of these incidents. In this connection, the rate of 0.5 per cent, as opposed to the standard rate of 1 per cent, of total personnel has been applied within the present budget. Apportionment: $114,695,100; estimate: $111,605,100; variance: ($3,090,000) 7. The decrease of $3,090,000 under this heading relates to civilian police ($2,161,700) and international and local staff costs ($928,300). 8. The decrease of $2,161,700 under this heading is attributable to the reduction in the budgeted strength from 1,954 civilian police to 1,850 civilian police and the change in travel costs. The strength has been reduced for the reasons stated in paragraph 9 of the main report. Additionally, the average one-way cost of air travel, including 50 kg of baggage, has been reduced from $1,150 to $1,000 based on mission experience. International and local staff 9. The cost estimates for international staff are based on New York standard costs for 175 staff. Emoluments of 188 international staff who are recruited under contracts of limited duration have been calculated on the bases of a new salary scale, effective 1 July 2000. It is estimated that 65 per cent of Professional and Field Service staff are classified as mission appointees. Because of the high number of mission appointees, common staff costs have been calculated at 40 per cent of adjusted net salaries, which amounts to less than standard costs. Finally, based on mission experience, all international staff costs take into account the application of a 10 per cent vacancy rate in respect of the proposed establishment of 363 international posts. 10. Local salaries for staff in Bosnia were calculated based on level 3, step I of the salary scales applicable to Sarajevo, local salaries for staff in Belgrade were calculated based on level 3, step I of the salary scales applicable in Belgrade and local salaries for staff in Zagreb were calculated based on level 3, step I of the salary scales applicable in Zagreb. Local staff salaries are inclusive of a 7.5 per cent vacancy factor, based on mission experience. Standard salary costs for national officers were calculated based on salary scales approved as of June 2000 and take into account a 10 per cent vacancy factor. 11. Local salary rates for Belgrade apply to the 10 Local level posts assigned to the United Nations liaison office in Belgrade. Local salary rates for Zagreb apply to the 11 Local level posts at the United Nations liaison office in Zagreb and to the 5 Local level posts in UNMOP. Apportionment: $24,962,500; estimate: $21,231,300; variance: ($3,731,200) 12. The estimate of $21,231,300 includes non-recurrent cost requirements in the amount of $5,479,600. 13. The decrease of $3,731,200 under this heading is attributable to a decrease of $3,966,200 in premises/accommodations ($576,600), infrastructure repairs ($60,000), transport operations ($545,200), communications ($1,417,500), other equipment ($192,300), supplies and services (1,099,600) and air and surface freight ($75,000), partially offset by an increase of $235,000 in air operations. Premises/accommodation 14. Overall reduced requirements under this heading are primarily attributable to the reduction of individual IPTF stations from 55 to 40. This was achieved through the continuation of joint efforts to co-locate IPTF officers with local police at stations throughout all regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The collocation programme began in August 1999 to enable closer scrutiny of police behaviour and practices and has expanded to its present level of over 700 police officers who are now collocated in 256 of 318 local police stations. Consequently, provision for costs relating to renovation of premises, maintenance services, supplies and utilities have been reduced. 15. The increase in non-recurrent provision for prefabricated buildings, as detailed in annex II.C, is however attributable to the acquisition of 15 rub hall covers to replace those beyond economical repair and the purchase and installation of 60 prefabricated containers to be located along 30 national border entry points. These will be used by IPTF civilian police assigned to assist National Border Service law enforcement officials. Infrastructure repairs 16. Non-recurrent provision is made for the upgrading of regional helicopter landing sites in Mostar, Banja Luka, Tuzla, Bihac and Brcko and the renovation of 10 car park facilities within the Mission. Transport operations 17. The overall decrease of $545,200 under this heading is mainly attributable to the lower number of vehicles proposed for purchase. Non-recurrent provision is included for the replacement of 60 vehicles, out of an establishment of 1,345 vehicles and the provision of two additional telescopic forklifts (light) to meet general-purpose maintenance demands. The replacement programme is based on a policy of age, mileage or condition. Requirements provide for the replacement of vehicles written off due to accident (33), wear and tear (25) and theft (2). The armoured vehicles to be replaced will be between 7 and 9 years old at the commencement of the next financial period. Further, current UNMIBH fleet consists of several mixed models inherited from other missions that require replacement, owing to conditions and problems in obtaining spares and maintenance parts. The detailed breakdown of vehicle requirements is shown in annex II.C. Non-recurrent provision is further made for the purchase and replacement of tools and workshop equipment for vehicle maintenance and the installation of 500 "Car log" security devices to deter the theft of United Nations-owned vehicles. 18. The cost estimates for spare parts, repairs and maintenance of vehicles have been calculated at $50 per vehicle per month for new vehicles up to one year old and at $150 per vehicle per month for vehicles older than one year. The deviation from the standard rates of $100 for vehicles up to one year old, and $350 for light vehicles older than one year, and $500 for heavy and specialist vehicles older than one year, is based on mission experience. 19. Provision for vehicle insurance is based on the current premium rates of $461 per vehicle for civilian pattern vehicles and $60 per vehicle for 35 engineering pattern vehicles. Air operations 20. Requirements under this heading provide for the continued rental of one medium fixed-wing transport aircraft and one medium utility helicopter to support the Mission in fulfilling the requirements of the mandate. Increased requirements relate primarily to liability and war-risk insurance, positioning/depositioning, painting and liability insurance as detailed in annex II.A. No provision was made for these items in the previous budget. Communications 21. Reduced requirements under this heading relate to the procurements of fewer items of communications equipment. Non-recurrent provision under communications relates primarily to the replacement of very high frequency (VHF) and ultra high frequency equipment, a large portion of which will be more than six years old at 30 June 2001, beyond economical repair or unavailable due to damage resulting from accidents (20 items), theft (25 items) and wear and tear (472 items). Provision is also included for the replacement of satellite modems to meet changing demands for greater bandwidth and replace the six that have been written off, owing to wear and tear. Provision is further included for the replacement of switching and miscellaneous communications equipment that were damaged (4 items), stolen (1 item) or reached the end of their useful life (30 items). Provision was also included for the replacement of test and workshop equipment that was written off, owing to wear and tear (2 items), but required to effectively maintain, fault-find and thoroughly test particular satellite equipment. 22. Cost estimates included communications spare parts and supplies and commercial communication charges in respect of satellite transponder rental, INMARSAT C and M terminals, and telephone, telex and mobile telephone charges. Estimated requirements were based on past expenditure patterns and are detailed in annex II.B. Other equipment 23. Non-recurrent provision under other equipment relates primarily to the replacement of office furniture and office equipment that have reached the end of their economically useful lives. Based on mission experience, 5 per cent of office furniture needs to be replaced, owing to wear and tear. 24. Provision is made for the replacement of desktop computers, monitors, laptops, printers, uninterruptible power supply units (UPS), file servers, and accessories. This is essential to ensure efficiency, functionality and system/data protection within the Mission. Replacement of the 730 printers is due to obsolescence and anticipated higher maintenance costs, as the line of printers is no longer produced by the manufacturer. Replacement of the other items is based on obsolescence of current equipment (513 items), wear and tear (296 items) and theft (12 items). 25. Provision is also made for medical equipment to be located in regional headquarters based in Bihac and Brcko and also in the headquarters medical clinic in Sarajevo. The equipment is considered essential for a field mission medical service. 26. Requirements for miscellaneous equipment relate to the replacement of air conditioners, heating units and fans received from closed missions and which are located at UNMIBH regional headquarters and IPTF stations missionwide. These have reached the end of their useful life. Provision is also included for the replacement of electrical tools and equipment for carpentry, plumbing and welding operation. Supplies and services 27. Overall requirements under this heading show an overall decrease of $1,099,600. This is largely attributable to the decrease in provision for security guards employed under contractual arrangements, as reflected in paragraph 28 of the main report. Air and surface freight 28. Reduced requirements of $75,000 are based on past expenditure history, as reflected in annex II, paragraph 16, of the performance report (A/55/683). Apportionment: $8,044,800; estimate: $8,884,500; variance: $839,700 29. The amount budgeted under this heading represents the difference between gross and net emoluments, that is, the amount of staff assessment to which United Nations staff members are subject, in accordance with the staff rules and regulations of the United Nations. Staff assessment costs take into account a 10 per cent vacancy rate in respect of the proposed 363 international posts and 17 national posts, and a 7.5 per cent vacancy rate in respect of the proposed 1,536 Local level posts. The increase in budgetary requirements is largely attributable to the net increase of 65 posts and the application of salary scales established for staff recruited under appointments of limited duration. Income from staff assessment Apportionment: ($8,044,800); estimate:($8,884,500); variance: $839,700 30. The staff assessment requirements provided for under category VII have been credited to this item as income from staff assessment and will be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund established by the General Assembly in its resolution 973 A (X) of 15 December 1955. Member States are given credit in the Fund in proportion to their rates of contribution to the UNMIBH budget. Annex III Support provided by the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina to United Nations and non-United Nations entities in the mission area Section providing support/tasks performed by UNMIBH Entities receiving supporta I. Support for United Nations entities Finance Payment of salaries and allowances Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNDCP, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mine Action Centre, International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, UNDP, WFP, UNICEF Transport Provision of transportation services and supplies including fuel, vehicle maintenance, repair and liberty mileage tracking/reporting Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNDCP, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mine Action Centre, International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, World Bank, United Nations Office of Project Services, UNDP, WFP, UNESCO, WHO Building Management Provision of building management services (on a cost share basis) including cleaning services and utilities International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNDCP, IOM and UNESCO Communications and information technology Provision of communications support including telephone charges Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (Geneva), UNDCP, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mine Action Centre, International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, United Nations Office of Project Services, UNDP, UNICEF General Services Provision of pouch services and miscellaneous supplies Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mine Action Programme, UNDP, UNICEF II. Support provided to non-United Nations entities Communications and Information Technology Provision of communications support including telephone charges and share of satellite transponder rental a The following abbreviations are used in the table: UNDCP -- United Nations International Drug Control Programme UNDP -- United Nations Development Programme WFP -- World Food Programme UNICEF -- United Nations Children's Fund UNESCO -- United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization WHO -- World Health Organization IOM -- International Organization for Migration Implementation of previous recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Request Response The Advisory Committee requested a review of standard rates for freight of vehicles (15 per cent) to determine whether performance data warrant a change in the standard rate (A/54/841/Add.6, para. 13). The Mission in consultation with the Field Administration and Logistics Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is reviewing the use of the existing standard rates for freight of vehicles against actual freight charges (as per invoice/shipment requirements). Any change deemed necessary will be reflected in the next budget submission. The Advisory Committee was not convinced of the need to continue to replace automatically all vehicles that have reached the replacement threshold of five years old or have been driven beyond 120,000 kilometres. In addition to the current replacement policy, the Committee believed that other reasons for replacement (e.g. extensively damaged owing to accidents or lost because of hostility or theft) should be indicated in a more transparent manner in future budgets (para. 23). The Committee also requested that the current replacement policy cycles for various inventory items should be reviewed and made more transparent. As in the case of vehicles, mentioned above, equipment items should not be replaced merely because they have reached the replacement cycle but because they are no longer usable or economical (para. 25). The Mission's replacement policy is based on age, mileage or condition. In accordance with the Field Administration Manual, the current criteria used for light vehicle replacement, that is, a minimum vehicle age of 5 years and/or 120,000 km and/or condition has been used as a guide only. While every mission situation regarding vehicle usage and geographical conditions will differ, UNMIBH finds this criterion to be a good base to work from. However, with improvements in vehicle and engine design, current mileage limits for vehicle replacement could be increased. It may, however, prove difficult to determine a benchmark higher mileage limit that should be adopted. At this time, it is recommend that the age limit for vehicle replacement should remain at 5 years, as most manufacturers tend to produce models for a limited time. Thereafter the corresponding spare parts are taken out of production and are no longer readily available. Another aspect to consider in vehicle replacement is the question of reliability, which naturally decreases with the age of a vehicle, however best maintained. Reasons for replacement of vehicles and other items of equipment have been provided in the supplementary information contained in annex I.C. The Committee noted that UNMIBH had developed an enhanced and potentially strategic approach to address some of the Mission's operational problems. The Committee requested that any changes and realignments to policies be explained more clearly in future budgets (para. 26). The IPTF co-location programme and State Border Service programme reflects the UNMIBH strategic approach to the implementation of its mandate. Information on the co-location programme is contained in paragraph 14, annex I.C. Under the auspices of IPTF, UNMIBH provides front-line support to the State Border Service in the execution of its official functions at major ports of entry and other border crossings around the country. Further, with the firm objective of establishing a consolidated mission-wide strategic and operational framework for the execution of the Mission's core mandate, UNMIBH recently developed a Mandate Implementation Plan on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions. The Plan identifies the objectives that are to be achieved, the programmes and modalities that will be used to achieve the objectives and the timeline for the successful completion of each programme. Implementation of previous recommendations of the Board of Auditors Recommendation Implementation Board of Auditors (A/54/5) 1. Miscellaneous obligating documents, paragraph 87: The Board recommends that the Administration emphasize to UNMIBH the need to fully comply with established procedures regarding the use of miscellaneous obligating documents. The Mission has taken steps to minimize the use of miscellaneous obligation documents for procurement activities. UNMIBH has set procedures in place to review unliquidated obligations on an ongoing basis (monthly report). As a result, the Mission has been able to limit the use of miscellaneous obligation documents and reduce outstanding obligations. In this connection, UNMIBH has a positive history of reducing the level of unliquidated obligations each year for the last three consecutive financial periods. 2. Civilian police monitors, paragraphs 170 and 172: The Board recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations review the arrangements for screening and testing of civilian police monitors with a view to improving the effectiveness of the selection process. The Board recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations ensure that personnel are in no case assigned to a mission prior to their obtaining medical clearance. Improvement in selection assistance team testing and screening has been implemented. This greatly reduces the possibility of receiving monitors with poor skills (i.e. poor English and driving ability). Measures have now been put in place to prevent tampering with test results (in-country) and trainers of the same nationality as those who are being tested are prohibited from participating in the process. This alleviates the pressure on individual may feel from his home country to intervene in the testing process in any way. Medical clearance has always been a strict requirement for any United Nations mission assignment. Civilian police assigned to a peacekeeping mission must have medical clearance prior to their departure. National authorities of the home country forward, through their Permanent Mission to the United Nations in New York, a copy of each individual applicant's medical history to the United Nations Medical Director. It is the responsibility of the contributing country to ensure that their personnel are fit for mission assignment. 3. Trust funds, paragraph 174: The Board recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations instruct peacekeeping missions to ensure that trust funds are used only for the purpose cited. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has implemented this recommendation. 