%%%INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|ETHIOPIA|REGIONAL SECURITY|EAST AFRICA|PEACEBUILDING|

* Reissued for technical reasons. General Assembly Fifty-fifth session Agenda item 20 (b) Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance: special economic assistance to individual countries or regions Security Council Fifty-sixth year Letter dated 1 February 2001 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to forward for your kind consideration a letter addressed to you from His Excellency Dr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister for External Relations and Current Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), and the resolution adopted by the IGAD Summit, held in Khartoum on 23 November 2000 in support of the reconciliation efforts and assisting Somalia in its efforts for the realization of peace and national reconciliation and unity (see annexes). I would be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annexes circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 20 (b), and of the Security Council. (Signed) Mubarak Hussein Rahmtalla Chargé d'affaires a.i. [Original: Arabic] I have the honour to inform you that the meetings held at the Eighth Summit of the Heads of State and Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), hosted by my country on 23 and 24 November 2000, accorded particular attention to the question of Somalia. This led to the participation of the Transitional Government of Somalia in the work of the Summit, to its adoption of a resolution expressing support for the efforts being made for reconciliation and to the establishment of a committee of Somalia's neighbouring States to be chaired by the Sudan in order "to continue to assist the Somalis to achieve full peace, national reconciliation and unity". (A copy of the resolution is attached.) I further inform you that consultations among the IGAD States are continuing with a view to ensuring the implementation of the outcome of the Khartoum Summit and mobilizing regional and international support for rehabilitation and reconstruction following the destruction caused by the civil war in Somalia. We look to the international community and to the United Nations to play their part in establishing peace and rebuilding Somalia. (Signed) Mustafa Osman Ismail Minister for External Relations of the Republic of the Sudan Resolution adopted by the Eighth Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development on Somalia We, Heads of State and Government of IGAD member States, meeting in Khartoum on 23 November 2000 on the occasion of the Eighth IGAD Summit, Considering the decade-long crisis in Somalia aggravated by the absence of a central government in that country, Considering further the commendable efforts made by Ethiopia (country mandated by IGAD), the Organization of African Unity, the Arab League and the United Nations in order to settle the internal conflict in Somalia, Reaffirming the crucial role of IGAD in the settlement of the crisis and the restoration of peace in Somalia and the subregion, Applauding the initiative taken by His Excellency Ismael Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti, to promote peace and national reconciliation in Somalia by convening the Arta Conference leading to the establishment of a Transitional Government for Somalia, Recalling the resolution of the Seventh Summit of the Heads of State and Government of IGAD member States endorsing the peace initiative for Somalia of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Djibouti, Noting that some parties in Somalia, including the self-administering areas of the country with relative peace and stability, have not participated in the national reconciliation efforts so far: 1. Affirm that the Arta Peace Conference that resulted in the establishment of the Transitional Government for Somalia, constituted a major achievement in the Somali peace process; 2. Urge the Transitional Government and all parties and administrations of Somalia to create the environment that would bring into the process those that did not participate at the Arta Conference with the objective of widening and deepening the process of national reconciliation; 3. Insist that the peace process in Somalia must continue and be completed through dialogue and not by resorting to the use of force; 4. Encourage Somalia's neighbours and the current Chairman of IGAD to establish a mechanism that would enable them to continue to assist the Somalis to achieve full peace, national reconciliation, and unity; 5. Affirm the need for all necessary measures to be taken to ensure that the territory of Somalia is not used as a springboard by groups inimical to the peace and security of the subregion; 6. Reaffirm IGAD's commitment to the unity and territorial integrity of Somalia; 7. Welcome the participation of the Transitional Government of Somalia in the deliberations and activities of IGAD, bearing in mind that regular and continuing evaluation of progress towards peace and national reconciliation in the country will be carried out; 8. Urgently call upon the international community to support the rehabilitation in Somalia through direct assistance to the Transitional Government and the regions which had established peace and stability through self-administration, as long as they are committed to the peace process. 