%%%CYPRUS QUESTION|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|SANCTIONS|NEGOTIATION|

General Assembly Security Council Fifty-fifth session Fifty-sixth year Agenda item 64 Question of Cyprus Letter dated 12 April 2001 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 12 April 2001, addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Aytuğ Plümer, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of the present letter and its annex would be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 64, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Umit Pamir Ambassador Permanent Representative I have the honour to convey herewith a copy of a letter dated 10 April 2001 addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Rauf R. Denktaş, President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, concerning the latest provocative statements by the Greek Cypriot leadership in South Cyprus (see enclosure). I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its enclosure circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 64, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Aytuğ Plümer Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus I am writing to inform you about the latest provocative statements emanating from the Greek Cypriot administration and leadership in Southern Cyprus, which reveal their deep-rooted animosity towards the Turkish Cypriot people and the fact that the crux of the Cyprus issue has always been, and continues to be the Greek Cypriot side's attempt to "hellenize" the island under its usurped title "the government of Cyprus". In fact, these statements clearly show that as we have been saying all along, the whole motive behind the Greek Cypriot drive for European Union membership is precisely to achieve union with Greece in that illegal and illegitimate capacity. First, I would like to refer to the anti-Turkish slogans chanted in a Greek Cypriot military camp during routine training exercises, which appeared in the Greek Cypriot daily, Haravgi, dated 22 March 2001, under the apt heading "Chauvinistic Slogans at the Greek Cypriot National Guard". These slogans are yet another demonstration of the fact that the planting of seeds of hatred towards the Turkish Cypriot people in the minds of Greek Cypriot youths, be they military or civilian, is institutionalized on the Greek Cypriot side and is passed from generation to generation: "Turks, Turks, you will die. You will die in front of the blue and white flag." "All Turks must be driven out to sea." The Greek Cypriot National Guard officer conducting these exercises, upon being questioned by an ordinary Greek Cypriot about the wisdom of using such chauvinistic slogans, defended this practice by the shocking remarks "What are you bothered about? We will kill all Turks!" Similar remarks are common in the Greek Cypriot military as well as civilian life, notably in the teachings of the Greek Orthodox Church and the education system. Archbishop Chrisostomos, as the head of the Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus, has achieved renown by his prejudicial remarks against the Turks and for frequently calling for a "crusade" to drive out "the national enemy". Greek Cypriot textbooks, particularly at the elementary school level, are replete with racist indoctrination, such as "we either push out all the Turks, or face annihilation". In anti-Turkish demonstrations, which are often held in the South, public feelings are expressed in such abhorrent slogans on banners which read, "The best Turk is a dead Turk!" It is the kind of racist and chauvinistic mentality that led to the Greek Cypriot campaign of ethnic cleansing against the Turkish Cypriots from 1963 to 1974. The mass graves of Turkish Cypriots in places such as Ayvasil, Muratağa, Athlar, Sandallar and elsewhere stand as testimony to the ruthless application of this abhorrent policy which was clearly laid out in the notorious Akritas Plan (circulated as United Nations document A/33/115-S/12722 of 1978) and a painful lesson to us all as we try to forge a more sound and secure future in Cyprus. Makarios' public exhortation in August 1964 to the effect that "if Turkey comes to save the Turkish Cypriots it will find no Turkish Cypriot to save" is a clear indication of keeping Turkish Cypriots as "hostages to Greek Cypriot policies". We are now told that the European Union membership of "Cyprus" does not depend on the settlement of the Cyprus issue and that the Greek Cypriot side is entitled to be treated as the legitimate government of all! In the higher ranks of the Greek Cypriot National Guard, "the national objective" of the Greek Cypriot armed forces is described not only as defending the South, but also vowing "to liberate the occupied territories", meaning Northern Cyprus. This was revealed in an interview by the Greek Cypriot daily, Politis, published on 17 March 2001, with the Commander of the Greek Cypriot National Guard, Lieutenant-General Evangelos Florakis, who is a Greek national. His words were echoed by the Greek Cypriot leader Mr. Glafkos Clerides himself, who, in his "EOKA Day" message of 1 April stated, "The most serious responsibility we have is to liberate our lands under occupation" (Politis, 2 April 2001). Thus, the threat posed by the Greek-Greek Cypriot front, which is manifested in the "joint military doctrine" between the two, continues. On the political plane, the Chairman of the Greek Cypriot ruling party, Democratic Party Rally (DISI), Mr. Nicos Anastasiades, has recently declared that the accession of the Greek Cypriot administration to the European Union would be tantamount to Enosis (union of Cyprus with Greece). During an event organized by DISI, a university students' group held in Athens on 22 March 2001, Mr. Anastasiades stated that "by attaining the union of Cyprus with the European Union, we are at the same time attaining its union with Greece". It is our firm belief that this declaration by the Greek Cypriot leadership is of such significance that it obligates all those involved in facilitating a negotiated settlement on the island to take a fresh look at the prospect of Greek Cypriot accession to the European Union, before a settlement, in the name of Cyprus as a whole. I hardly need to reiterate the implications of such an eventuality for your efforts for a settlement. Most of all, we believe that the European Union must be made aware of the damage that it has done to the prospects for a settlement on the island by processing the unilateral and unlawful application made by the Greek Cypriot administration for accession to the European Union, and the damage it continues to do by insisting on this totally wrong and misguided policy. Our repeated representations and efforts to make the European Union, both the institution as well as its individual member countries understand and appreciate the possible consequences of this one-sided policy, have unfortunately been ignored. Far from heeding our repeated calls and demarches in this respect, the European Union is now seriously entertaining the offer of the Greek Cypriot administration to contribute to the European Union Headline Goal within the context of the European Union Common Security and Defence Policy. If the Greek Cypriot side also succeeds in this endeavour, it will have completed its policy of engaging the European Union in the military as well as the political aspects of the Cyprus issue, to the detriment of the Turkish Cypriot party and all efforts aimed at reconciliation. Efforts aimed at reconciliation are not hampered merely by the above developments, but also by the continuing inhuman embargoes and measures of isolation imposed on the people of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. As we have repeatedly brought to your attention and to that of the international community, these embargoes range from prohibitions put on the simplest forms of transaction by the Turkish Cypriot people with the outside world, and even with the Greek Cypriots, to the most fundamental issues such as representation in international forums. These inhuman and totally unjustified measures, many of which date back to 1963 and therefore have a 38-year-old history, have taken their toll not only on the economic, social, cultural and political life of the Turkish Cypriot people, but also on the relationship between the two peoples, which has naturally deteriorated to the point of a total lack of trust and confidence between the two. I hardly need to stress the damage that this inimical Greek Cypriot policy has dealt to the prospects for a settlement through your mission of good offices. So far, the only response we have received to our appeals to the international community to help remove these embargoes has been a reference to the existence of these measures in a few of your relevant reports. While this is a welcome development, it has unfortunately not been sufficient to remove or even relax these all out restrictions on our people. In fact, in the most recent development on the issue of the embargoes, we have noted with disappointment that even the brief reference to the embargoes in your latest report to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (E/CN.4/2001/31 of 20 February 2001) has been put in quotation marks upon the protestations of the Greek Cypriot administration, which objected to the original form of the report referring to the issue without using quotation marks. Even this seemingly small change indicates, without doubt, the utter denial of the Greek Cypriot party of the existence of these embargoes, and the inability or unwillingness of the international community to cope with these Greek Cypriot objections. We appeal to you to take the foregoing ominous developments into serious consideration in your current evaluations of the Cyprus issue and to do what you deem is necessary. These developments confirm, once gain, that any future effort must, as a priority, address the fundamental issue of the chronic inequality of status between the two parties, in order for negotiations on the basis of true equality to start. This is not a precondition, but a dictate of reason, justice and fairness. Otherwise, the real precondition in the way of a negotiated settlement, that is the so-called "government" status of the Greek Cypriot party, will continue to dominate and pre-empt all efforts aimed at reconciliation. (Signed) Rauf R. Denktaş President 