%%%SEABED|ARMS RACE|NUCLEAR WEAPONS|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|

Fifty-sixth session Item 86 (b) of the preliminary list* General and complete disarmament Further measures in the field of disarmament for the prevention of an arms race on the seabed and the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof * A/56/50. ** The present report contains information received from Member States up to the first week of July. Report of the Secretary-General** Contents Page Introduction Information received from Governments Côte d'Ivoire Mexico Saudi Arabia 1. At its forty-fourth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 44/116 O of 15 December 1989, entitled "Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof", the relevant operative paragraphs of which read as follows: "The General Assembly, "8. Also requests the Secretary-General to report by 1992, and every three years thereafter until the fourth Review Conference is convened, on technological developments relevant to the Treaty and to the verification of compliance with the Treaty, including dual-purpose technologies for peaceful and specified military ends; in carrying out this task he should draw from official sources and from contributions by States parties to the Treaty and may use the assistance of appropriate expertise; "9. Urges all States parties to the Treaty to assist the Secretary-General accordingly by providing information and drawing his attention to suitable sources". 2. Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 9 of the resolution, the Secretary-General addressed a note verbale to States parties to the Treaty inviting them to provide information on the subject. Replies have been received from Côte d'Ivoire, Mexico and Saudi Arabia and are reproduced in chapter II of the present report. Portugal and Switzerland submitted a nil reply. Any other information received will be issued as addenda to the present report. 3. The Secretary-General wishes to point out that the information submitted to him by States parties to the Treaty does not provide sufficient official material for him to report on the subject-matter on the basis indicated in paragraph 8 of the resolution. II. Information received from Governments A. Côte d'Ivoire [Original: French] [8 May 2001] 1. The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire to the United Nations has the honour to recall that Côte d'Ivoire is a party to the Treaty of Pelindaba establishing the African continent as a nuclear-weapon-free zone and that this position was reaffirmed at the Cairo Conference. 2. Côte d'Ivoire, which has been a non-nuclear-weapon State since its independence, implements this treaty in good faith. 3. Côte d'Ivoire, which is primarily concerned about the lives and well-being of its fellow citizens and about systematizing the policy of good neighbourliness and integration in Africa, and which is concentrating more than ever on its economic, cultural and social development, does not intend to develop nuclear technology for military purposes or to acquire weapons of mass destruction. 4. Côte d'Ivoire does not have any type of nuclear weapon or weapon of mass destruction. A fortiori, it cannot place something which it does not have on the seabed or the ocean floor or in the subsoil thereof. B. Mexico [Original: Spanish] [29 June 2001] 1. As a State party to the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof since 23 March 1984, Mexico supports the adoption of measures that will lead to major advances in the universal prohibition of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction on the seabed and the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof, as a step towards the prohibition and eventual destruction of all nuclear weapons everywhere. 2. Mexico regards the Treaty as an important milestone in the prevention of an arms race on the seabed and the ocean floor, which cover two thirds of the surface of the Earth. 3. Having ratified the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in 1982, the Government of Mexico believes that the provisions of the Treaty are perfectly applicable. 4. With regard to the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, Mexico considers that, after three decades since the entry into force of the Treaty, there remain some outstanding issues that could help to determine new measures to improve the Treaty regime. 5. Although the Review Conference entrusted the United Nations Secretary-General with the task of reporting every three years on technological developments relevant to the verification of and compliance with the Treaty, it is clear that the Review Conference needs a specific monitoring or reporting body, established under the auspices of the United Nations. 6. Mexico wishes to stress that, more than 10 years having elapsed since the last Conference of the Parties to the Treaty, in 1989, it is necessary to study the possibilities and conditions for convening the Fourth Review Conference of the Treaty. 7. The topics which Mexico would like the Fourth Review Conference to discuss include issues related to the scope of the Treaty, as regards both its field of application and the inclusion of arms which are not weapons of mass destruction; the need to adopt new measures for the improvement and updating of the Treaty regime; a detailed follow-up on technological innovations relevant to the functioning of the Treaty; the possibility of evaluating the design of a mechanism for Treaty verification; establishing the relationship between the Treaty and the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea; and the means and resources available to the Secretary-General for the presentation of reports. C. Saudi Arabia [Original: Arabic] [20 June 2001] We should like to state that the Saudi naval forces do not possess any of the weapons in question and that there have therefore been no technological developments relevant to the Treaty and to the verification of compliance with the Treaty, including dual-purpose technologies for peaceful and specified military ends. 