%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|FACT-FINDING MISSIONS|SPECIAL RAPPORTEURS|REPORT PREPARATION|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS|

Fifty-sixth session * A/56/150. ** The footnote requested by General Assembly resolution 54/248 was not included in the submission. Item 131 (c) of the provisional agenda* Human rights questions: human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives Mission report by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances Note by the Secretary-General** 1. In its resolution 2001/19, adopted without a vote on 20 April 2001, the Commission on Human Rights recalled its decision to request the Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to carry out a joint mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while regretting that the security situation in the country has not yet allowed such a mission. 2. In the same resolution, it decided to request the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to carry out, as soon as security considerations permit and, where appropriate, in cooperation with the National Commission of Inquiry to investigate alleged human rights violations and breaches of international humanitarian law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) between 1996 and 1997, a joint mission to investigate all massacres carried out on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including those in the province of South Kivu and other atrocities referred to in the most recent and in previous reports of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human 3. It also decided to request the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur and to the joint mission, to enable them to discharge their mandates fully, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide appropriate technical expertise to enable the joint mission to fulfil its mandate. 4. The Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will visit the country from 19 July through 2 August to collect information with a view to preparing his report to the General Assembly in the framework of his mandate. 5. On that occasion, he will pay particular attention to security conditions on the ground in order to assess the feasibility of the joint mission and the extent to which the Government and the rebel groups will support its work. 6. Relevant details will be reflected in his interim report to the General Assembly. 