%%%ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|REGIONAL COOPERATION|LATIN AMERICA|CARIBBEAN REGION|

Fifty-sixth session Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003* Part V Regional cooperation for development Section 19 Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean (Programme 17 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005) Contents Page Overview A. Policy-making organs B. Executive direction and management C. Programme of work Subprogramme 1. Linkages with the global economy, regional integration and cooperation Subprogramme 2. Productive, technological and entrepreneurial development Subprogramme 3. Macroeconomic policies and growth Subprogramme 4. Social development and equity Subprogramme 5. Mainstreaming the gender perspective in regional development * The present document contains section 19 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003. The approved programme budget will subsequently be issued in final form as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/56/6/Rev.1). Subprogramme 6. Population and development Subprogramme 7. Planning of public administration Subprogramme 8. Environment and human settlements Subprogramme 9. Natural resources and infrastructure Subprogramme 10. Statistics and economic projections Subprogramme 11. Subregional activities in Mexico and Central America Subprogramme 12. Subregional activities in the Caribbean D. Programme support Annex Indicative resource requirements 19.1 The programme of work under this section has been formulated within the framework of programme 17 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (A/55/6/Rev.1) and will be implemented by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 19.2 The terms of reference of ECLAC were adopted by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 106 (VI) and subsequent amendments. ECLAC has a clear role to play within the United Nations system, and also among other intergovernmental organizations that serve Latin America and the Caribbean. 19.3 The overall purpose of this programme is to promote economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean through cooperation with member States in the comprehensive analysis of the development process and in providing the relevant operational services. 19.4 The programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 reflects the role that member Governments expect ECLAC to play. The present programme budget seeks to reinforce the Commission's institutional identity as the only regional institution that takes a systematic approach in examining the development issues facing the Latin American and Caribbean countries from a regional perspective. 19.5 It should be highlighted that this proposal has taken into account the principles and values contained in the Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2) and the calls for action adopted by world leaders to which the work programme of ECLAC is in a position to make substantive contributions. Among these are the fight to reduce extreme poverty by half and to provide clean water and basic education to all; the fight against social injustices and inequalities and the empowerment of women; the management of natural resources and species in accordance with the precepts of sustainable development; the promotion of international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, including the drug problem; the promotion of good governance at the national and international levels and transparency in the financial, monetary and trading systems; addressing the special needs of small island developing States; and disseminating the benefits derived from new technologies, especially information and communication technologies, to all. 19.6 More specifically, the programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 has been prepared on the basis of four fundamental considerations: first, the strategic orientations for the work of the Commission contained in the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005; second, the lessons learned from an assessment at the end of the 1990s of structural reforms now in place, their outcome and the priorities for regional development deriving therefrom; third, global trends on the international scene, their impact on the region and the adjustment effort that countries of Latin America and the Caribbean will need to make; and fourth, the growing importance attached to various cross-disciplinary issues in the formulation and implementation of public policies that have an impact on the economic, social, political and cultural spheres in the region. 19.7 The Latin American and Caribbean region has played a leading role over the past decade in modifying the development paradigm. The region has witnessed the introduction of new economic operational modalities and major changes, all of which have been reflected in a long-term transformation, still under way, of the productive structure, the technological base and the institutional and regulatory framework of countries in the region. 19.8 The resulting reforms have generated costs as well as benefits, and their outcome has not always been satisfactory in terms of the anticipated growth rate, improvements in productivity and equitable distribution of the benefits of modernization among the members of society. It is therefore crucial for the region to implement development and reform policies aimed not only at carrying through the modernization of its production apparatus, but also at correcting errors and placing greater emphasis on social imperatives, especially social equity. 19.9 Global trends and their implications for development in Latin America and the Caribbean also occupy an important place in the programme of work of the ECLAC system. Indeed, the accelerated pace of economic globalization is a challenge to the region to forge stronger trade, financial and technological linkages within the global economy, to avail itself of new options emerging in a rapidly changing international environment and to harmonize its practices with the new open regionalism and integration at different levels. 19.10 One of the most important challenges for Governments and societies in the region in the twenty-first century is to work out ways of reconciling economic growth with social equity and of improving competitiveness without eroding social cohesion. With the advance of globalization and the knowledge economy, the task of overcoming poverty and achieving social equity becomes more complex and, therefore, an interdisciplinary and integrated approach to social policies, programmes and projects is indispensable in reordering priorities to include such essential areas as governance and the building of social capital. 19.11 In view of the evolution of the economic and social agenda in the region in the last decade, the programme budget will attach major significance to: the reform of the international financial institutions and the regulatory framework for financial actors with a view to stabilizing the global financial markets and counteracting cyclical trends; the follow-up to the rapidly changing interaction between the region and other regional groups, especially the European Union in the wake of its monetary unification, which is expected to have a huge impact on international trade, finance and the overall linkages of the Latin American and Caribbean region with the global economy; the evolution of the negotiating process leading to hemispheric integration with the creation of the Free Trade Area of the Americas by 2005; the promotion of gender mainstreaming in the major areas of economic, social, political and cultural action in the region; and, finally, the provision of services in connection with the socio-economic assessment of the effects of natural disasters in countries of the region affected by such events. 19.12 Consequently, the present programme budget reflects a carefully selected programme of work, duly discussed with member Governments during the twenty-eighth session of the Commission, held in Mexico City in April 2000, and further reviewed in detail and prioritized during the sixth meeting of the ad hoc working group established pursuant to resolution 553 (XXVI), convened in Santiago in August 2000. It emphasizes those activities in which ECLAC has clear comparative advantages for making contributions to its member countries. Additionally, it is inspired by the objective of getting the most value, in terms of relevant outputs, from the expected level of resource allocation. The programme budget is furthermore consistent with the overall thrust of the United Nations in the economic and social sectors. 19.13 Finally, the present programme budget is part of a longer-term institutional strategy, which has also been the subject of consultations between the secretariat and ECLAC member Governments. This means that the programme budget is consistent with programme 17 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (see A/55/6/Rev.1). It also includes as a salient feature the mainstreaming of the gender perspective in all ECLAC subprogrammes and their corresponding technical cooperation components in order for ECLAC to be in a position to play a role in mainstreaming gender considerations in all spheres of regional development, in accordance with mandates stemming from the Beijing Platform for Action as well as those of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly. Consideration of environmental sustainability, institutional development and improvement of public regulatory frameworks in the region are also priority aspects of this programme. 19.14 As for organizational and management issues, restructuring will continue to be a highly dynamic process in ECLAC during the coming biennium. Efforts in this area will be aimed at developing a more streamlined organizational structure and enhancing responsibility and accountability on the part of organizational units and individual staff members. Salient features of this restructuring trend, reflected in the present budget, include the conclusion of the reorganization of the former subprogramme on environmental and land resource sustainability into two more specialized subprogrammes with clearly defined funding allocations, one on environment and human settlements and one on natural resources and infrastructure. In the latter subprogramme the traditional perspective of activities in the field of transport has been broadened to include basic infrastructure services with a strong emphasis on the further development of public regulatory frameworks in the region. 19.15 In addition, other areas of work in ECLAC have been streamlined and consolidated in order to adapt to new technological developments, such as the advent and dynamic expansion of the Internet, and to take account of the profound impact of such changes on information management. This is particularly the case in the information technology area, the activities of which are acquiring growing importance in ECLAC. Examples of this are the strengthening of the official web site operations under the Programme Planning and Operations Division and the transformation of the former Computer Centre into the Electronic Information Section, reporting directly to the Deputy Executive Secretary of ECLAC. In addition, issues related to the management of economic and social documentation, which were formerly under the sole responsibility of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation, have been decentralized and are now the responsibility of executing divisions. The associated resources are redeployed accordingly. 19.16 The overall resources budgeted under this section amount to $76,206,500, including resource growth of $622,400, or 0.8 per cent The growth reflected in table 9.2 can be summarized as follows: (a) The increase of $78,200, or 7.2 per cent, under policy-making organs will meet requirements for servicing two new bodies, the Statistical Conference of the Americas and its Steering Committee; (b) The increase of $413,200 under executive direction and management relates to: (i) the incoming redeployment of one P-4 post to assist with the duties and responsibilities entrusted to the Office of the Secretary of the Commission, one Local level post to strengthen research functions in the Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary, three Local level posts to strengthen the operations of the official web site of ECLAC under the Programme Planning and Operations Division and one Local level post to strengthen the Information Services Unit and the outward redeployment of one P-5 post to subprogramme 3 ($435,900); and (ii) an offset of $22,700 relating to a decrease in resource requirements under travel of staff; (c) The net increase of $14,500 under programme of work relates to a decrease of $59,900 for posts and an increase of $74,400 for non-post resources. A number of posts are redeployed between subprogrammes as a result of the restructuring of ECLAC in connection with the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation and the redefinition of its traditional functions; (d) Programme support registers an increase of $116,500, or 0.3 per cent. The increase is attributed to a net decrease of $88,200 for posts and a net increase of $204,700 for non-post resources. 19.17 During the biennium 2002-2003, projected extrabudgetary resources amounting to $16,896,500, or 18.1 per cent of the total resources to be made available to the programme, will supplement resources from the regular budget to finance posts, consultancy services, expert group meetings, various publications, advisory services and group training in carrying out operational activities. The external environment for mobilizing extrabudgetary resources is undergoing important changes, some of which confirm the overall trends in recent years, while some others show variances in their composition. Overall, contributions from the major multilateral sources within the United Nations system have continued to strengthen the noticeable trends of prior bienniums. The composition of the flow of resources has changed, with UNDP being a case in point. Support for ECLAC regional projects from UNDP is negligible, while ECLAC technical advisory services are being increasingly mobilized at the country level through UNDP resources. Sources external to the United Nations system such as the Inter-American Development Bank have strengthened their positions as leading agencies in supporting ECLAC projects. Support from the European Union, mainly in the energy sector, has also been maintained. In addition, ECLAC has been able to mobilize resources from multilateral agencies in the region, such as the Latin American Reserve Fund and the Corporación Andina de Fomento. As regards bilateral sources, certain contributors have maintained their significant level of contributions while others could be regarded as major bilateral donors. An important change that has been observed during the last biennium is the steady increase in contributions from local agencies to specific projects that affect their economies. Support has also been mobilized from private entities and foundations. Lastly, the increase in funds received for technical cooperation projects from some developing member countries appears to be a promising change. 19.18 The percentage distribution of the resources for ECLAC in the biennium 2002-2003 is as shown in table 19.1. Percentage distribution of resources by component Component Regular budget Extrabudgetary Subprogramme 5. Mainstreaming the gender perspective into regional development Subtotal C Total Table 19.2 Resource requirements by component (Thousands of United States dollars) (1) Regular budget expenditure appropri- ation Resource growth before recosting Recosting estimate Amount Percentage (2) Extrabudgetary Total (1) and (2) Table 19.3 Post requirements Established regular budget posts Temporary posts Category Professional and above USG ASG D-1/2 P-1/5 Subtotal General Service Table 19.4 Resource requirements by policy-making organ Resources (thousands of United States dollars) Posts Policy-making organ (before recosting) 1. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2. Committee of the Whole 3. Presiding Officers of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean 4. Committee of High-level Government Experts 5. Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee 6. Central America Economic Cooperation Committee 7. Presiding Officers of the Regional Council for Planning, Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning 8. Steering Committee of the Statistical Conference of the Americas 9. Statistical Conference of the Americas 19.19 The estimated requirements of $1,158,500 under policy-making organs includes growth of $78,200, for the servicing of two new bodies: the Statistical Conference of the Americas and its Steering Committee. The increase covers requirements relating to staff costs and travel of staff to meetings. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Resource requirements (before recosting): $263,800 19.20 The Commission is composed of 41 members and 7 associate members and meets biennially to provide overall direction to the work of the secretariat. Its biennial meeting, scheduled for April 2002 in Santiago, is estimated to last six days. Pursuant to ECLAC resolution 553 (XXVI), an ad hoc working group composed of member State representatives meets periodically to provide guidance to the Commission in defining its priorities regarding the substantive outputs of its approved programme of work. Committee of the Whole Resource requirements (before recosting): $50,300 19.21 The Committee of the Whole will meet in plenary session in New York for a three-day period in 2003 to discuss issues of concern to the Commission. The Committee meets during the years when the Commission is not in session. Presiding Officers of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean Resource requirements (before recosting): $253,900 19.22 The Presiding Officers provide overall direction to the work of the Secretariat on issues related to the integration of women into development in the region, in accordance with the Regional Plan of Action for the Integration of Women into Latin American Economic and Social Development. The Presiding Officers will meet on four occasions in the coming biennium for their thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth meetings, proposed to be held in Santiago and Port of Spain in 2002, and their thirty-sixth and thirty-seventh meetings proposed to be held in Mexico City and Quito in 2003. Committee of High-level Government Experts Resource requirements (before recosting): $164,600 19.23 The Committee of High-level Government Experts is a subsidiary organ of the Commission that acts as a forum devoted to the analysis of various aspects of the implementation and appraisal of development strategies in Latin America and the Caribbean. Its meetings during the biennium are proposed to be held in New York in 2002 and in Guatemala in 2003. Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee Resource requirements (before recosting): $175,700 19.24 The Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee coordinates all activities related to subregional development and cooperation. It also serves as an advisory and consultative body to the Executive Secretary of ECLAC on issues concerning the Caribbean. The Committee will meet annually in the biennium 2002-2003; the proposed sites are the Dominican Republic and Jamaica. Central American Economic Cooperation Committee Resource requirements (before recosting): $119,000 19.25 The Committee on Central American Economic Cooperation provides overall coordination and direction to the secretariat in relation to activities to promote the integration of national economies in Central America. It also serves as an advisory and consultative body to the Executive Secretary of ECLAC on issues related to the Central American region and as a subsidiary organ of the Commission. During the biennium, one meeting is proposed to be held in Mexico, in 2002, and the other in Panama, in 2003. Presiding Officers of the Regional Council for Planning, Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning Resource requirements (before recosting): $53,000 19.26 The Presiding Officers of the Regional Council for Planning are scheduled to meet in Brasilia in 2002. The meeting constitutes an intergovernmental forum of the ministers of planning to develop the work programme of the Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning and provides a venue for the Secretariat of ECLAC to discuss development strategies. Steering Committee of the Statistical Conference of the Americas Resource requirements (before recosting): $33,900 19.27 The Steering Committee of the Statistical Conference of the Americas was established along with the Statistical Conference of the Americas at the Commission's twenty-eighth session (resolution 580 (XXVIII)). It meets annually to provide support to the Statistical Conference of the Americas. The main responsibilities of the Steering Committee are to prepare a biennial programme of regional and international cooperation concerning statistical matters to be presented to the regular conference; to follow up on the implementation of the agreements and the tasks assigned by the Conference; and to decide on the substantive documentation to be presented to the Conference. 19.28 The next meeting of the Steering Committee will be held in Santiago in 2002, and for costing purposes it is assumed that the 2003 meeting will also be held in Santiago. Statistical Conference of the Americas Resource requirements (before recosting): $44,300 19.29 The Statistical Conference of the Americas was created as a subsidiary body of ECLAC at the Commission's twenty-eighth session (resolution 580 (XXVIII)). 19.30 The Conference meets biennially with the objective of promoting the development and improvement of national statistics and their international comparability, strengthening cooperation among national statistical offices and international and regional agencies and preparing a biennial programme of regional and international cooperation to meet the demands of the countries of the region in the field of statistics. 19.31 The next meeting of the Conference will be held in Brasilia in 2003. Resource requirements (before recosting): $4,495,200 19.32 The Office of the Executive Secretary provides overall direction, supervision and management to the ECLAC secretariat with a view to implementing the legislative mandates and the approved programme of work. It continues to be responsible for the preparation of a biennial interdivisional substantive report on the main topics to be discussed at the session of the Commission, as well as for the publication of CEPAL Review. 19.33 In addition, the Office will provide direction and policy orientation and establish the criteria to coordinate the services rendered by the ECLAC system to affected countries in the Latin American and Caribbean region in connection with the socio-economic assessment of the effects of natural disasters. 19.34 The Programme Planning and Operations Division, on behalf of the Executive Secretary, will continue to provide advice, overall substantive coordination and assistance on the formulation of the proposed medium-term plan of ECLAC and its revisions, the preparation of the biennial draft programme of work and the report of the work of the Commission for presentation to and adoption by the Commission, and the preparation of the programme budget proposals for the biennium and the subsequent budget performance reports. 19.35 The Division will also monitor the execution of the programme of work and the biennial programme performance report. Similarly, it will organize, coordinate and report on the programme self-evaluation cycle of ECLAC and will provide contributions to in-depth evaluation exercises of United Nations programmes. In addition, the Division will continue to provide substantive servicing to and prepare relevant documentation for the meetings of the ad hoc working group established pursuant to ECLAC resolution 553 (XXVI) for the purpose of carrying out priority-setting exercises for the programme of work and providing strategic guidance to the Commission on institutional and policy issues. The Division will also continue to coordinate, develop, update and maintain the official institutional web site and sub-sites; coordinate, guide and supervise the extrabudgetary technical cooperation programme and its relevant fund-raising activities as well as the work of the ECLAC library in Santiago, for which resources are provided under programme support. 19.36 The Office of the Executive Secretary includes the Information Services Unit. The activities of the Unit are carried out in Santiago, in close coordination with the Department of Public Information at Headquarters. Its main activity is disseminating ECLAC and United Nations information throughout the region, including organizing press conferences and issuing press releases, producing and disseminating booklets and information kits about ECLAC and the United Nations, placing opinion pieces in the region's media, producing and editing a bimonthly newsletter and attending to journalists and the general public. 19.37 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (RB) (i) Secretariat services and substantive support to the sessions of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies; (ii) Report on the main topic to be discussed at the twenty-ninth session of the Commission (2003); (b) Substantive outputs (RB) (i) Recurrent publications, CEPAL Review (3 issues 2002, 3 issues 2003); (ii) Electronic, audio and video issuances, including films, videotapes, radio broadcasts, news tapes and documentary and feature programmes: a. Transmission of news dispatches to Headquarters for inclusion in United Nations radio programmes and to radio stations throughout the region (average of 50 per year); b. Videotapes of interviews and other activities for inclusion in United Nations programmes and for distribution to the media throughout the region (average of 3 per year); (iii) Exhibits, guided tours and other visual materials: a. Photographic coverage of ECLAC meetings and activities (average of 35 per year); b. Briefings and organization of activities related to United Nations and ECLAC events and special observances (average of 20 per year); c. Exhibits and other visual material on United Nations activities (average of 35 per year); d. Organizing guided tours of the ECLAC premises in Santiago (average of 6 per year); (iv) Production of booklets, pamphlets, fact sheets, wallcharts and information kits: a. Monthly newsletter, "Notas de la CEPAL/ECLAC Notes" (6 issues in Spanish and 6 in English each year); b. Responses to public enquiries in oral and written form (average of 8,000 per year); c. Liaison activities with national and international news media (including press conferences and interviews) and with governmental and non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, libraries and other local distributors of information services (average of 2,000 per year); (v) Press releases and press conferences: a. Press releases in Spanish and English on ECLAC meetings and activities (average of 100 per year); b. Press releases in Spanish based on cables received from the Department of Public Information of the United Nations Secretariat, other United Nations offices and the specialized agencies (average of 50 per year); c. Organization of press conferences of the Executive Secretary and other senior officials of ECLAC and the United Nations system (average of 25 per year); d. Organization and holding of presentations of ECLAC publications to the media (average of 23 per year); e. Production and editing of press releases to be disseminated through the web page and electronic mail (recurrent). Table 19.5 Resource requirements: executive direction and management Post Non-post 19.38 The amount of $3,902,200 for posts reflects an increase of $435,900 for five additional posts owing to a number of redeployments: (a) an inward redeployment of one P-4 post from subprogramme 9 to assist the Office of the Secretary of the Commission; two Local level posts from programme support, of which one is to strengthen research functions and one is to strengthen the operations of the ECLAC official web site and; three Local level posts from subprogramme 3 due to the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation, two of which are for strengthening the official web site and one of which is for strengthening the Information Services Unit; and (b) an outward redeployment of one P-5 post to subprogramme 3, which partially offsets the aforementioned post changes. The decrease of $22,700 for non-post requirements relates to a decrease in the travel of staff. Table 19.6 Resource requirements by subprogramme Subprogramme 1. Linkages with the global economy, regional integration and cooperation 2. Productive, technological and entrepreneurial development 3. Macroeconomic policies and growth 4. Social development and equity 5. Mainstreaming the gender perspective in regional development 6. Population and development 7. Planning of public administration 8. Environment and human settlements 9. Natural resources and infrastructure 10. Statistics and economic projections 11. Subregional activities in Mexico and Central America 12. Subregional activities in the Caribbean Subprogramme 1 Linkages with the global economy, regional integration and cooperation Resource requirements (before recosting): $3,257,200 19.39 The work under this subprogramme will be carried out by the International Trade and Development Finance Division and the ECLAC office in Washington, D.C. 19.40 The main end-users of the outputs will be government authorities and officials of the countries of the region concerned with the formulation, execution and management of strategies and policies in the area of foreign trade and international trade negotiation as well as regional integration and cooperation. Other users will include associations of producers and exporters, chambers of commerce and other promotional and development entities, regional and subregional bodies, academic institutions, research centres and other agencies involved with economic cooperation. Table 19.7 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To increase member States' awareness of the challenges and opportunities for strengthening their linkages with the global economy as well as to further the development of agreements in the region and to promote the harmonization of and convergence between existing agreements. Expected accomplishments Performance indicators (a) Stronger institutional capacity in member countries for decision-making in order to carry out activities and generate concrete progress in relation to subregional, regional and hemispheric integration. (a) Progress recorded in bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations conducted by countries receiving specialized analytical and policy recommendation inputs from ECLAC, in particular with respect to the ongoing negotiations on a Free Trade Area of the Americas. (b) The development and consolidation of new forms of linkages with the international economy in the context of the parallel advancement of globalization and open regionalism in Latin America and the Caribbean. (b) (i) Changes recorded in the countries' patterns of specialization and/or forms of linkages with the international economy along the lines of ECLAC policy recommendations; (ii) The number of policies adopted for boosting competitiveness and growth that make use of, among other things, the Commission's analytical inputs, proposals and technical cooperation. (c) The gradual improvement, harmonization and convergence of the numerous integration schemes. (c) (i) The increased use by member countries and the secretariats of regional integration schemes of specialized information generated and disseminated by the Commission as a basis for the negotiating process; (ii) The expression of satisfaction of member States with the specialized analytical and policy recommendation inputs generated and disseminated by the Commission on issues relating to the harmonization and convergence of integration schemes. (d) Improved analysis of the impact of trade on vulnerable groups, with special regard to gender, and the development of specific indicators. (d) The expression of satisfaction by member States for progress made regarding the linking of macroeconomic data with social and gender indicators in studies and reports prepared under the subprogramme. External factors 19.41 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) policy makers will be willing to improve the linkages of the region's economies with the global economy, to build up technical, institutional and policy-making capacity to face the challenges of globalization and to further develop integration agreements, and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive to the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to improve their linkages with the global economy and to further develop integration agreements. Outputs 19.42 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (RB/XB). Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to examine market globalization trends and their impact on market access for goods and services exported from the region (2), national trade policies in the light of trends in the system of multilateral trade rules and the development of subregional, regional and hemispheric integration (1) and relevant aspects of the structure and functioning of the financial system, foreign exchange regimes and their effects on trade, investment and product diversification in the region (1) (XB); (b) Other substantive outputs (RB/XB) (i) Recurrent publications: Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy, 2002 and 2003 editions (2); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: capital flows into Latin America and the Caribbean (in English only) (8); characteristics and impact of recent changes in specific aspects of Brazil's economic integration in the world market (1); economies in transition, with special attention to changes in their linkages with the global economy and the impact of those linkages on the economies of the region (1); new markets for the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean (1); the effectiveness of regulatory and financial supervision mechanisms, with an analysis of their capacity for averting crises (1); the effects of changes in international trade regulations on markets of interest to the region (1); emerging economies in Asia and the Pacific and their relationships with economies of the region (1); features of selected service sectors in some countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, with emphasis on linkages between those sectors and the rest of the economy and their effects on job creation and the dissemination of technology (1); the relationship between the specific regulatory framework of services and international trade disciplines, with a view to strengthening regulation and supervision in various sectors (1); the role of regional or subregional finance institutions in providing financing and liquidity options that foster intraregional trade relations and that may be instrumental in averting external payment crises (1); the United States trade barriers on exports from Latin America and the Caribbean (2); the recent evolution of the Canadian economy (in English only) (2); the recent evolution of the United States economy (in English only) (2); major financial developments and their impact on foreign trade in the region (2); changes in the law, policies and institutional issues relating to international trade conducted by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and their impact on economic integration (2); recent trends in the patterns and main flows of international trade, external financing and foreign direct investment, growth trends in the region's main export markets and the linkages with the global economy (2); the development of relationships between Latin America and the Caribbean and other regional groupings, with emphasis on issues relating to trade and investment (2); the development of subregional, regional and hemispheric integration (2); the effects of trends in the information economy on external demand for products and on the productive structure in the region (2); and main developments within the World Trade Organization and the trade policies of the large industrialized countries (2); (iii) Booklets, fact sheets, wallcharts and information kits: CEPAL News (24 issues, in English only); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB) (i) Cooperation and liaison will be maintained in the area of integration with United Nations bodies and international, regional and subregional organizations, as well as with the secretariats of the region's integration bodies and with government and private bodies responsible for integration matters; (ii) Cooperation and support for the hemispheric integration process and coordination of ECLAC activities as a member of the Tripartite Committee with the Organization of American States and the Inter-American Development Bank with respect to negotiations for the establishment of a Free Trade Area of the Americas; (d) Technical cooperation (XB). Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation, upon request, on regulation and financial supervision mechanisms, analysis of the impact on trade in the region of major developments in the area of international finance; and trade policies, multilateral trade regulations and trends and prospects for regional integration. Table 19.8 Resource requirements: subprogramme 1 19.43 The amount of $3,257,200 reflects a decrease of $166,700 for posts owing to the outward redeployment of one P-4 post from the Washington, D.C., office of ECLAC and the abolition of one Local level post, the functions of which will be phased out, offset by the establishment of a new P-2 post to strengthen research functions and the incoming redeployment of one Local level post to provide clerical support. Subprogramme 2 Productive, technological and entrepreneurial development Resource requirements (before recosting): $3,644,000 19.44 This subprogramme is carried out by the Division of Production, Productivity and Management. 19.45 The main users of the outputs will be government authorities, officials and policy makers concerned with the analysis, design and execution of policies for the productive, technological and business development of the industrial and agricultural sectors, foreign investment and transnational corporations and technological innovation systems. Other users will include various private sector institutions, such as business, labour, technical and professional organizations, universities and other academic and research institutes and centres for technology development and dissemination. In implementing the subprogramme, the Division will give due regard to social and gender equality issues as well as to increasing competitiveness and improving the quality of investment in terms of achieving a development policy. Table 19.9 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To assist member States in the design and implementation of new institutional mechanisms, regulatory frameworks and policy instruments affecting the different meso- and microeconomic behaviour of economic agents and productive sectors, with a view to raising production growth rates and narrowing the productivity gap in relation to the developed countries. (a) Enhanced policy-making and/or policy review capabilities related to improving competitiveness and the restructuring of productive sectors. (a) (i) An increased number of countries in the region receiving analytical and policy inputs and technical cooperation services from ECLAC that adopt or review policies to boost both competitiveness and the restructuring of productive sectors; (ii) An increased number of countries acquiring and using application software developed by ECLAC related to competitive analysis and industrial and agricultural dynamics in the region. (b) Improved design of institutional regulatory frameworks and policy instruments with a view to raising production growth rates, increasing competitiveness and reducing productivity gaps in comparison with the developed countries. (b) The number of changes in the regulatory frameworks affecting the meso- and microeconomic behaviour of economic agents and productive sectors in the countries that have received analytical and policy proposal inputs and technical assistance from ECLAC. (c) Increased availability of new information, studies and technical support from the Commission to policy makers in the region regarding foreign investment, competitiveness, technological innovations and the behaviour of economic agents and productive sectors as well as improved collection, analysis and use of data disaggregated by relevant variables throughout the subprogramme. (c) An increase in the level of readership of the analytical studies and policy proposal reports of the Commission in relation to foreign investment, competitiveness, technological innovations and the behaviour of economic agents and productive sectors. 19.46 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumptions that: (a) policy makers will be willing to adopt and implement the necessary reforms to strengthen policy-making, institutional and managerial capacity affecting the productive sectors of the economy, and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to reduce the productivity gap in relation to developed economies. 19.47 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (RB/XB). Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to analyse new lines of work with respect to outputs and inputs of technological innovation in the agricultural, agro-industrial and trade sectors (1), to consider policies of industrial competitiveness in selected countries of the region (1), to consider the industry dynamics and productivity in countries of the region and contrast them with those of the industrialized countries and the main emerging economies (1), to examine issues relating to diverse strategies for trade linkages and export specialization in agricultural and agro-food products (1) (XB), to examine the development of domestic capital conglomerates in countries of the region (1) and to study trends in foreign direct investment in the region and identify policy alternatives in the area of international negotiation (1); (i) Recurrent publications: Foreign Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean (with CD-ROM attached) (2); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: access to land in the rural sector (1); changes in the industrial structure of countries of the region (1); changes in the position of the major domestic conglomerates of industrial companies with respect to subsidiaries of transnational companies established in the region (1); changes in the productive structure in Brazilian industry following the maturation of reforms implemented in the 1990s (1); diverse strategies in trade integration and export specialization in agricultural and agro-food products, with special attention to subregional integration groups and changes on the international scene (1); employment and productivity in the rural sector (1); policy changes in the industrial competitiveness of countries in the region, including policies related to technology, human resources development and export promotion (1); outputs and inputs of technological changes in the agricultural, agro-industrial and trade sectors (1); the decentralized local dimension of industrial competition policies in selected countries in the region (1); the development of agricultural production and its environmental and socio-economic impact (1); the performance of agents in investment and technical progress in the Brazilian economy (1); the status of competition policies of countries in the region and future trends (1); the status of policies related to support to small and medium-sized enterprises in countries of the region and future trends (1); and the situation of production complexes based on natural resources processing in countries of the region (2); (iii) Technical material: development of computer software to analyse the dynamic of small and medium-sized industrial enterprises in the region (1); exploring the development of alternative analytical software for monitoring trends in the agricultural sector (1); methodological analyses for determining the items that have the greatest impact on pricing on factor markets, especially land and water (1); regular update and improvement of databases relating to the legal framework and statistical information concerning foreign direct investment in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); updating and improving the system of information on international trade in agricultural products and their respective indicators and matrices (1); and yearly updating and development of the CAN (Competitive Analysis of Nations) and PADI (Industrial Performance Analysis Program) computer programs (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison. Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with government, academic and private sector bodies concerned with the economic analysis of industry and agriculture as well as with specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations system and various international and regional organizations; (d) Technical cooperation (XB) (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services, upon request, in connection with: competition policies, improving productivity and developing innovative national systems in the industrial field and in the design and use of socio-economic indicators, particularly with respect to rural and agro-industrial production; the formulation of policies to promote the development of productive complexes in processing natural resources, to generate productive employment in the rural sector and to improve the distribution of wealth, especially in the form of land and water; hemispheric integration and strategies for specialization in the agricultural and agro-food sectors; improvement in statistical information and the identification of alternatives to the regulatory framework governing foreign direct investment in international negotiations; and small and medium-sized enterprises; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: postgraduate courses in subjects relating to development, industrial organization and policies and training workshops on the use of CAN and PADI computer software; (iii) Field projects: regional projects in connection with the development of resource-based production complexes, equity and small and medium-sized enterprises, human resources and the environment, indicators to assess the socio-economic impact of desertification and land degradation processes, professional training and trade liberalization of agricultural products, regional integration and multilateral negotiations. Resource requirements: subprogramme 2 19.48 The increase of $68,300 arises from the reclassification of one Local level post to the P-3 level as a result of an appeal to the initial reclassification of Local level posts in Santiago carried out by the Office of Human Resources Management in 1995. Subprogramme 3 Macroeconomic policies and growth Resource requirements (before recosting): $4,886,600 19.49 The work under this subprogramme will be carried out by the Economic Development Division with support from the ECLAC subregional headquarters and the offices in Buenos Aires, Brasilia, Montevideo and Bogota. Activities of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation, traditionally covered by this subprogramme, will no longer be included since the organizational unit and its functions were phased out during the biennium 2000-2001. 19.50 The main users of the outputs will be ministries of economic affairs and finance, economic and social planning offices, central banks, universities and other academic institutions, libraries, research workers and academics concerned with research into economic and social development and international economic and financial organizations. Table 19.11 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To follow up on the evolution of the region's macroeconomic performance with a view to furthering the harmonization of macroeconomic policies and strengthening the new strategies adopted by Member States for achieving sustainable long-term growth. (a) Goal-setting (and the introduction of any adjustments considered necessary) by Governments with respect to their policies and economic performance. (a) An increase in the number of countries setting sound macroeconomic goals and the performance of those receiving ECLAC inputs and technical cooperation in the macroeconomic field. (b) Strengthened regional cooperation and gradual improvement in the harmonization of macroeconomic policies in the context of the move towards regional integration. (b) Increased sharing of experiences and best practices among member countries on issues related to the harmonization of macroeconomic policies in the region through forums organized and/or serviced by the Commission. (c) Increased access of policy makers in the region to and their awareness of research findings, conclusions and recommendations related to the effect of economic reforms on gender inequality. (d) An increase in the capacity to design macroeconomic policies that are more consistent with objectives for long-term growth and with the goal of social equity. (d) An increase in the number of countries incorporating elements to foster long-term growth and social equity in the design and implementation of macroeconomic policy among those receiving analytical and policy inputs and technical cooperation services from ECLAC. 19.51 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumptions that: (a) policy makers at the national and international level will attach priority to macroeconomic policy issues, develop strategies for achieving sustainable long-term growth and be actively involved in discussions on those issues at United Nations bodies; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to improve their macroeconomic performance and implement long-term growth strategies. 19.52 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (RB). Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to analyse issues relating to the coordination of macroeconomic policies in countries of the region (1) and to consider the conclusions of the study on the relationship between investment, finance, saving and the growth dynamic for the long term (1); (b) Other substantive activities (RB/XB) (i) Recurrent publications: Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, and Preliminary Overview of the Economy of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2002 and 2003; (ii) Non-recurrent publications: a study on a high-priority issue related to the Latin American and Caribbean situation (1); employment and social equity in the labour market (1); links between investment, financing, saving and the long-term economic growth dynamic (1); the coordination of macroeconomic policies of the countries of the region (1); macroeconomic prospects of MERCOSUR (1); the relationship between macroeconomic policies and external trade in the context of globalization and the opening up of Latin American and Caribbean markets (1); the responses of the Argentine economy to disruptions originating in the real or financial sectors (1); and the use of fiscal goals in financial programming in Brazil and a comparison with the experiences of other countries (1); (iii) Technical material: monthly publication of the statistical bulletin "Evolution of the Brazilian Economy" (in English, Portuguese and Spanish) (24); quarterly publication of Argentine macroeconomic indicators (8); and updating and improvement of databases on economic performance in Latin America and the Caribbean, in particular those containing the information needed for the preparation of the aforementioned recurrent publications (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison. Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with various programmes and units of the United Nations system, in particular with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs for the preparation of the World Economic Survey, as well as with government institutions and regional and subregional bodies; (d) Technical cooperation (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services to member States, upon request, for the implementation of fiscal policies (income, expenses, tax administration and institutional issues) and decentralization, mainly in the context of a second phase of economic reforms; (ii) Field projects: regional projects in relation to domestic management of volatility and financial globalization, economic governance and a Latin American and Caribbean network for macroeconomic coordination. Table 19.12 Resource requirements: subprogramme 3 19.53 The decrease of $455,000 for posts is the net result of: (a) the incoming redeployment of one P-5 post from executive direction and management to provide for the Chief of the ECLAC office in Bogota; (b) the outward redeployment of one P-2 post to the library under programme support and six Local level posts as follows: two to subprogramme 6, one to subprogramme 10 and three to executive direction and management, all arising from the restructuring process in ECLAC following the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation and the redefinition of its traditional functions; (c) the abolition of one Local level post for functions no longer required; (d) the reclassification of one P-3 post to the P-4 level; and (e) the establishment of one new P-3 post to strengthen the substantive capacity of the ECLAC office in Brasilia. A decrease of $600 for non-post requirements reflects a decrease in staff travel. Subprogramme 4 Social development and equity Resource requirements (before recosting): $1,783,800 19.54 This subprogramme will be carried out by the Social Development Division. 19.55 The end-users of the outputs will be government authorities and officials, especially those concerned with the formulation, execution and management of social policies, programmes and projects related to the subprogramme. Other important users will include regional and subregional bodies, universities and other academic institutions, research centres and other non-governmental bodies and organizations. The activities will be carried out with due consideration for gender, ethnicity and other aspects of social equity. Table 19.13 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To accelerate the alleviation of poverty and the attainment of social equity by member States in the region by strengthening their capacity to design and implement appropriate social policies, programmes and projects. (a) Strengthened capacity of countries to design and implement policies that target the most underprivileged social sectors so as to increase the quality of human capital, foster social equity and reduce poverty with a focus on gender inequality. (a) The number of countries receiving analytical inputs, policy recommendations and technical cooperation from ECLAC that undertake the revision and/or reform of their social policies in a manner consistent with ECLAC recommendations and proposals in this field. (b) Strengthened international and regional cooperation and increased capacity of national social institutions to analyse and share their experiences in managing social policies, programmes and projects and to incorporate any necessary adjustments. (b) Increased sharing of best practices and lessons learned regarding the design and implementation of social policies, programmes and projects among member States. (c) Increased coordination among national and regional actors engaged in the prevention of drug consumption and the control of drug trafficking and improved efficiency of programmes in terms of targeting, selectivity and impact. (c) (i) The degree of satisfaction expressed by member countries with the usefulness of inter-agency and expert forums organized and/or serviced by the Commission intended to facilitate programme coordination in the prevention of drug consumption; (ii) An increase in the number of countries using the analytical inputs, policy proposals and technical cooperation services provided by the Commission on the prevention of drug consumption and the control of drug trafficking for policy purposes; (iii) Increased inclusion of gender issues in social policy and programming. (d) Improved analytical capacity to mainstream gender concerns in social policy and programming. (d) Increased inclusion of gender issues in social policy and programming. 19.56 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) policy makers are willing to assign high priority to social development issues, to adopt reforms and to strengthen policy-making, institutional and managerial capacity in the social area in order to implement policies geared towards alleviating poverty and attaining social equity, and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to address social development issues and to implement relevant social development policies and programmes. 19.57 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (RB/XB) (i) Substantive servicing of the Third Regional Conference in Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development (1); (ii) Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to carry out a comparative analysis of drug control policies applied by Governments of the region with an assessment of their successes and failures (1), to examine issues relating to institutions responsible for social policy in countries of the region (1), to examine the effects of economic reforms and structural adjustments on socio-economic stratification in selected Latin American countries (1), to examine the impact of economic changes on different types of families in countries of the region (1) (XB) and to examine theoretical and methodological advances in the study of social stratification in countries of the region (1) (XB); (b) Other substantive outputs (RB) (i) Recurrent publications: Social Panorama of Latin America (2002 and 2003 Editions) (2); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: the development of quasi-markets for providing social services in selected countries of the region (1); human capital and the importance of developing it for institution-building and governance (1); changes in the socio-economic stratification in selected countries in the region and their impact on policies for overcoming poverty and reducing inequalities (to be published in the "Políticas sociales" series) (1); the principal methodological and technical points incorporated into studies on changes in socio-economic stratification and their possible relevance in case studies on other countries in the region (to be published in the "Políticas sociales" series) (1); the examination of existing policies in the region for preventing drug use and controlling the traffic in illicit drugs (3); the development of social policy management reforms in selected countries of the region (to be published in the "Políticas sociales" series) (2); national experiences with respect to the coordination of public institutions that provide social services with a view to proposing strategies for achieving greater coordination between them (to be published in the "Políticas sociales" series) (2); and the impact of economic adjustments and structural reforms on different types of families in selected countries in the region (2); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation and liaison will be maintained: (a) in the field of social development issues, with programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, including UNDP, UNESCO, UNICEF, UNFPA and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, as well as with government institutions, regional and subregional organizations, and international organizations, such as the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Organization of American States and the Pan-American Health Organization and, in the area of drugs, with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and competent government agencies concerned with drug issues; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services to countries of the region, upon request, in connection with developing methods for analysing socio-economic stratification, with reference to policies for overcoming poverty and reducing inequalities; establishing integrated systems for the formulation, evaluation and monitoring of social programmes and projects and for social policy management; and methods for collecting and analysing statistical information for the preparation or updating of diagnostic studies on social issues; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of intensive training courses or workshops on the management and monitoring of social programmes and projects and training on methodologies for formulating and evaluating social programmes and projects for government technical staff; (iii) Field projects: regional projects on drug issues; the formulation, monitoring and evaluation of social programmes and projects; and social equity. Table 19.14 Resource requirements: subprogramme 4 19.58 The decrease in post requirements of $68,300 is the net result of the outward redeployment of one P-3 post to subprogramme 6, offset by the inward redeployment of one Local level post from the Documents and Publications Division under programme support. Subprogramme 5 Mainstreaming the gender perspective in regional development Resource requirements (before recosting): $751,800 19.59 The activities on gender mainstreaming consolidated under a single subject area will be carried out by the Women and Development Unit, which reports to the Office of the Secretary of the Commission. The main users of the outputs will be government authorities and public officials of the countries of the region with responsibility for formulating and implementing policies, programmes and projects relating to the incorporation of the gender equity perspective into the political, economic and social spheres as well as non-governmental organizations, academic and research institutes and centres concerned with gender issues. Table 19.15 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To increase awareness of gender issues and to promote gender mainstreaming in regional development, including within all ECLAC subprogrammes and projects. (a) Strengthened and consolidated national and regional institutions intended to reduce the gender gap in various spheres of development. (a) (i) Improved consolidation of national and regional institutions dealing with gender issues; (ii) Increased use of up-to-date analysis and gender-sensitive indicators, methodologies and information developed and provided by the Commission to support national and regional institutions regarding priority issues; (iii) Increased sharing of experiences and lessons learned in relation to the implementation of the regional programme. (b) Increased and systematic incorporation of the gender perspective into national sectoral institutions as well as into the ECLAC programme of work. (b) (i) The number of countries receiving conceptual inputs and technical cooperation from ECLAC that report by the end of the biennium favourable trends in the implementation of agreements and goals of the Beijing Platform for Action; (ii) An increase in the number of ECLAC subprogrammes and extrabudgetary projects which, by the end of the biennium, have systematically incorporated the gender perspective into their principal ongoing activities. 19.60 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumptions that: (a) policy makers are willing to assign high priority to gender issues, to implement the commitments contained in the Beijing Platform for Action and other relevant international agreements on the advancement of women, and to further develop and strengthen policy-making, institutional and managerial capacities to reduce the gender gap, and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of Governments and other national and international actors to implement policies and programmes on gender issues and the advancement of women. 19.61 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) Substantive servicing of the thirty-fourth to thirty-seventh meetings of the Presiding Officers of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean: four meetings, including the preparation of reports on the secretariat's activities and substantive documentation; (ii) Substantive servicing of the ninth session of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean: one meeting, including the preparation of reports on the ECLAC secretariat's activities and substantive documentation for the Conference; (iii) Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to consider: priority issues under the Regional Programme of Action for the Women of Latin America and the Caribbean to address the effects on women of social security reform (1); the relationship between trade liberalization, the employment of women and respect for the economic and social rights of women (1); the effects of judicial reforms on the institutions and mechanisms relating to the human rights of women (1); and the differential impact of natural disasters on women (1); (i) Recurrent publications: four issues of the series "Mujer y desarrollo"; (ii) Non-recurrent publications: advances in the equitable distribution of family responsibilities between men and women (1); the development of municipal and decentralized institutions for the advancement of women (1); the employment of women in high-productivity sectors of the economy (1); the status of holistic health policies for women (1); strategic areas that may be covered by a regional instrument to supplement the Regional Programme of Action for the Women of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1995-2001, for presentation to the Presiding Officers of the Regional Conference on Women and possible adoption at the ninth session of the Conference (1); (iii) Booklets, fact sheets, wallcharts and information kits: an information leaflet and briefing notes to be prepared in collaboration with the Information Services Unit for distribution at the next session of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); (iv) Technical material: a study on compliance with agreements adopted at the world conferences on women and related agreements issued by the Summit of the Americas (1); a study on the connection between the level of education of women and their access to the job market (1); a study on the construction and application of gender indicators, mainly in areas such as poverty, employment, health and education (1); and updating and dissemination, through the ECLAC web site, of the directory of national organizations dealing with programmes and policies on women in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with government agencies and entities with responsibility for policies and programmes for women, public and private institutions that implement public policies on gender equity and academic centres and non-governmental organizations involved in related activities. Coordination will also be maintained with various organs, programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, in particular with the focal point for gender issues, the Division for the Advancement of Women of the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, UNIFEM and INSTRAW. ECLAC will also participate in two inter-agency meetings with United Nations bodies, programmes and specialized agencies, including the preparation of substantive support documents and relevant reports; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services to member countries, upon request, with respect to the design and use of gender indicators, the design of policies for gender mainstreaming and the strengthening of government agencies and entities responsible for programmes on women; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of technical support to countries of the region, upon request, regarding training provided by government agencies, non-governmental organizations, universities and academic centres in the area of gender mainstreaming in development; (iii) Field projects: regional projects on building the capacity of national machineries for governance with a gender perspective in Latin America and the Caribbean; changes in Latin American pension systems and their effect on overcoming gender inequalities; and gender indicators for policy-making. Table 19.16 Resource requirements: subprogramme 5 19.62 The amount of $112,200, reflecting an increase of $14,700, for non-post requirements provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, for consultants and experts and for travel of staff to attend regional conferences for follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women. Subprogramme 6 Population and development Resource requirements (before recosting): $1,857,100 19.63 The work under this subprogramme will be carried out by the Population Division (the Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre). 19.64 The main users of the outputs will be the authorities and government officials of the countries of the region, particularly those working on population-related issues in ministries of health, education and housing and national statistical offices. Other users will include public and private agencies and bodies responsible for the design, execution and administration of population-related programmes, policies and projects, and national, regional and local institutions concerned with economic and social development. Table 19.17 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To assist member States: (a) in strengthening their technical capacity for monitoring population trends for use in social programming, in particular to assess socio-demographic factors that tend to generate disadvantages and other forms of social vulnerability; and (b) in monitoring and implementing the agreements and goals of the Programme of Action adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development. (a) Strengthened technical capacity of ECLAC member countries to design policies and programmes incorporating socio-demographic variables with gender and other social perspectives for overcoming the vulnerability of disadvantaged social sectors and the intergenerational transmission of disadvantageous conditions. (a) Increased incorporation of socio-demographic variables in the social programming of ECLAC member countries. (b) Greater national capacities and enhanced regional cooperation to follow up and fulfil the agreements and goals set forth in the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development. (b) (i) The number of countries receiving analytical inputs and technical cooperation from ECLAC that report by the end of the biennium favourable trends in the implementation of agreements and goals of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development; (ii) Increased regional sharing of experiences and lessons learned in relation to the implementation of the Programme of Action. (c) Increased availability of new information, studies and technical support from the Commission at the disposal of policy makers in the region to foster policies geared to harmonizing migratory trends with national development objectives. (c) The degree of satisfaction expressed by member countries on the timeliness, importance and relevance of the specialized information, documents and technical reports measured through surveys, reviews and quotations of ECLAC texts in specialized literature. 19.65 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) policy makers will be willing to develop and strengthen policy-making, institutional and managerial capacities to incorporate demographic variables into social programming and to attach priority to implementing the goals and objectives of the International Conference on Population and Development, and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to implement the goals and objectives of the International Conference on Population and Development. 19.66 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) ECLAC sessional Ad Hoc Committee on Population and Development. Substantive servicing of meetings: one meeting, including the preparation of technical documents for the biennial follow-up to the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Plan of Action on Population and Development; (ii) Ad hoc expert groups. Meetings of experts: to analyse the socio-demographic situation of socially vulnerable groups in the region (1) (XB); to consider progress in the implementation of the recommendations of the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Plan of Action on Population and Development and the Programme of Action adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development (1); and to examine the results of the 2000 round of censuses, their use in the formulation of social policies and their dissemination to support decentralized administration (1); (i) Recurrent publications: Demographic Bulletin (4), Notas de Población (4), and REDATAM Informa (2); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: quantifying and describing the demographic and socio-economic impact of international migration, based on information obtained from the 2000 censuses (1); socio-demographic analysis of vulnerable groups in selected countries of the region, with special reference to gender inequalities and reproductive health services (1); internal migration in selected countries of the region aimed at facilitating the decentralist activities of public management with special attention to gender-specific factors and to information from the 2000 round of censuses (1); socio-demographic inputs for policy management by sector (1); population levels and trends in countries of the region (2); computer software applications in the field of population (2); and evaluation of the 2000 round of censuses (2); (iii) Technical material: development and updating of computer programs to facilitate the use of population data, with special attention to optimizing the use of census data from the 2000 round and other sources through the combined use of the microcomputer data retrieval system for small areas and geographic information systems (WIN-REDATAM/GIS) (1); maintenance and updating of a data bank for the investigation of international migration in Latin America programme incorporating the results of the 2000 round of censuses (1); maintenance and updating of a database on demographic trends, population projections by sex and age and demographic indicators (1); and updating of the database on spatial distribution of the population and urbanization in Latin America and the Caribbean, with special attention to the incorporation of the results of the 2000 round of censuses (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with United Nations programmes, specialized agencies and departments, mainly UNFPA, UNDP, the Population and Statistics Divisions of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the Population Information Network of the United Nations and with such specialized agencies as FAO, the Pan-American Health Organization, UNESCO and UNICEF and with intergovernmental organizations such as the International Organization for Migration and IDB; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services to countries of the region, upon request, on: data collection, demographic analysis and methodologies for the preparation of projections and population estimates; the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Plan of Action on Population and Development; the design and use of the WIN-REDATAM/GIS computer software application and the development of relevant databases; and the incorporation of population variables in development policies, programmes and projects and issues linked to territorial mobility of the population, urbanization and vulnerable groups; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: cooperation, upon request, with government entities, universities, non-governmental organizations and regional and subregional bodies in support of training in demographic analysis and methodologies for the preparation of population estimates and projections; operational integration of socio-demographic elements in development policies, programmes and projects; use of software applications for data recovery for small areas by microcomputer and GIS (WIN-REDATAM/GIS) and the establishment of population databases; and issues relating to the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Plan of Action on Population and Development; and provision of training on demographic analysis or other relevant aspects of population and development (two regional courses lasting from two to four months each, for approximately 15 Professionals); (iii) Field projects: The Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre/UNFPA regional programme on population; regional project on bilingual literacy on reproductive health and sexuality; regional project on identification and localization of the most vulnerable population groups for sectoral and local development programmes; and regional project on training on population issues. Table 19.18 Resource requirements: subprogramme 6 19.67 The increase of $343,300 in post requirements results from the inward redeployment of one P-3 post from subprogramme 4 to strengthen the capacity of the Division for implementing designated high priority outputs and two Local level posts from subprogramme 3 to strengthen the research capacity of the Division. Subprogramme 7 Planning of public administration Resource requirements (before recosting): $1,709,000 19.68 The activities of this subprogramme will be carried out by the Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning. 19.69 Notwithstanding political recognition of the convergence and complementarity of the respective functions of market and State, securing a new balance between these two sectors remains one of the outstanding goals in the ongoing reform process in Latin America and the Caribbean. New forms of State involvement, consistent with the operation of the market economy and characterized by more efficient and effective public management, improved public policy coordination, the development of evaluation systems for optimizing management and securing higher returns from public resources, are all prerequisites for developing more equitable societies and for achieving the pursued productive transformation of the economies of the region. 19.70 The main end-users of the outputs will be government authorities and officials of the countries of the region, especially those concerned with the planning and coordination of economic and social policies at the national, regional and local levels, as well as those carrying out planning, programming and management activities in other public bodies and enterprises. Other end-users will be institutions of civil society, such as political groups and parties, business, labour and professional organizations and universities and other academic and research institutions. Table 19.19 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To strengthen the institutional capacity of member States' public administration at the regional, national and local levels, in particular with regard to basic planning functions and the challenges arising from privatization, deregulation of economic activities, protection of consumers and the need to improve the regulatory frameworks of public services and non-competitive sectors. (a) Enhanced capacity of member States to accommodate their public and administrative procedures to better achieve national, regional and local goals. (a) The number of countries receiving ECLAC analytical and policy recommendation inputs and technical cooperation which adopt innovative administrative procedures in public administration to facilitate the achievement of national and local goals. (b) Enhanced capacity of national, regional and local government staff to apply the basic principles of democratic governance, efficient public administration planning and State regulation. (b) Increased application of basic principles of planning of public administration. (c) Increased availability of new information, studies and technical support regarding such public planning issues as decentralization and administration of public decisions, local development, regulation of public services and non-competitive sectors. (c) The degree of satisfaction expressed by member countries with the timeliness, quality and usefulness of documents, reports and conceptual inputs measured through surveys, reviews and quotations in specialized publications. (d) Increased integration of the gender perspective into the capacity-building activities carried out by the subprogramme. (d) Increased incorporation of gender issues in the curricula of training courses, seminars and workshops organized by the subprogramme, and increased gender parity among participants, with an overall attendance goal of at least 40 per cent of women. 19.71 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) member States will continue to recognize and attach priority to the role of public administration, public investment planning and economic regulation in economic and social development and would adopt administrative reforms and strengthen policy-making, institutional and managerial capacities in those areas; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to strengthen basic planning functions in public administration. 19.72 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (i) Eleventh session of the Conference of Ministers and Heads of Planning of Latin America and the Caribbean; (ii) Twelfth Meeting of the Regional Council for Planning; (iii) Twenty-second Meeting of the Presiding Officers of the Regional Council for Planning; (iv) Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts on: development policies and land-use planning in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); experiences in the operation of national public investment systems in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); indicators for evaluating public management (1); instruments and experiences in local strategic management in selected countries in the region (1); distance teaching training network (2); and successful experiences in local economic development in countries of the region with special attention to business development (2); (b) Other substantive outputs (i) Non-recurrent publications: methodologies in use for the programming and evaluation of the medium-term budget policy (1); development of regulatory frameworks of public services in the region (1); decentralization in Latin America and the Caribbean, with special attention to the participation of civil society and governance (1); the design and application of policies for promoting productive development at the local level (1); an evaluation of the advances made in the process of economic reform in countries in the region and in the construction of a new State profile (1); development and land-use policies and instruments in Latin America and the Caribbean, two in metropolitan areas and the other two on binational integration in frontier regions (4); development and local management in selected countries in the region based on the analysis of structures and production interrelationships and on the analysis of the effects of the former on job creation and local projects (4); four issues of the Boletín del Instituto (4); the preparation and evaluation of local development projects applicable in specific sectors (4); evaluation methods and techniques for public management (1); institutional planning structures and land-use management in selected countries of the region (2); and participatory structures and land-use planning in selected countries of the region (2); (ii) Technical material: development of geo-reference software for the regional analysis of metropolitan areas (1) and maintenance and updating of a database on development policies and land-use planning (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison. Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with the national planning bodies of Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as with universities and research centres, private-sector bodies and non-governmental organizations concerned with public policy planning and coordination. Close collaboration will also be maintained with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, IDB, the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation, the International Institute for Public Administration of the Government of France, the General Secretariat for Planning and the Budget of the Government of Spain and the Inter-American Public Budget Association; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services on local development and management, land-use planning and information systems for project administration and monitoring; and provision of technical cooperation services on State management, budgeting, national public investment systems and economic regulation; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of training on: economic reforms and strategic State management; land-use planning and management; management and evaluation of public policy, public service regulation, the macroeconomic context surrounding budget policy and efficiency and equity in social benefits; preparation and evaluation of local development projects; provision of training on project management and control; and strategic management of local development; (iii) Field projects: regional project in relation to planning of public administration. Table 19.20 Resource requirements: subprogramme 7 19.73 The resource requirements under subprogramme 7 are at the maintenance level. Subprogramme 8 Environment and human settlements Resource requirements (before recosting): $1,708,700 19.74 Activities under this subprogramme will be carried out by the Environment and Human Settlements Division. The activities, as well as those appearing under subprogramme 9, were previously under subprogramme 7, Environmental and land resource sustainability, for the medium-term plan for 1998-2001. 19.75 The main users of the outputs will be government authorities and officials of countries of the region at the central and local levels responsible for policy formulation and for carrying out activities relating to the environment and environmental management, as well as with human settlements. Other end-users will be regional and subregional bodies, universities, academic and applied research centres, the business sector and non-governmental organizations. Table 19.21 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objectives: (a) To assist member States in the further implementation and monitoring of Agenda 21 and other new outcomes of United Nations global environmental conventions; (b) to strengthen their capacity for incorporating environmental and gender considerations in the formulation and implementation of public policies; and (c) to assist them in the design and implementation of land-use management systems intended to promote sustainable rural and urban uses of land, including integrated and well-balanced human settlements. (a) Increased application of global environmental agreements at the national and regional levels. (a) The number of countries receiving ECLAC analytical inputs and technical cooperation which report progress in the implementation of commitments adopted under Agenda 21, the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and other global environmental agreements by the end of the biennium. (b) Enhanced national capacity to incorporate the environmental dimension into the design and implementation of development policies, including a better understanding of the uneven effects of such policies on men and women. (b) (i) Increased number of public policies in the region incorporating environmental considerations at the design stage and during implementation; (ii) An expansion in the use of economic instruments in the region in innovative ways with environmental management purposes. (c) Reduction of the existing gap of empirical information, including sex-disaggregated data, as well as of conceptual inputs to assess systematically the national and regional trends towards sustainable patterns of development. (c) Satisfaction expressed by member States for progress made regarding the increased availability and inclusion of data disaggregated by sex and other relevant variables in studies and reports in the subprogramme. (d) Adoption of integrated urban management practices incorporating systematic criteria of sustainability in the formulation of land-use policies, as well as policies particularly intended to address problems related to urban poverty. (d) The number of countries reporting progress in the adoption of integrated urban management practices that incorporate systematic criteria of sustainability in the formulation of land-use policies. 19.76 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) member States and international organizations will attach priority to the implementation of Agenda 21 and other commitments made during the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II); (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to incorporate environmental sustainability in public policy programming. 19.77 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) Regional Meeting of Ministers and High-level Authorities of the Housing and Urban Development Sector in Latin America and the Caribbean: servicing of one meeting, including the preparation of technical documents; (ii) Ad hoc expert groups. Meeting of experts to consider issues relating to methodologies for calculating public spending for environmental protection (1); priority issues for countries of the region relating to trade and the environment, in the light of trends that may emerge from multilateral negotiations of greater significance (1); the incorporation of the environmental dimension into the sphere of action of the judiciary in countries of the region (1); the main conclusions of the status report on sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); and the examination of issues relating to instruments and strategies for urban management (1); (i) Non-recurrent publications: current legislation and the mechanisms for regulation of urban land holdings in selected countries of the region (1); sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); environmental clauses contained in agreements on integration and free trade and their impact on legislation and institutions in countries of the region (1); environmental clauses in integration agreements already in force or under negotiation to which countries of the region are party (1); environmental externalities caused by incomplete markets or policy failures and the options for putting into practice the necessary corrections (1); experiences in the application of methodologies for the processing and use of information in decision-making with environmental impact within the area of public policies, with special attention to elements such as indicators and environmental accounts and statistics, among others (1); integrated land use and sustainable development (1); methodologies for calculating public spending on environmental protection (1); distribution of benefits and costs of environmental policies among different social groups (1); economic effects of fulfilment of the commitments made by countries of the region within the framework of Agenda 21 and other international environmental agreements (1); environmental impact of the productive structure resulting from the development strategy directed towards external markets in countries of the region (1); impact of production and consumption patterns on the resource base and ecosystems which support them (1); incorporation of the environmental dimension in territorial development at the urban and local levels and its impact on land use (1); recent development of environmental policies in countries of the region, with special attention to changes in legislation and environmental institutions (1); relationship between institution-building, decentralization and the environment (1); use of economic instruments in environmental management in selected economic sectors in countries of the region (1); (ii) Technical material: updating and improving the database on indicators and parameters for measuring and assessing the status of sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); updating and improving the database on the development of environmental and land-use policies in countries of the region (1); updating and perfecting the database on economics and the environment (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with programmes and organizations of the United Nations system, such as UNEP, UNDP, the Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean of FAO, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), the Commission on Sustainable Development, and other intergovernmental organizations, such as IDB and the World Bank. Cooperation will also be maintained with non-governmental organizations, the business sector, universities and research centres, and environmental organizations established under integration agreements existing in the region, with the secretariats of the main environmental conventions on biodiversity, climate change and desertification and with financial institutions, such as the Global Environment Facility and the Andean Development Corporation; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services on: environmental accounting methodologies and the development of environmental indicators; issues relating to the introduction of clean production technologies; facilitating public and private initiatives for environmental management; implementing economic instruments in environmental management; the development of innovative schemes for environmental management at the national, regional and local levels and strengthening the bargaining power of countries on environmental issues in regional and multilateral forums; public efficiency in the management of human settlements, urban environmental management and assessments of the impact of natural disasters in urban areas and on the environment; the development of mechanisms to follow up on the compliance with international environmental agreements and assessing the impact on public administrative practices and procedures at the national and local levels; and the participation of civil society in matters relating to the environment, in particular, the inclusion of criteria of sustainability in the citizenship agenda; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of training on environmental management (one regional course); (iii) Field projects: regional project in relation to: assessment of market opportunities for environmental goods and services in Latin America and the Caribbean; assessment of sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean; environment and development; sustainable development in the context of globalization; and urban management strategies and tools for sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean. Table 19.22 Resource requirements: subprogramme 8 19.78 The post and non-post requirements of $1,708,700, reflecting an increase of $184,000, result in part from the redistribution in the biennium 2002-2003 of resources from subprogramme 7 for the biennium 2000-2001 following the revision of the subprogramme structure of the ECLAC medium-term plan for 2002-2005. The provision of $184,000 relates to requirements for general temporary assistance, consultants and experts and travel of staff. Subprogramme 9 Natural resources and infrastructure Resource requirements (before recosting): $2,887,400 19.79 Activities under this subprogramme will be carried out by the Natural Resources and Infrastructure Division, which includes the Transport Unit. The activities, as well as those appearing under subprogramme 8, were previously under subprogramme 7, Environmental and land resource sustainability for the medium-term plan for 1998-2001 (A/53/6/Rev.1). 19.80 The main users of the outputs will be authorities and government officials concerned with natural resources, energy, infrastructure management, and also those concerned with international and regional transport. Other users will be regional and subregional bodies, universities, academic and applied research centres and other non-governmental bodies and organizations. The activities will be implemented with due consideration of social and gender equity. Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To promote the efficient use of natural resources and infrastructure in the energy, water, mining and transport sectors and their environmentally sustainable management. (a) Enhanced technical expertise of ECLAC member countries to design suitable policies for promoting the sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure and to carry out actions in this field oriented to achieve environmental sustainability and social equity. (a) (i) An increase in the number of countries receiving ECLAC analytical inputs, proposals and technical cooperation services which formulate and/or modify policies intended to improve the sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure; (ii) Increased environmental and gender concerns in designing suitable policies in the field of sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure. (b) Increased capacity of countries of the region to manage natural resources and infrastructure at the decentralized regional and local levels and, in particular, reinforcement of the capacity of major groups involved in these processes with due consideration to the gender perspective in this regard. (b) (i) A growing number of countries recipient of ECLAC analytical and conceptual inputs and technical cooperation services which further develop their regulatory frameworks along the lines of ECLAC proposals with an impact on their sustainable development; (ii) An increase in the number of national staff involved in regulatory activities in the field of management of natural resources and infrastructure benefiting from ECLAC training services. (c) Strengthened negotiating capacity of countries of the region at international and regional mechanisms dealing with the sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure. (c) (i) Increased ability of countries of the region to negotiate proposals at regional and international mechanisms and meetings dealing with the sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure; (ii) Satisfaction expressed by member States with the relevance, timeliness and quality of documents, technical reports and the impact of operational activities carried out by the Commission. 19.81 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) policy makers will be willing to recognize and attach priority to the sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure in economic and social development and to adopt administrative reforms and strengthen policy-making, institutional and managerial capacities in this area, particularly in the energy, water, mining and transport sectors, and that the related political climate exists at the national and international levels; (b) response from the international community in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to incorporate the sustainable development of natural resources and infrastructure in public policy programming. 19.82 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (RB/XB). Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to examine and analyse aspects of pricing for use of infrastructure, project financing and the modal and spatial distribution of transport traffic (1); the competitiveness of ports and shipping in countries of the region (1); issues relating to the formulation of a draft code on seabed mining (1); proposals aimed at incorporating climate vulnerability criteria in policies for the integrated management of coastal areas (1); shipping and port policy in the Caribbean subregion and its contribution to the socio-economic development of countries (1); experiences and progress made in regulation of water-related public services (1); and issues relating to the transport of persons and goods between countries belonging to the same subregional integration group (1); and to study the performance of water authorities in river basins (1); (i) Recurrent publications: FAL Bulletin, a bimonthly publication on the facilitation of trade and transport in Latin America and the Caribbean (12); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: conflicts and potential mechanisms for conciliation between local communities and companies devoted to the development of natural, in particular mineral, resources (1); cooperation arrangements and agreements between countries on river basins and transboundary bodies of water (1); fostering the economic efficiency of the transport system and its integrated development in countries with high levels of private-sector participation in that area, with a view to maximizing returns on investment and their contribution to economic and territorial development with emphasis on the proposal of appropriate policies and actions (1); mining trends and prospects in the region in the context of globalization and regional integration (1); procedures and mechanisms for the management and development of small-scale mining in Latin America (1); river basin authorities and management mechanism for multiple uses of water (1); effects of the application of environmental mining standards in selected countries in the region (1); effects of the evolution of the energy sector on sustainable development, in its economic, social and environmental components (1); evolution of water policies and rights (1); impact of social changes and technological advances on transport infrastructure requirements and their relationship with the long-term return on investments geared to coping with transport at times of peak demand (1); impact of the integrated management of river basins on the control of marine pollution from land-based sources (1); legal situation with respect to biotechnological resources of the international seabed area (1); participation of local authorities in the management of water resources, including waterways and catchment areas (1); problems posed by energy development in rural areas and among the most vulnerable social groups (1); regulation of the energy industry in selected countries in the region, with special attention to the identification and analysis of problems facing regulatory bodies (1); regulation of water-related public services in selected countries of the region (1); relevance of shipping services between the countries of the Caribbean and South and Central America to the current needs of the region (1); transport infrastructure, services and institutional arrangements with a view to facilitating trade among countries belonging to a single subregional integration group (1); (iii) Booklets, fact sheets, wallcharts, information kits: newsletter of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resources Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (4) and newsletter on waterways and lakes shared between countries (2); (iv) Technical material: updating and improvement of the electronic publication, Perfil marítimo with information on the status of shipping in the region (1) and updating the transport statistics system for South America and extending its coverage to other countries in the region (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation and liaison will be maintained in the field of water-related activities with programmes and offices of the United Nations system, including the Commission on Sustainable Development, the Subcommittee on Water Resources of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, the Office of Legal Affairs, the Division for Ocean Affairs and Law of the Sea, UNDP, the regional offices of FAO and UNESCO, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and other international, regional and subregional organizations, such as the World Bank, the Organization of American States, IDB, the Permanent South Pacific Commission and the Global Water Partnership; cooperation and liaison will be maintained in the mining and energy sectors with the Latin American Energy Organization, the Latin American Mining Organization, the European Union cooperation programme on the rational use of energy in Latin America, the Interparliamentary Conference on Mining and Energy in Latin America and the Conference of Ministers of Mining of the Americas; cooperation and liaison will be maintained in the field of transport with the Latin American Integration Association, the Latin American Economic System, MERCOSUR, the Permanent Secretariat of the General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration, the Caribbean Community, the Caribbean Shipping Association, the Central American Commission of Maritime Transport, IMO, the International Road Federation, the Latin American Railways Association, the Conference of South American Ministers of Transport, Communications and Public Works, the Meeting of National Customs Directors of Latin America, Spain and Portugal and with the World Bank and IDB; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services on market policy, legislation and regulation of markets in the mining, energy, water and transport sectors and, in particular, on issues linked to the control of demand for transport and the development of statistical systems in this sector; shipping and port policies to promote linkages between their economies and the global economy; the formulation, implementation or revision of legislation and adoption of policies, programmes and plans for the sustainable management of natural resources and infrastructure; and the implementation of international and regional instruments relating to the sustainable development of oceans and coastal areas and to procedures for the adoption and reform of mining legislation; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: cooperation with government departments, universities and regional and subregional organizations, upon request, to assist with training in the management of multiple uses of water and regulation of water-related public utility companies; and provision of training workshops for local stakeholders with a view to strengthening their participation in the sustainable management of natural resources and infrastructure; (iii) Field projects: regional project in relation to natural hazard vulnerability in river basins in Latin America and the Caribbean and road maintenance concepts in the region. Table 19.24 Resource requirements: subprogramme 9 19.83 The increase of $125,500 for posts provides for the establishment of one new P-3 post and one new P-2 post, the reclassification of two P-3 posts to the P-4 level, the inward redeployment of one Local level post from the Division of Administration to assist with the research functions of the subprogramme and to enhance its capability to implement designated high-priority outputs, offset by the outward redeployment of one P-4 post to executive direction and management. The decrease of $123,400 for non-post resources results from the redeployment of general temporary assistance, consultants and travel of staff resources to subprogramme 8, the activities of which were co-mingled in the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001 with activities under this subprogramme. Subprogramme 10 Statistics and economic projections Resource requirements (before recosting): $3,699,700 19.84 The work under this subprogramme will be carried out by the Statistics and Economic Projections Division. 19.85 The end-users of the outputs will be government agencies of member States, particularly national statistical offices, central banks and ministries concerned with economic affairs. Other users will be business associations, labour organizations and technical and professional institutions linked to production sectors, universities, research centres, regional and subregional integration bodies and other public and private entities which require comparable information on the countries of the region, including experts working with UNDP and other United Nations bodies responsible for drafting reports and implementing technical cooperation projects. Table 19.25 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To strengthen the capacity of the region to produce the statistics and projections necessary for formulating and monitoring policies designed to implement new development modalities and to increase the level of coordination of international statistical work throughout the region. (a) Increased capacity of ECLAC and member countries to produce statistics, to expand, update and develop data banks, including those related to environment and gender indicators, and to generate analyses of current economic trends as inputs for the management of short-term policies. (a) (i) Improved timeliness, reliability and comparability of databases and expansion of their coverage; (ii) An increase in the use of ECLAC statistical information in forecasts by countries and regional or international organizations; (iii) An increase in the systematic availability and use of gender indicators for policy-making purposes, as measured by the satisfaction expressed by the Statistical Conference of the Americas of ECLAC, national statistical offices and women's bureaus; (iv) An increase in the systematic availability and use of gender indicators for policy-making purposes, as measured by the satisfaction expressed by the Statistical Conference of the Americas of ECLAC, national statistical offices and women's bureau. (b) Expanded and improved technical capacity of countries of the region to produce statistics and forecasts as inputs for developing economic and social programmes in the short, medium and long term. (b) The widespread adoption and dissemination by countries in the region of methodological and technological advances that ECLAC assists in channelling, in particular the harmonized commodity description and coding system. 19.86 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumptions that: (a) policy makers are willing to recognize and attach priority to the statistical field in economic and social development; to strengthen technical, institutional and managerial capacities in this area; and to promote regional and international cooperation in this respect and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to strengthen national statistical offices and regional capabilities to produce statistics and projections and to promote the adoption and dissemination of methodological and technological advances in this field. 19.87 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) Statistical Conference of the Americas of ECLAC: coordination and monitoring of technical cooperation agreements in different areas and preparation of relevant documentation (1); (ii) Steering Committee of the Statistical Conference of the Americas (1); (iii) Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to consider methodological and substantive aspects of prospective studies and economic projections (1); to consider the regional system of short-term economic data and expansion of the subject areas covered (1); to examine methodologies and procedures that enable countries of the region to produce standard national and international environmental indicators (2); to examine techniques and methodologies used in household surveys and the possibility of incorporating them in a social information system that uses information from other sources for poverty analysis and the design of social policies (4); and to evaluate the introduction of the new System of National Accounts and the new questionnaire on the United Nations System of National Accounts, and to examine the scope for regional cooperation in this area (2); (i) Recurrent publications: "Cuadernos estadísticos de la CEPAL" (in Spanish only, 1 on external sector statistics and 1 on regional series of national accounts (2); preparation of annual editions of the Social Panorama for Latin America, carried out jointly by the Statistics and Economic Projections Division and the Social Development Division (2); principal short-term indicators (8); statistical summary and estimates for the Preliminary Overview of the Economy of Latin America and the Caribbean (2); and Statistical Yearbook for Latin America and the Caribbean (2); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: statistics on international trade in services (1); income distribution, poverty, employment and other social indicators in selected countries (4); structural trends affecting the current situation of countries of the region and on the outlook for the world economy and for Latin America and the Caribbean (4); world economy focusing on globalization as it relates to production patterns and financial intermediation (1); external sector statistics (2); implementation of the new United Nations System of National Accounts in countries of the region (2); medium and long-term assessment of the main trends of production and social progress in selected countries of Latin America (2); medium and long-term global and sectoral macroeconomic projections (2); structural effects of globalization and macroeconomic and institutional reforms in areas such as capital accumulation, the fiscal budget, external financing and trade equilibria and relative prices (2); production rates by sector (1); and domestic prices (1); (iii) Technical material: maintenance and updating of existing databases and creation of databases on new topics in the social sector (1); maintenance, updating and expansion of existing databases on new topics; development of quick-access database systems; upgrading of mechanisms for connecting to ECLAC internal computer networks and the economic and social information system of the United Nations; and establishment of regional networks with national statistical offices and central banks in order to expedite data collection and exchange (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison. Close cooperation will be maintained with the Statistics Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations, especially the National Accounts Section, in the preparation and distribution of technical manuals on the new System of National Accounts and the Spanish version of SNA News and Notes; cooperation and liaison will also be maintained with various programmes and organizations of the United Nations system, including the Division for Social Policy and Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the Project Link Research Centre, the regional commissions of the United Nations, UNCTAD, UNDP, FAO, WTO, the World Bank, international and regional bodies such as IDB, the Organization of American States, the Centre for Latin American Monetary Studies, the Statistical Office of the European Communities and the European Training Centre for Economic Statisticians of Developing Countries; and statistical offices of the countries of the region; in addition, the subprogramme will coordinate a regional cooperation programme in the area of environmental statistics, in conjunction with the Government of Mexico, consisting basically in the transmission of successful experiences and new methodologies from developed countries or countries in the region to other countries that need them; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services on the organization of workshops and seminars on the implementation of recommendations made by the United Nations Statistical Commission in such areas as the generation of information on social variables, methodologies for the analysis of situations of poverty and specialized statistical techniques, including computing requirements; the provision of technical cooperation services on household surveys; statistics and social indicators; the quantification, description and analysis of situations of poverty; the organization of economic and other statistics, national accounts, techniques for the electronic dissemination of statistical data, and the design of projection models and methodologies for use in the formulation of development policies and strategies; and the dissemination of progress achieved by the main technical groups working on policies for the generation and dissemination of statistics under the direction of the Statistical Commission; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of training in the estimation and use of social indicators relating to income distribution, poverty and employment of various social groups; (iii) Field projects: it is expected that a regional technical cooperation project will be carried out in the field of economic and social statistics and projections. Table 19.26 Resource requirements: subprogramme 10 19.88 The increase of $92,000 in post requirements provides for one Local level post to be redeployed to this subprogramme from subprogramme 3 to assist with research functions. Subprogramme 11 Subregional activities in Mexico and Central America Resource requirements (before recosting): $5,734,000 19.89 The work under this subprogramme will be carried out by the ECLAC subregional headquarters in Mexico City. 19.90 The end-users of the outputs and services will be government authorities and officials and public sector entities concerned with economic and social matters, the formulation and execution of policies, programmes and projects in the areas indicated above, as well as international, regional and subregional organizations involved in integration and cooperation. Other important users will be various private sector institutions such as business, labour and professional associations, and universities and other academic institutions involved in applied research. Table 19.27 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: The objective is to promote cooperation among Member States in the subregion and to provide support in their efforts geared to: (a) formulating and implementing policies and measures aimed at improving subregional and international integration, economic growth and employment; (b) strengthening the capacity of the subregion to analyse and design appropriate policies and programmes affecting social development; (c) formulating policies and measures to strengthen productive, technological and business development in the agricultural and industrial sectors; and (d) promoting subregional cooperation and integration in the energy sector. (a) Enhanced institutional frameworks in the countries of the subregion in terms of their economic and technical capacities to adjust to rapid changes on the international scene, to identify emerging opportunities and to maximize the beneficial effects and mitigate any adverse consequences of globalization. (a) Increasing number of public sector institutions in the subregion benefiting from ECLAC analytical inputs, policy proposals and technical cooperation services which design and adopt policies consistent with ECLAC recommendations to foster competitiveness. (b) Improved formulation or review of policies aimed at reducing poverty and gender inequality. (b) An increased number of social policies specifically addressed to poverty and gender inequality reduction being implemented or reviewed by countries of the subregion consistently with ECLAC policy recommendations; the number of requests for technical cooperation. (c) Gradual harmonization of energy policies in the subregion and enhanced technical expertise geared to increase the efficiency of energy management. (c) The number of countries receiving analytical inputs, policy proposals and technical cooperation from ECLAC that take steps towards the harmonization of their regulatory frameworks in the energy sector along the lines of ECLAC recommendations. 19.91 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) policy makers will be willing to recognize and attach priority to subregional cooperation and integration in Central America, to improve the linkages of the subregion's economies with other regions and the global economy and to strengthen technical, institutional and policy-making capacities in the subregion to implement policies to reduce poverty and foster social equity and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to strengthen subregional integration and cooperation on the aforementioned areas. 19.92 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) Central American Economic Cooperation Committee. Substantive servicing of a meeting to examine the features of Central American integration in the context of hemispheric integration (1); (ii) Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts to analyse the relationship between the fulfilment of multilateral commitments entered into by countries of the subregion with respect to new topics in international trade and negotiating frameworks within the subregion (1); to consider the competitiveness of the manufacturing industry in the countries of the subregion, in the context of the development of a hemispheric free trade area (1); to consider the issue of sustainable food production in the subregion (1); to examine economic development, integration and cooperation within the subregion (1); to examine issues relating to investment in human capital and the effect of such an approach on vulnerable social groups (1); to examine the characteristics and composition of subregional trade among Central American countries and between countries of the subregion and the rest of the world to determine their technological content (1); to examine trends in the composition of economic areas in the subregion and their links with economic policy (1); and to consider issues relating to decentralization of public management (1) (XB); (i) Non-recurrent publications: the potential for industrial development through the promotion of clusters and the effects of scientific-technological policies on the industrial sector of the subregion (1); constraints and prospects in terms of the formulation and implementation of economic policy espoused by countries of the subregion in addressing problems of unemployment and poverty (1); the link between macroeconomic policy and spatial development of economic activities in selected countries of the region (1); the constitution of a subregional economic area in the coordination of the economies of Central America with their main hemispheric markets and to identify opportunities and challenges arising therefrom in terms of trade flows, investment and other productive resources (1); challenges posed by the regulatory framework governing the energy sector in selected countries of the subregion (1); progress made in the integration of electricity systems in Central America (1); trends in the agricultural sector in countries of the subregion (1); benefits associated with trade in environmental services and for the incorporation of the environmental variable in exports (1); decentralization of public management, geared especially towards the transfer of functions and resources to the regional and local spheres and to the generation of management capacities at the local level in selected countries of the subregion (1); decentralization of social spending and social equity in selected countries of the subregion (1); investment geared towards increasing human capital and the effect of such an approach on vulnerable social groups (1); investment, employment and non-agricultural rural income in selected countries of the subregion (1); public policy geared towards the promotion of employment for women in selected countries of the subregion (1); sustainable food production in selected countries of the subregion (1); characteristics and composition of subregional trade among Central American countries and between countries of the subregion and the rest of the world to determine their technological content (1); competitive development of small and medium-sized businesses in countries of the subregion (1); development of energy services in rural areas of selected countries in the subregion (1); effects of globalization in Central America, with emphasis on the main trends in productive integration and land use in the subregion (1); effects of globalization on factors that affect poverty alleviation, such as employment, migrant flows and family remittances in selected countries of the subregion (1); sustainability of reforms in the energy sector in small markets (1); recent developments in the manufacturing industry in countries of the subregion (2); and trends in national trade policies and the process of subregional integration in Central America (2); (ii) Technical material: notes on economic trends in countries of the subregion in 2001 and 2002 (10); notes on economic trends in countries of the subregion in 2002 and 2003 (10); preparation of basic social indicators for the countries served by the subregional headquarters (1); updating and dissemination of information on the agricultural sector in countries of the subregion (1); updating and improvement of databases on the development of the energy sector in countries of the subregion (1); updating and improvement of the database on the manufacturing industry of countries of the subregion (1); updating and improvement of the statistical database and documents of trade, economic integration and cooperation among countries of the subregion (1); and updating, improvement and dissemination of the computer software entitled "Module for the Analysis of Growth of International Commerce" (MAGIC) and the TradeCAN database (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation, coordination and liaison will be maintained between ECLAC headquarters, other United Nations bodies and international, regional and subregional organizations, such as UNCTAD, WTO, FAO, UNIDO, ILO, IDB, the permanent secretariat of the General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration, the Central American Bank for Economic Integration, the secretariat of the Central American Integration System, the secretariat of the Central American Monetary Council, the Latin American Energy Organization, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture, the Central American Agricultural Council and the Central American Institute for Industrial Research and Technology. Cooperation will also be maintained with subregional and national private sector bodies, in particular the Federation of Central American and Panamanian Private Entities and the Federations of Chambers of Commerce and Industry Associations of Central America and the Caribbean. In addition, the subregional headquarters in Mexico City will collaborate with the Central American Electrification Council, the Central American Regional Energy Forum, and the Central American Committee for Cooperation on Hydrocarbons, especially in connection with regular and special annual meetings convened by their respective secretariats; (i) Advisory services: technical cooperation services on energy integration and management; international trade, economic integration and regional cooperation; rural development and agricultural policies; social development and equity technological innovation and industrial policies; the design and evaluation of public policies and development cooperation programmes in the field of economic policies and the promotion of foreign investment; and to countries of the Central America and the Caribbean subregions in connection with the assessment of socio-economic effects of natural disasters; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of training on competitiveness and the use of the MAGIC computer software and the TradeCAN databases; international trade linkages, economic integration and regional cooperation; and sustainable development of the energy sector, energy economics and regulation of public utilities; (iii) Field projects: subregional project in relation to environmental strategy and standards for the supply of liquefied gas in Central America and the Dominican Republic; reproductive education and responsible fatherhood in the Central American isthmus; risk information on natural disasters for decision-making at the national level; and sustainable use of hydrocarbons in Central America. Table 19.28 Resource requirements: subprogramme 11 19.93 The decrease of $300 in non-post requirements relates to requirements for consultants and experts. Subprogramme 12 Subregional activities in the Caribbean Resource requirements (before recosting): $3,423,600 19.94 This subprogramme is carried out by the ECLAC subregional headquarters for the Caribbean, which also serves as the secretariat for the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee. 19.95 The main users of the outputs of this subprogramme will be government authorities and officials of the countries of the subregion concerned with economic and social affairs and with the formulation and execution of policies, programmes and projects in the areas indicated above, as well as international, regional and subregional organizations concerned with integration and cooperation. Other major users will include a variety of public and private sector organizations, such as business, labour and professional associations, universities and other academic institutions, and applied research institutes and centres for the development and diffusion of technology. Table 19.29 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments and performance indicators Objective: To promote cooperation among Member States in the Caribbean subregion and to provide support in their efforts geared towards: (a) formulating and implementing policies and measures aimed at promoting growth, improving their international linkages with the global economy and consolidating subregional integration; (b) strengthening the capacity of the subregion to analyse and design policies and programmes aimed at social development, including gender mainstreaming; (c) promoting institution-building and developing national capabilities in the field of science and technology; and (d) implementing the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. (a) Improved policies, programmes and projects to facilitate adjustment of Caribbean societies to rapid changes on the international scene, to maximize the benefits and mitigate the adverse effects of globalization, to boost the subregional integration process incorporating the changes derived from the evolution of the multilateral trading regime, and to alleviate poverty and reduce gender inequalities. (a) An increasing number of public sector institutions in the Caribbean subregion benefiting from ECLAC analytical inputs, policy proposals and technical cooperation services which design and adopt policies consistent with ECLAC recommendations to foster competitiveness. (b) Strengthened capabilities of member States to develop and apply indicators to measure the catalyst effect of science and technology on economic and social development in the subregion. (b) An increase in the number of national staff trained by ECLAC in the area of formulation and use of science and technology indicators. (c) Strengthened national capacities to implement the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States in Caribbean countries. (c) An increasing number of Caribbean countries that are recipients of ECLAC inputs and technical cooperation reporting favourable trends in their national progress reports on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 19.96 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) policy makers will be willing to recognize and attach priority to subregional cooperation and integration in the Caribbean, to improve the linkages of the subregion's economies with other regions and the global economy, to strengthen technical, institutional and policy-making capacities in the subregion to implement policies to reduce poverty and foster social equity, and to implement the agreements contained in the Programme of Action of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, and that the related political conditions exist at the national and international levels; (b) the international community will be responsive, in accordance with the guidelines of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; and (c) resources will be available to support the efforts of ECLAC member States to strengthen subregional integration and cooperation in the aforementioned areas. 19.97 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) Substantive servicing of meetings: a ministerial meeting on the integration of women into the development of the Caribbean, which will serve as preparatory meeting to the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean (1); an intergovernmental meeting to evaluate progress in implementing plans of action for overcoming poverty as part of the follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development (1); the nineteenth session of the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee, including the preparation of reports and the relevant substantive documentation; the eleventh meeting of the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee Monitoring Committee (2); the Third Caribbean Ministerial Meeting on the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (1); and an intergovernmental meeting to evaluate progress in implementing the Programme of Action adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development as part of the activities in follow-up to the Conference (1); (ii) Ad hoc expert groups: meetings of experts: to analyse the experience acquired in the preparation and use of science and technology indicators and their contribution to economic development in the subregion, in particular with respect to those of specific relevance to small island developing States (1); to analyse the importance of the informal sector in the economy of selected countries of the Caribbean (1); to analyse the socio-economic consequences of natural disasters in the subregion (1); to consider the repercussions of changes in international trade and finance, including international agreements, on countries of the Caribbean (1); to evaluate progress in adopting measures for monitoring the exercise of the social and economic rights of women in the Caribbean subregion (1); to examine issues relating to the production of statistical information in the Caribbean and proposals for increasing efficiency in this sphere (1); to examine the influence of macroeconomic policies on the performance of countries of the Caribbean (1); to examine the links between the practices of gender socialization and violence against women in the Caribbean (1); and to examine the main problems that affect social development programmes of countries of the subregion (1); (i) Recurrent publications: "Selected Statistical Indicators of Caribbean Countries" (2 issues in the biennium and electronic publication of material); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: policies on technology and industry in the Caribbean and their effects on development (1); progress achieved with economic diversification in selected Caribbean countries (1); production of statistical information in the Caribbean and proposals for increasing efficiency in this sphere (1); setting forth criteria for the efficient coordination of the activities for data collection and the design of instruments for mapping and data collection applicable to the countries of the subregion (1); experience acquired in the subregion with respect to links between economics and the environment (1); aspects of sustainable development of relevance to the subregion (1); aspects of trade and investment among member countries of the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee (1); demographic trends, including a summary of population and development indicators in the countries of the Caribbean (1); energy policies and obstacles to the adoption of new and renewable sources of energy in the subregion (1); foreign exchange policies in the Caribbean (1); gender socialization practices and violence against women in the Caribbean. The focus will be on existing links between the socio-cultural process of defining identity, behavioural standards and gender relationships in the Caribbean and specific aspects of the problem of violence against women in the subregion (1); important aspects of social development in the Caribbean (1); information policies in selected countries of the Caribbean (1); investments in the Caribbean and their role in the economic and social development of the subregion (1); labour movements in the subregion, including the return of emigrants to the subregion, and their impact on socio-economic policies in the Caribbean (1); linkages existing between free trade and the environment (1); macroeconomic policies of selected Caribbean countries in the context of financial and economic liberalization and their effects on growth, employment and poverty reduction (1); mechanisms for fostering the entrepreneurial spirit among young people in the Caribbean through information technology (1); public-sector reforms implemented in selected countries of the Caribbean (1); social security reforms in the Caribbean (1); some aspects of the services sector in selected Caribbean countries (1); adoption and application of information technology in the subregion and its contribution to scientific, technological and human resource development (1); advances made in the adoption of measures for monitoring the exercise of social and economic rights of women in the Caribbean (1); effect of tourism promotion legislation on sustainable tourism in the Caribbean (1); impact of biotechnology and other new technologies on the development process, especially in relation to agriculture and health (1); implementation of the Programme of Action adopted at the World Summit on Social Development and its follow-up in the Caribbean (1); preparation and use of science and technology indicators and their contribution to economic development in the subregion, in particular those of specific relevance to small island developing States (1); social consequences of globalization (1); socio-demographic consequences for the subregion of events relating to the issues of health and natural disasters (1); status of international trade negotiations within the framework of the World Trade Organization and their effects on the trade policies of Caribbean countries (1); use of socio-demographic information in the formulation of policies and programmes, including a compendium of social and demographic statistics in the Caribbean (1); trade and investment flows between the Caribbean and the rest of the world (1); examination of the feasibility of establishing trade and investment linkages between non-self-governing Territories of the Caribbean and other members of the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee (1); implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States from the Caribbean perspective (1); and economic trends in the countries of the subregion (2); (iii) Booklets, fact sheets, wallcharts and information kits: "Caribbean Action on Gender Equity, Development and Peace" newsletter (4); "Current Awareness Bulletin" (8); "Focus" bulletin (United Nations focus on the Caribbean) covering Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee activities (English only) (8); bulletin on trade issues of relevance to Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee member States in the context of current and future negotiations (8); and "Caribbean Action on Population and Development" newsletter (8); (iv) Technical material: preparation of a methodological manual for the development of science and technology indicators (1); regular updating and improvement of the institution's web site and virtual library (1); updating and improvement of databases on small island developing States (1); updating and improvement of existing databases and the design and creation of databases on new issues (1); and updating and improving the database on women and development in the Caribbean, including information on gender equity and the database of socio-demographic statistics for the subregion (1); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB). Cooperation and liaison will be maintained with ECLAC headquarters, the subregional headquarters in Mexico City, agencies and programmes of the United Nations system, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, CARICOM, the Latin American Economic System and the Association of Caribbean States, as well as with central banks and intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations active in the subregion, specifically: (i) in the field of science and technology, with the secretariats of CARICOM and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Technology and Energy Office of the Caribbean Development Bank and with other United Nations bodies such as UNESCO, UNDP and the Centre for Science and Technology for Development; (ii) in the area of statistics and information management for development, with the secretariats of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, CARICOM, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the national statistical offices of member States; (iii) in the sphere of sustainable development, with all United Nations agencies with concerns in the Caribbean, as part of the Inter-Agency Collaborative Group, in particular with UNEP, UNDP and the Division for Sustainable Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to provide support for the subregional mechanism for coordinating the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States and related decisions adopted in multilateral forums, as well as with the CARICOM and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States secretariats and the Caribbean Development Bank; (iv) in the area of social development, with intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with issues relating to population, the status of women and development, in particular with the CARICOM and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States secretariats, UNFPA, UNIFEM, UNDP and ILO; and participation in joint meetings of the open-ended Small Island Developing States Bureau and the Inter-Agency Collaborative Group for the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States; (i) Advisory services: provision of technical cooperation services on information management and the organization of statistical services; new phases of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, including the formulation of national development strategies, the conceptualization of approaches applicable to problem areas and the formulation of project proposals; the impact of world economic trends on policies adopted nationally and subregionally and changes in macroeconomic policies and economic performance in the subregion; the contribution of science and technology to sustainable development in the Caribbean; the application of the Beijing Platform for Action, the presentation of national reports on compliance with the Convention on the Elimination on All Forms of Discrimination against Women, fostering gender mainstreaming in all spheres, the assessment and analysis of census data and the incorporation of socio-demographic information in the formulation and implementation of policies and programmes; and trade, investment, integration and subregional cooperation; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: provision of training in connection with the development and updating of Internet sites for information specialists and librarians (1 course) and on information management (1 seminar); development of national environmental strategies (1 seminar); formulation and implementation of programmes for transmitting basic economic knowledge to women, intended for the staff of national offices responsible for women's issues (workshops); the role of technological transfer in fostering technological innovation, particularly at the level of small and medium-sized companies and for devising programmes for wide dissemination of science through electronic means (workshops); the use of social data and indicators in the formulation of policies and programmes in the subregion (workshops); and various aspects of hemispheric and international trade in the context of the advances of hemispheric integration and the new international trade regulations (seminars and workshops); (iii) Field projects: subregional project in relation to: development of social databases for a social vulnerability index in small island developing States; development of a subregional marine-based tourism strategy; gender mainstreaming in the Caribbean; and support for the development of trade in the Caribbean. Table 19.30 Resource requirements: subprogramme 12 19.98 The resource requirements under subprogramme 12 are at the maintenance level. Resource requirements (before recosting): $35,209,900 19.99 The activities carried out under programme support comprise conference services, library services, management of technical cooperation activities and administration and common services. 19.100 During the biennium 2002-2003, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Conference services. The activities are carried out by the Documents and Publications Division in Santiago and the Editorial, Documents and Conference Services Unit in Mexico City. The main activities relate to: (i) the provision of conference services to the meetings of policy-making organs of ECLAC and other intergovernmental meetings held under its auspices; and (ii) translation, interpretation, editing, verbatim reporting, the publications programme and the distribution of ECLAC publications and collaboration with the United Nations Sales Unit in the commercial distribution of United Nations publications; (b) Library services. Library services are provided to ECLAC staff members and external users by the libraries in Santiago and Mexico City. Activities include the publication of bulletins and bibliographies; the provision of services to remote users through the Internet; the United Nations depository library in Chile; the establishment of agreements and cooperation with other libraries in the subregion; dissemination of the substantive documentation of ECLAC; processing of external bibliographic resources and information in support of the substantive activities of the Commission in the subregion; dissemination of the Micro-ISIS programme in Mexico and the Central American region and advising libraries and information centres on its installation and operation; provision of technical assistance and organization of courses on the use of Micro-ISIS; answering reference queries; and the publication of hard-copy and electronic bulletins and bibliographies; (c) Management of technical cooperation activities. The activities are carried out by the Project Management and the Extrabudgetary Resource Mobilization Units of the Programme Planning and Operations Division. The ECLAC technical cooperation programme is formulated to supplement the regular budget resource allocation. It is geared towards strengthening and expanding the economic and social research agenda and the application of research findings to the provision of advisory services and training for the benefit of ECLAC member States. It plays an active role in integrating substantive activities financed with extrabudgetary funds with those financed with the regular budget. It also aims at maintaining a mutually supporting balance between substantive research and operational activities. The anticipated outputs during the biennium are as follows: (i) Publication of reports on the activities carried out by the ECLAC system to support and/or promote technical cooperation among developing countries at the regional, subregional and national levels; institutional arrangements for technical cooperation activities existing in developing member States of ECLAC; and operational activities carried out in the region to promote interregional cooperation; (ii) Advisory services to Governments and/or regional institutions in the identification and/or elaboration of technical cooperation programmes and project proposals to be implemented at the regional, national or interregional level; (iii) Coordination with the technical cooperation focal points in other regional commissions for the promotion of interregional cooperation activities; (iv) Consultations with other regional organizations that carry out technical cooperation in Latin America and the Caribbean to identify priorities to be included in the regional programme; (v) Collaboration with substantive units in the ECLAC system and subregional offices for the preparation and implementation of projects to promote and support technical cooperation among developing countries components in the ECLAC programme of work; (vi) Assessment of damage caused by natural disasters in the region using ECLAC methodology; (vii) Formulation of projects for rehabilitation and reconstruction following natural disasters, in close consultation with concerned Governments; (viii) Formulation of specific projects for prevention and mitigation of potential damages caused by natural disasters; (ix) Assistance to Governments in the identification of technical and cooperation demands and opportunities and in the preparation of project proposals; (x) Preparation of project agreements and proposals in accordance with the operational and financial rules and procedures established by the contributing organization, institution or Government and by the United Nations; (xi) Preparation of budgets for extrabudgetary activities; (xii) Monitoring project implementation; (xiii) Administration of extrabudgetary funds in close collaboration with the substantive units responsible for the implementation of such projects; (d) Administration and common services. The main activities of the Division of Administration at the ECLAC office in Santiago are: (i) the overall management and coordination of administrative services, policy formulation and the establishment of managerial and administrative guidelines at ECLAC; (ii) human resources management: recruitment, placement and career development of staff, staff administration and classification, maintenance of the classification system for General Service posts established under administrative instruction ST/AI/410, internship programme, medical and employee assistance, general advice and individual counselling; (iii) budget formulation, control and financial management through preparation of biennial programme budgets and budget performance reports, programme planning, budgeting and monitoring of approved budgets and staffing table control, financial reporting and accounting; (iv) office support services, including security and safety, communications and transportation; procurement, facilities management and maintenance, archives and records management and the implementation, coordination and administration of IMIS in the ECLAC system; (v) language training at all ECLAC duty stations (excludes training activities funded and directed by the Training Service in New York); electronic information activities carried out by the Electronic Information Section in consultation with the ECLAC Information Management Committee, whose main activities are to advise the Executive Secretary on policy formulation for the automation processes in the ECLAC system, including the allocation of material and financial resources; the provision of technical advice and support services to substantive areas, ensuring the appropriate functioning of the ECLAC automation platform, including the web site and Internet and IMIS services; and supervision of the maintenance services of the ECLAC computer hardware and ensure the security of the ECLAC information systems. Table 19.31 Resource requirements: programme support 19.101 The decrease of $88,200 for post requirements is the net result of: (a) a reduction of five posts overall as a net result of 11 fewer General Service posts, offset by six additional Professional posts. These changes reflect a combination of the abolition of two Local level posts and a net of four outward redeployments (1 inward, 5 outward), together with four reclassifications from the General Service category to the Professional level. The increase of $204,700 in non-post resources is the net result of additional requirements ($425,900) for other staff costs, general operating expenses and supplies and materials, offset by reduced requirements ($221,200) for contractual services and furniture and equipment. Table 19.32 Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant recommendations of the internal and external oversight bodies and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Brief description of the recommendation Action taken to implement the recommendation Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/54/7) On the basis of information from representatives the Advisory Committee concluded that there was currently no coordinated policy within the Secretariat regarding the development, management and hosting of web sites. The Committee recommended that the Department of Public Information, together with the Information Technology Services Division, take the leading role in providing coordination and advice (para. 91). The information strategy for ECLAC is defined locally by the Information Management Committee. However, the ECLAC Electronic Information Section ensures that this strategy follows the overall information technology strategy of the United Nations Secretariat. Regular exchange of information on this subject matter takes place between the Information Technology Services Division and the Electronic Information Section at ECLAC, as well as with specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations system. The Committee reiterated its request for a review and analysis of the liaison office function (para. 107). The ECLAC office in Washington, D.C. performs liaison activities with the Bretton Woods institutions, the Inter-American system and the United States Government. In addition, it coordinates ECLAC activities in support of the hemispheric integration process. The ECLAC subregional offices for Central America and the Caribbean (in Mexico City and Port of Spain, respectively) and the national offices, basically discharge duties of a substantive nature related to the implementation of the programme of work of the Commission. However, they also perform some limited liaison activities with respect to host countries according to local circumstances. The Advisory Committee recommended that the Secretary-General continue to inform Member States in conjunction with proposed programme budget, about pilot projects he has undertaken and the results achieved (para. 124). The Pilot Management Project at ECLAC basically referred to the delegation of authority to the Executive Secretary to decide upon appointment and promotion cases at the P-3 and P-4 levels when the decision of the Appointment and Promotion Committee is unanimous. Although such delegation is quite limited, it is considered to be beneficial, since overall vacancy rates have been reduced, particularly for Professional posts, and the appointment and promotion processes have been dealt with more expeditiously. The Advisory Committee requested the Secretary-General, in the context of the next proposed programme budget, to provide information on the extent of the use of videoconferencing and the attendant savings and productivity gains (para. I.36). ECLAC introduced videoconferencing facilities at its offices in Santiago, Mexico City and Washington, D.C. during the current biennium. The project envisages the expansion of similar facilities to the rest of the ECLAC offices, provided that technological constraints in some of the offices' host countries are overcome. A total of 60 videoconferences have been held in Santiago since April 1999, for the benefit of approximately 720 participants. This has resulted in cost avoidance in travel, per diem and consultants' fees, and has increased communication flows and the exchange of ideas throughout the system. The Advisory Committee recommended that, in the context of the next budget submission, information be provided on the extent to which IMIS is used by programme managers in the management of the activities under their purview (para. VIII.47). Releases 1 and 2 have been operational at ECLAC headquarters since April 1997 and September 1998, respectively. Release 3 was implemented at ECLAC headquarters in Santiago in July 2000 and has been operating normally, with occasional assistance from the IMIS team in New York. Extension of IMIS to the two ECLAC subregional headquarters and five national offices is contingent upon a decision and support by United Nations headquarters. Table A.19.1 Resource requirements by component and source of funds Source of funds (a) Services in support of: (i) United Nations organizations (ii) Extrabudgetary activities (b) Substantive activities (c) Operational projects Commission of the European Communities Inter-American Development Bank UNDP UNFPA Other United Nations agencies Other multilateral organizations Bilateral resources Various contributions to the Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning Requirements by object of expenditure Object of expenditure Other staff costs Consultants and experts Travel of staff Contractual services General operating expenses Hospitality Supplies and materials Furniture and equipment Other expenditures Post requirements D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4/3 P-2/1 Other level Other Local level Field Service Table A.19.4 Requirements by object of expenditure Resource requirements (before recosting) A.19.1 The amount of $501,700, including an increase of $48,000, provides for meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies. The requirements relate to temporary assistance for meetings ($360,700), reflecting an increase of $35,800; general temporary assistance ($78,100) to assist in the preparation of substantive documentation, reflecting an increase of $7,800; and overtime for pre-session and in-session activities ($62,900), reflecting an increase of $4,400. The increases relate to servicing of the two new bodies, the ECLAC Statistical Conference of the Americas and its Steering Committee. A.19.2 The amount of $448,700 reflects an increase of $30,200 for travel of staff to attend meetings of the ECLAC Statistical Conference of the Americas and its Steering Committee held away from Santiago. A.19.3 The amount of $31,800, at the maintenance level, provides for contractual translation and editing of pre-session documentation to be submitted to the Commission at its twenty-ninth session and for translation of documentation for use by the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee. A.19.4 The amount of $144,500, at the maintenance level, provides for the rental of meeting facilities ($75,300), long-distance telephone charges, postage, courier and diplomatic pouch services and the temporary connection of meeting facilities to the Internet ($47,000), and miscellaneous services ($22,200) for the meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies. A.19.5 The amount of $14,100, at the maintenance level, covers the cost of official functions planned during the meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies. A.19.6 The amount of $17,700 provides for supplies and materials required in connection with the meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies. Table A.19.5 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.6 Post requirements Other categories A.19.7 The amount of $3,902,200, reflecting a net increase of $435,900, relates to the posts shown in table A.19.6. The net increase results from: (a) the inward redeployment of one P-4 post from subprogramme 9 to the Office of the Secretary of the Commission; (b) the inward redeployment of two Local level posts from programme support, one of which is to strengthen the support capabilities for research in the office of the Deputy Executive Secretary and one of which is to strengthen the operations of the official ECLAC web site under the Programme Planning and Operations Division; (c) the inward redeployment of three Local level posts from subprogramme 3 owing to the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation, and one of which is for the Information Services Unit; and (d) the outward redeployment of one P5 post to subprogramme 3 to provide for the Chief of the ECLAC office in Bogotá. A.19.8 The amount of $59,800, including growth of $1,200, provides for general temporary assistance for the preparation of CEPAL Review and other publications of a multidisciplinary nature under the direction of the Office of the Executive Secretary and for additional support during periods of increased workload, particularly in relation to new developments relating to the maintenance and updating of the ECLAC web site. A.19.9 The amount of $34,700, including a decrease of $1,200, which was redeployed to other staff costs, is required for consultants to provide specialized inputs for CEPAL Review and other publications of a multidisciplinary nature ($20,000) and for the development of systems based on new Internet technologies and the maintenance, updating and improvement of the general architecture of the ECLAC official web site and subsites ($14,700). A.19.10 The amount of $180,000, reflecting a decrease of $22,700, relates to the cost of travel of the Executive Secretary and staff of his/her office to undertake official missions for consultations with Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental institutions, for coordination with the United Nations Headquarters in New York, ECLAC subregional headquarters and offices and United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and bodies and for attendance at annual meetings of the Economic and Social Council and the Committee for Programme and Coordination. A.19.11 The amount of $177,100, at the maintenance level, provides for: (a) public information production costs, such as those related to field projects aimed at establishing public information focal points in four ECLAC national offices, namely, those in Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Montevideo and Bogota, and the production of photographs, wallcharts, posters and other visual materials, as well as a video to promote the Commission's main substantive documents to academic institutions ($41,000); and (b) specialized services, including the services of a journalist in economics and social affairs, a design specialist and a multimedia specialist, subscriptions to newspapers and journals and contracting of news agency services ($136,100). A.19.12 The amount of $137,700, at the maintenance level, covers the communication costs of the Information Services Unit, such as long-distance calls, postage and courier and pouch services. A.19.13 The amount of $3,700, at the maintenance level, provides for expendable office supplies. Table A.19.7 Requirements by subprogramme and source of funds Various contributions to the Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning Table A.19.8 Post requirements Percentage distribution of resources by subprogramme Table A.19.10 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Other bilateral resources Table A.19.11 Post requirements A.19.14 The amount of $3,086,400, which reflects a decrease of $166,700, provides for the posts indicated in table A.19.11, with all posts based in Santiago except for one P-5 and four General Service (Other level) based in the Washington, D.C., office. The decrease is the net result of: (a) the outward redeployment of one P-4 post from the Washington office to programme support; (b) the abolition of one Local level post the functions of which will be phased out, offset by the establishment of a new P-2 post to strengthen the research functions and to prepare studies and documents on various topics under the subprogramme; and (c) the inward redeployment of one Local level post from programme support to provide clerical support to the subprogramme. A.19.15 The amount of $79,200, at the maintenance level, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for: two studies on the effects of trends in the information economy on external demand for products and on the productive structure in the region; a study on the relationship between the specific regulatory framework of services and international trade disciplines, with a view to strengthening regulation and supervision in various sectors; a study on the features of selected service sectors in some countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, with emphasis on linkages between those sectors and the rest of the economy and their effects on job creation and the dissemination of technology; a study on the role of regional or subregional financial institutions in providing financing and liquidity options that foster intraregional trade relations and that may be instrumental in averting external payment crises; two studies on the development of subregional, regional and hemispheric integration; and (b) convening three ad hoc expert group meetings, two of which will examine market globalization trends and their impact on market access for goods and services exported from the region and one of which will examine national trade policies in the light of trends in the system of multilateral trade rules and the development of subregional, regional and hemispheric integration. A.19.16 The amount of $91,600, at the maintenance level, provides for the official travel of staff for consultations and missions relating to the preparation of studies and publications included in the programme of work and for collaboration and cooperation with regional member States on issues relevant to the programme of work. Table A.19.12 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.13 Post requirements A.19.17 The amount of $3,410,800, which includes an increase of $68,300, provides for the posts reflected in table A.19.13. The increase arises from the reclassification of one Local level post to the P-3 level as a result of an appeal following the initial reclassification of Local level posts in Santiago by the Office of Human Resources Management in 1995. A.19.18 The amount of $25,100, at the maintenance level, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the yearly updating and development of the CAN and PADI computer programs ($10,400), and for updating, developing and improving computer software and databases ($14,700). A.19.19 The amount of $115,300, at the maintenance level, will be required for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for studies on changes in the industrial structure in countries of the region; technological changes in the areas of agriculture, agro-industry and trade in the outputs and inputs of the sector; changes in policies related to the industrial competitiveness of countries in the region, including policies on technology, human resources development and export promotion; the development of agricultural production and its environmental and socio-economic impact; and the status of policies for providing support to small and medium-sized enterprises in countries of the region and future trends ($69,600); and (b) the convening of five ad hoc expert group meetings on: analysis of new lines of work with respect to outputs and inputs of technological innovations in the agricultural, agro-industrial and trade sectors; policies of industrial competitiveness in selected countries of the region; industry dynamics and productivity in countries of the region in contrast with those of the industrialized countries and the main emerging economies; the development of domestic capital conglomerates in countries of the region; and trends in foreign direct investment in the region ($45,700). A.19.20 The amount of $92,800, at the maintenance level, provides for the official travel of staff members for consultations and missions relating to the preparation of studies and for maintaining close collaboration and cooperation with Governments, academic and private sector institutions, international and regional organizations and organizations within the United Nations system. Table A.19.14 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Commission of the European Community Table A.19.15 Post requirements A.19.21 The amount of $4,651,800, reflecting a decrease of $455,000, provides for the posts outlined in table A.19.15. The decrease is due primarily to the restructuring of ECLAC following the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation and the redefinition of its traditional functions. Post changes under the subprogramme are as follows: (a) the incoming redeployment of one P-5 post from executive direction and management to provide for the Chief of the ECLAC office in Bogota; (b) the outward redeployment of one P-2 post to the library under programme support and six Local level posts as follows: two to subprogramme 6, one to subprogramme 10, two to executive direction and management and one to the Information Services Unit, also under executive direction and management, all in line with the phasing out of the Centre; (c) the reclassification of one P-3 post to the P-4 level in the ECLAC office in Brasilia to, inter alia, interact with the Brazilian Government, negotiate with Brazilian counterparts, participate in ECLAC research on fiscal policy and macroeconomic equilibrium in Latin American countries and consult frequently with member Governments, private agents and researchers with regard to specific aspects of the Brazilian economy; and (d) the establishment of one new P-3 post to strengthen the substantive capacity of the ECLAC office in Brasilia by conceiving, designing and executing research on the Brazilian and Latin American economies and supporting and cooperating with other ECLAC divisions and offices in implementation of their activities with Brazil. One Local level post for functions that are no longer required is abolished. A.19.22 The amount of $53,600, reflecting an increase of $11,800, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with updating and improving the databases on economic performance in Latin America and the Caribbean, the preparation of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economy of Latin America and the Caribbean. The increase is based on the realized expenditure patterns. A.19.23 The amount of $83,300, including an increase of $7,800, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for: the annual issues of the Preliminary Overview of the Economy of Latin America and the Caribbean; a study on the coordination of macroeconomic policies of the countries of the region, with special emphasis on domestic saving and productive investment; a study on links between investment, financing, saving and the long-term economic growth dynamic; a study on employment and social equity in the labour market, in which the relationship between labour supply and demand will be examined ($65,300); and (b) the convening of two ad hoc expert group meetings to analyse issues relating to the coordination of macroeconomic policies in countries of the region and to consider the conclusions of the study on the relationship between investment, finance, saving and the growth dynamic for the long term ($18,000). A.19.24 The amount of $97,900, which includes a reduction of $20,200, provides for: attendance at meetings of the Committee for Development Policy; consultations and missions related to the preparation of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economy of Latin America and the Caribbean and several studies; and maintaining close collaboration and cooperation with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, as well as with government institutions of the countries of the region, intergovernmental organizations and other international, regional and subregional bodies. Table A.19.16 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.17 Post requirements A.19.25 The amount of $1,677,100, reflecting a decrease of $68,300, is the net result of the redeployment of one P-3 post to subprogramme 6, offset by the inward redeployment of one Local level post from the Documents and Publications Division under programme support in order to enhance the capability to support research under the subprogramme. A.19.26 The amount of $7,600, at the maintenance level, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the organization and substantive servicing of the Third Regional Conference in Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development. A.19.27 The amount of $42,400, which includes an increase of $2,700 redeployed from travel of staff, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for comparative studies on the development of social policy management reforms in selected countries of the region; a study on changes in the socio-economic stratification in selected countries in the region and their impact on policies for overcoming poverty and reducing inequalities; and studies to examine existing policies in the region for preventing drug use and controlling the traffic in illicit drugs ($19,600); and (b) the convening of three ad hoc expert group meetings to carry out a comparative analysis of drug control policies applied by Governments of the region with an assessment of their successes and failures; examining issues relating to institutions responsible for social policy in countries of the region; and examining the effects of economic reforms and structural adjustments on socio-economic stratification in selected Latin American countries ($22,800). A.19.28 The amount of $56,700, reflecting a decrease of $2,700 redeployed to consultants and experts, provides for the travel of staff members to regional conferences for follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development and for consultations and missions relating to the preparation of the Social Panorama of Latin America and two of the studies mentioned in paragraph A.19.27 above. Table A.19.18 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds A.19.29 An amount of $639,600, at the maintenance level, provides for the posts reflected in table A.19.19. A.19.30 The amount of $8,500, which includes an increase of $900, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the updating of a database containing information on all programmes and projects carried out in the Latin American and Caribbean region by agencies and programmes of the United Nations system, pursuant to resolution 3 (VIII) of the Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the updating of the directory of national organizations dealing with programmes and policies on women in Latin America and the Caribbean. A.19.31 The amount of $59,600, reflecting an increase of $7,800, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for documents and reports of the meetings of the Presiding Officers and a study on the strategic areas that may be covered by a regional instrument to supplement the Regional Programme of Action for the Women of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1995-2001, for presentation to the Presiding Officers; and (b) the convening of three ad hoc expert group meetings to consider priority issues under the Regional Programme of Action to address such issues as the effects on women of social security reform; the relationship between trade liberalization, the employment of women and respect for the economic and social rights of women; and the effects of judicial reforms on institutions and mechanisms relating to the human rights of women. A.19.32 The amount of $44,100, reflecting growth of $6,000, provides for the travel of staff for attendance at various United Nations inter-agency meetings and other meetings at the regional level and for other missions of consultation for the preparation of documents and publications. Subprogamme 6 Table A.19.20 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds A.19.33 The amount of $1,743,400, reflecting an increase of $344,300, provides for the posts shown in table A.19.21. The increase results from the inward redeployment of one P-3 post from subprogramme 4 to strengthen the capacity of the Division for implementing designated high-priority outputs and two Local level posts from subprogramme 3 to strengthen the research support capabilities of the Division arising from the restructuring of ECLAC in connection with the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation and the redefinition of its traditional functions. A.19.34 The amount of $30,100, reflecting a decrease of $3,200 redeployed to travel of staff, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the maintenance and updating of databases on demographic trends, population projections by sex and age, demographic indicators, the investigation of international migration in Latin America programme and the spatial distribution of the population and urbanization in Latin America and the Caribbean; and for the development and updating of computer programs to facilitate the use of population data. A.19.35 The amount of $33,400, at the maintenance level, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for an evaluation of the 2000 round of censuses and a study on internal migration in selected countries of the region aimed at facilitating the decentralist activities of public management ($13,800); and (b) convening two ad hoc expert group meetings to consider progress in the implementation of the recommendations of the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Plan of Action on Population and Development and the Programme of Action adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development, and examining the results of the 2000 round of censuses, their use in the formulation of social policies and their dissemination to support decentralized administrations ($19,600). A.19.36 The amount of $50,200, including an increase of $3,200 redeployed from other staff costs, provides for the official travel of staff to participate in the meetings of working groups of the Ad Hoc Committee on Population and Development related to the follow-up to the Regional Plan of Action and for consultations and missions for the preparation of documents and publications relating to the Demographic Bulletin, REDATAM Informa, Notas de Población and other studies. Table A.19.22 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds A.19.37 The requirements of $1,638,200, at the maintenance level, provide for the posts reflected in table A.19.23. A.19.38 The amount of $35,100, including growth of $1,100, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the preparation of the Boletín del Instituto, for research, data collection and assistance in connection with five publications, for maintenance and updating of a database on development policies and land-use planning and development of geo-reference software for the regional analysis of metropolitan areas. A.19.39 The amount of $9,700, including an increase of $900, provides for specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for an evaluation of the advances made in the process of economic reform in countries in the region and in the construction of a new State profile, a document on the development of regulatory frameworks of public services in the region and four case studies on development and local management in selected countries in the region based on the analysis of structures and production interrelationships and on the analysis of the effects of the former on job creation and local projects. A.19.40 The amount of $26,000, reflecting a decrease of $2,000, will be required for the travel of the Director of the Latin American and Caribbean Institute for Economic and Social Planning to attend meetings within and outside the region and to consult with Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental institutions. Table A.19.24 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.25 Post requirements A.19.41 The resources available for activities under subprogramme 8, as well as those for subprogramme 9, were previously considered under subprogramme 7, Environmental and land resource sustainability, in the biennium 2000-2001. For the biennium 2002-2003, resources have been redistributed to reflect the new subprogramme structure of the ECLAC medium-term plan for 2002-2005. A.19.42 The amount of $1,524,700, at the maintenance level, provides for a total of 11 posts, which were subsumed, together with subprogramme 9, under subprogramme 7 during the biennium 2000-2001. A.19.43 The amount of $38,000 provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with regional meetings in follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), the regional meeting of Ministers and High-level Authorities of the Housing and Urban Development Sector in Latin America and the Caribbean, including the preparation of technical documents, substantive support to the ad hoc group of Latin American and Caribbean experts on climate change and the clean development mechanism and for updating and improving the databases on indicators and parameters for measuring and assessing the status of sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean, on the development of environmental and land-use policies in countries of the region and on economics and the environment. A.19.44 The amount of $74,500 provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of publications on sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean; the use of economic instruments in environmental management in selected economic sectors in countries of the region; the environmental impact of the productive structure resulting from the development strategy directed towards external markets in countries of the region; the incorporation of the environmental dimension in territorial development at the urban and local levels and its impact on land use; the distribution of benefits and costs of environmental policies among different social groups; and the recent development of environmental policies in countries of the region, with special attention to changes in legislation and environmental institutions ($44,900); and (b) the convening of three ad hoc expert group meetings on issues relating to methodologies for calculating public spending for environmental protection; priority issues for countries of the region relating to trade and the environment, in the light of trends that may emerge from multilateral negotiations of greater significance; and the main conclusions of the status report on sustainable development in Latin America and the Caribbean ($29,600). A.19.45 The amount of $71,500 provides for the travel of staff to attend meetings of the Commission on Sustainable Development and for missions and consultations in the context of the preparation of a number of publications, including some of those referred to in paragraph A.19.43. Table A.19.26 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.27 Post requirements A.19.46 The resources available for activities under subprogramme 9, as well as those for subprogramme 8, were previously consolidated under subprogramme 7, Environmental and land resource sustainability, in the biennium 2000-2001. For the biennium 2002-2003, resources have been redistributed to reflect the new subprogramme structure of the ECLAC medium-term plan for 2002-2005. A.19.47 The amount of $2,705,800, including an increase of $125,500, provides for the posts reflected in table A.19.27. The increase is the net result of: (a) the establishment of one new P-2 post to assist, inter alia, in the preparation of analytic studies of the economic and technical aspects of the development of mining resources in Latin America and the Caribbean and to participate in field missions and public policy proposals; (b) the establishment of one new P-3 post to assist in the design and implementation of all substantive research and administrative matters relating to the field of energy, to undertake and supervise research, including the definition and direction of completed studies and the preparation of reports, to participate in the organization of seminars, to provide advisory services and to promote regional and interregional cooperation in the field of energy; (c) the reclassification of one P-3 post to the P-4 level to assist in the design and implementation of all substantive research and administrative matters relating to the field of minerals, to undertake and supervise research, including the definition and direction of completed studies and the preparation of reports, and to identify and assess current issues and trends in mineral market management at the national and regional levels; (d) the reclassification of one P-3 post to the P-4 level to assist in the design and implementation of all substantive research and administrative matters relating to energy and sustainable development, to undertake and supervise research, including the definition and direction of completed studies and the preparation of reports, to identify and assess current issues and trends in institutional arrangements for energy market management and the regulation of public services and utilities at the national and regional levels, to function as the main representative of ECLAC in dealing with external sources on energy matters, to participate in seminars, to provide advisory services and to promote regional and interregional cooperation in the energy field, including the regulation of energy and sustainable development; (e) the inward redeployment of one Local level post from the Division of Administration under programme support to assist with research; and (f) the outward redeployment of one P-4 post to executive direction and management. A.19.48 The amount of $36,200, reflecting a decrease of $26,400, is due to the redistribution of general temporary assistance resources to subprogramme 8, the activities of which were co-mingled in 2000-2001 with activities under this subprogramme. The residual provision will be required for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the collection of research and data for the newsletter of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resources Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, the FAL Bulletin, the electronic publication Perfil marítimo and the updating of the transport statistics system for South America. A.19.49 The amount of $74,000 reflects a decrease of $50,200, which is due to the redistribution of consulting resources to subprogramme 8, the activities of which were co-mingled in 2000-2001 with activities under this subprogramme. The provision is required for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of publications on: the regulation of water-related public services in selected countries of the region; fostering the economic efficiency of the transport system and its integrated development in countries with high levels of private sector participation; the legal situation with respect to biotechnological resources of the international seabed area; mining trends and prospects in the region in the context of globalization and regional integration; the impact of social changes and technological advances on transport infrastructure requirements and their relationship with the long-term return on investments geared to coping with transport at times of peak demand; and the relevance of shipping services between the countries of the Caribbean and South and Central America to the current needs of the region ($44,300); and (b) for convening four ad hoc expert group meetings to analyse aspects of pricing for the use of infrastructure, project financing and the modal and spatial distribution of transport traffic; issues relating to the formulation of a draft code on seabed mining; shipping and port policy in the Caribbean subregion and its contribution to socio-economic development of countries; and the experiences and progress made in regulation of water-related public services ($29,700). A.19.50 The amount of $71,400 reflects a decrease of $46,800, which is due to the redistribution of travel resource for staff to subprogramme 8, the activities of which were co-mingled in the biennium 2000-2001 with activities under this subprogramme. The provision is required for the travel of staff to meetings of the Committee on Natural Resources and for consultations and missions relating to the preparation of a number of publications under the subprogramme. Table A.19.28 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.29 Post requirements A.19.51 The provision of $3,465,100 for posts listed in table A.19.29 includes an increase of $92,000, which is due to the redeployment of one Local level post from subprogramme 3 to strengthen the support capabilities for research under this subprogramme, in view of the organizational restructuring of ECLAC arising from the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation and the redefinition of its traditional functions. A.19.52 The amount of $53,700, reflecting a decrease of $2,600 which was redeployed to travel of staff, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with research assistance in the preparation of technical material, such as principal short-term indicators, and for the maintenance and updating of existing databases and creation of databases on new topics. A.19.53 The amount of $83,600, reflecting a decrease of $3,500 which was redeployed to travel of staff, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of the following studies and/or reports: medium and long-term global and sectoral macroeconomic projections; implementation of the new United Nations System of National Accounts in countries of the region; medium and long-term assessment of the main trends in terms of production and social progress in selected countries of Latin America; structural trends affecting the current situation of countries of the region and on the outlook for the world economy and for Latin America and the Caribbean ($44,200); and (b) convening three ad hoc expert group meetings to consider methodological and substantive aspects of prospective studies and economic projection; to consider the regional system of short-term economic data and expansion of the subject areas covered; and to evaluate the introduction of the new System of National Accounts and the new questionnaire on the United Nations System of National Accounts and to examine the scope for regional cooperation in this area ($39,400). A.19.54 The amount of $97,300, which includes an increase of $6,100 redeployed from other staff costs and consultants and experts, provides for travel of staff to attend meetings of the United Nations Statistical Commission and for consultations and missions relating to the preparation of publications of the Statistical Yearbook for Latin America and the Caribbean, the Preliminary Overview of the Economy of Latin America and the Caribbean, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and a number of other publications under the subprogramme. The projected requirements reflect the level of realized expenditures. Table A.19.30 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.31 Post requirements A.19.55 The provision of $5,342,500, at the maintenance level, provides for the posts reflected in table A.19.31. A.19.56 The amount of $49,000, which includes an increase of $5,700 redeployed from consultants and experts, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload in connection with updating and developing the following databases on countries of the subregion: the statistical database and documents of trade, economic integration and cooperation; the database on the manufacturing industry; and the database on the development of the energy sector; and for preparatory work related to intergovernmental meetings held in the subregion and for the preparation, updating and dissemination of various issues under the subprogramme, as well as the updating, improvement and dissemination of the computer program entitled "Module for the Analysis of Growth of International Commerce" (MAGIC) and the TradeCAN database. A.19.57 The amount of $183,700, reflecting a decrease of $6,000 redeployed almost entirely to other staff costs, provides for: (a) specialized consulting services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for studies and reports on: the constitution of a subregional economic area in the coordination of the economies of Central America with their main hemispheric markets and identification of opportunities and challenges arising therefrom in terms of trade flows, investment and other productive resources; analysis of constraints and prospects in terms of the formulation and implementation of economic policy espoused by countries of the subregion in addressing problems of unemployment and poverty; investment geared to increasing human capital and the effect of such an approach on vulnerable social groups; sustainable food production in selected countries of the subregion; the challenges posed by the regulatory framework governing the energy sector in selected countries of the subregion; decentralization of social spending and social equity in selected countries of the subregion; public policy geared to the promotion of employment for women in selected countries of the subregion; and determining the potential for industrial development through the promotion of clusters and the effects of scientific-technological policies on the industrial sector of the subregion ($108,700); and (b) for convening seven ad hoc expert groups on: an analysis of the relationship between the fulfilment of multilateral commitments entered into by countries of the subregion with respect to new topics in international trade and negotiating frameworks within the subregion; the competitiveness of the manufacturing industry in the countries of the subregion in the context of the development of a hemispheric free trade area; sustainable food production in the subregion; economic development, integration and cooperation within the subregion; investment in human capital and the effect of such an approach on vulnerable social groups; the characteristics and composition of subregional trade among Central American countries and between countries of the subregion and the rest of the world to determine their technological content; and trends in the composition of economic areas in the subregion and their links with economic policy ($75,000). A.19.58 The amount of $158,800, at the maintenance level, provides for the official travel of staff to attend meetings within and outside the region and to consult with Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental institutions and to coordinate with other United Nations organizations and for consultations and missions relating to the preparation of various documents and publications under the subprogramme. Table A.19.32 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds Table A.19.33 Post requirements A.19.59 The amount of $3,145,900, at the maintenance level, provides for the posts reflected in table A.19.33. A.19.60 The amount of $70,200, reflecting a decrease of $3,700 which was redeployed to consultants and experts and travel of staff, provides for general temporary assistance during periods of increased workload, particularly in connection with the updating and improvement of existing databases; the design and creation of databases on new issues, such as one on women and development in the Caribbean; the regular updating and improvement of the web site and virtual library under the subprogramme; the preparation of a methodological manual for the development of science and technology indicators; and the preparation of the Focus Bulletin and other documents and publications under the subprogramme. A.19.61 The amount of $132,000, which includes an increase of $1,400 redeployed from other staff costs, provides for: (a) specialized consultant services not available in the ECLAC secretariat for the preparation of inputs for reports and studies, as follows: two issues in the biennium and electronic publication of Selected Statistical Indicators of Caribbean Countries; some aspects of the services sector in selected Caribbean countries; the preparation and use of science and technology indicators and their contribution to economic development in the subregion, in particular those of specific relevance to small island developing States; the advances made in the adoption of measures for monitoring the exercise of social and economic rights of women in the Caribbean; the use of socio-demographic information in the formulation of policies and programmes, including a compendium of social and demographic statistics in the Caribbean; social security reforms in the Caribbean; the social consequences of globalization; gender socialization practices and violence against women in the Caribbean; and the status of international trade negotiations within the framework of the World Trade Organization and their effects on the trade policies of Caribbean countries ($80,000); and (b) the convening of six ad hoc expert group meetings: to consider the repercussions of changes in international trade and finance, including international agreements, on countries of the Caribbean; to evaluate progress in adopting measures for monitoring the exercise of the social and economic rights of women in the Caribbean subregion; to examine issues relating to the production of statistical information in the Caribbean and proposals for increasing efficiency in this sphere; to examine the influence of macroeconomic policies on the performance of countries of the Caribbean; to examine the links between the practices of gender socialization and violence against women in the Caribbean; and to examine the main problems that affect social development programmes of countries of the subregion ($52,000). A.19.62 The amount of $75,500, which includes an increase of $2,300 redeployed from other staff costs, provides for: the official travel of staff to conduct consultations with Governments and non-governmental institutions; to attend the Third Caribbean Ministerial Meeting on the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States and subregional meetings in follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, including the preparation of documentation and reports; and the preparation of documents and publications under the subprogramme. Table A.19.34 Requirements by object of expenditure and source of funds A.19.63 The amount of $23,773,700, which reflects a decrease of $88,200, provides for the posts listed in table A.19.35. The decrease is the net result of: (a) the outward redeployment of five Local level posts: (i) one to the Office of the Executive Secretary to strengthen the support capabilities for carrying out research in that office, (ii) one to subprogramme 4 to enhance its research support, (iii) one to the Programme Planning and Operations Division and to executive direction and management to reinforce functions related to the maintenance of the official web site, (iv) one to subprogramme 9 to strengthen the research and technical assistance capabilities of the subprogramme and (v) one to subprogramme 1 to provide required clerical support; (b) the inward redeployment of one P-2 post from subprogramme 3 to the library to strengthen its services as a result of the phasing out of the Latin American Centre for Economic and Social Documentation and the redefinition of its traditional functions; (c) the inward redeployment of one P-4 post from subprogramme 1 to reinforce the project management and evaluation capabilities of the Extrabudgetary Resource Mobilization Unit; (d) the reclassification of one Field Service post to the P-3 level in the Division of Administration (the post was originally approved to head the Communications Unit, but in the light of changed requirements, which emanated from technological developments in the communications area, there is a greater need for technical staff in the Communications Unit); (e) the reclassification of three Local level posts to the P-2 level as a result of the initial classification of all General Service posts at the ECLAC office in Santiago by the Office of Human Resources Management during 1995, which provides for one programme technician to develop and maintain computerized management and information systems, install, debug and modify software and other programs and assist in all matters related to systems management, and two computer systems officers to analyse, design and program computer systems, generate, install and maintain operating systems and evaluate, install and maintain software packages; and (f) the abolition of two Local level posts. In addition, the P-4 and Local level posts approved on a temporary post basis for support of IMIS in the biennium 2000-2001 are converted at no additional cost to established posts. A.19.64 The amount of $785,200, which includes a net increase of $21,200 for overtime requirements, provides for: (a) General temporary assistance to cover replacement of staff during periods of increased workload, temporary replacements in the ECLAC medical clinic to maintain minimum staffing requirements, the replacement of security officers on leave, reinforcement of the security services of ECLAC during special events and visits of foreign dignitaries, specialized professional services, such as civil engineering, architecture, electrical engineering, computer programming and design, and staff on medical or maternity leave ($564,200); (b) Overtime and night differential costs for staff members working after hours during periods of peak workload, for performing necessary maintenance work after regular working hours and for 24-hour security services in Santiago ($221,000). A.19.65 The amount of $10,900, at the maintenance level, provides for external expertise to assist in evaluating the language programmes and teaching methodologies in use at ECLAC with the aim of improving their quality. A.19.66 The amount of $46,300, at the maintenance level, provides for official travel of staff of the Division to headquarters, the ECLAC subregional offices in Mexico City and Port of Spain, and the five national offices, in Bogotá, Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Montevideo, and Washington, D.C., and for the travel of the Chief Medical Officer to attend the meetings of United Nations medical officers. A.19.67 The amount of $1,133,100, reflecting a decrease of $94,500, which is redeployed to rental and maintenance of premises, provides for: (a) External translation of the CEPAL Review, Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy, Foreign Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean and Social Panorama and external editing of the CEPAL Review and a bilingual bibliographic registry database ($251,800); (b) External printing and binding of various official documentation and publications, including Focus, a quarterly newsletter on the activities of the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee, the External Sector Briefing Notes and the Current Awareness Bulletin, including an increase of $15,800 on the basis of expenditure patterns ($345,900); (c) Data-processing services for the purchase of new software and licences for the ECLAC office in Santiago and the five national offices, the upgrading of existing software and licences, the renewal of Statistical Analysis System licences, access fees to provide Internet connectivity to the entire ECLAC system and specialized services to update and improve the web page of the ECLAC office in Mexico City. Several factors, such as the adoption of a standard desktop package and the purchase of upgrades instead of new licences and at reduced prices, contribute to a reduction of $110,300 in the resource requirements ($411,500); (d) Hiring of part-time language teachers to provide instruction to ECLAC staff in Santiago, Mexico City, Port of Spain and the five national offices, mainly in English, French and Spanish ($123,900). A.19.68 The amount of $7,264,300, reflecting an increase of $307,500, provided in part through redeployment from contractual services and from furniture and equipment, is required for: (a) Rental of premises for which an increase of $114,200 is redeployed from contractual services. The additional resources required are attributed to the contracting for services such as gardening, security and messenger services, which has led to a reduction in the number of General Service posts proposed under programme support; rental cost increases in national offices (mainly in Bogotá and Washington, D.C.) and the relocation of the ECLAC subregional office in Port of Spain to new premises upon the expiration of the current lease, in view of the serious problems encountered with its current premises, relating mainly to safety and security, lack of emergency stairs, a defective fire alarm system, a defective air-conditioning system and poor air quality. This move will reduce the size of the facility by approximately 18.5 per cent, which will reduce the impact of increased rental rates ($3,277,200); (b) Rental and maintenance of data-processing equipment, photocopying machines and reproduction equipment; maintenance of fax machines and the telephone switchboard; maintenance of the postage machine; local transportation; and other maintenance services, for which a net increase of $17,400 is proposed on the basis of expenditure experience ($470,600); (c) Maintenance of furniture and equipment in Santiago, Mexico City, Port of Spain and the national offices ($692,500); (d) Utilities charges for which an increase of $134,200 is proposed, redeployed in part from furniture and equipment and based on actual consumption ($712,700); (e) Communications costs to cover the rental costs of dedicated and back-up telephone lines; local and long-distance telecommunications; and postage, pouch and courier services, reflecting an increase of $54,400 ($1,705,400); (f) Miscellaneous services for freight and related charges, bank charges, customs and handling, general insurance and other miscellaneous services, for which there is a reduction of $12,700 ($405,900). A.19.69 The amount of $11,800, at the maintenance level, provides for official functions in connection with official visits of dignitaries and special events. A.19.70 The amount of $1,160,200, including an increase of $97,200 redeployed in part from furniture and equipment, provides for: (a) requirements for supplies and materials, such as expendable office supplies, paper for internal reproduction, data-processing supplies including toner, uniforms, and other miscellaneous supplies and materials for ECLAC headquarters, subregional headquarters and offices ($1,028,900); and (b) the acquisition of library books, supplies and subscriptions to various journals and periodicals ($131,300). A.19.71 The amount of $1,024,400, reflecting a decrease of $126,700, which was redeployed to utilities and supplies and materials, provides for: (a) The acquisition of 3 laptop computers, 5 high-resolution laser printers, 8 high-resolution monitors, 17 scanners, 260 new personal computers and 20 printers and the replacement of 16 personal computers, against which there is a decrease of $75,300 ($753,000); (b) The replacement of three official vehicles, including a decrease of $14,900 on the assumption that the proceeds from sale of current vehicles will be applied to the acquisition of the new vehicles ($33,200); (c) The upgrading of existing communications equipment, which reflects a decrease of $38,900, ($54,700) and the replacement of conference-servicing equipment, such as portable tape recorders and mobile radios, which includes an increase of $4,700 ($41,900); (d) The replacement of the old office furniture at ECLAC headquarters in Santiago and the progressive installation of workstations, the upgrading of the sound equipment in the conference facilities, the installation of the closed-circuit system for the transmission of voice and images linking all conference facilities of ECLAC, the purchase of new office furniture and fixtures for the ECLAC office in Mexico City, the acquisition of mobile radios to be used in connection with the security of the premises in Mexico City and for other equipment, which reflects a decrease of $2,300 ($141,600). 