%%%ECONOMIC COOPERATION|DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|DECLARATIONS|

Second Committee Summary record of the 37th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 27 November 2000, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Niculescu (Romania) Contents Agenda item 94: Sustainable development and international economic cooperation (continued) (a) Implementation of the commitments and policies agreed upon in the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in particular the Revitalization of Economic Growth and Development of the Developing Countries, and implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade (continued) Announcement concerning sponsorship of draft resolutions The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m. Agenda item 94: Sustainable development and international economic cooperation (continued) (A/C.2/55/L.39) Draft resolution on the implementation of the commitments and policies agreed upon in the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in particular the Revitalization of Economic Growth and Development of the Developing Countries, and implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade (A/C.2/55/L.39) 1. Mr. Osio (Nigeria), introducing the draft resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said that it was a concise text dealing with a long-standing issue that required collective action. After recalling the importance of development, which the international community had wisely prioritized in the context of the Fourth United Nations Development Decade, the draft resolution referred to the agreements concluded and the commitments entered into, in particular the results of all the major United Nations conferences held since the beginning of the 1990s and the Millennium Declaration, and emphasized the importance of several other development-oriented meetings being convened under the auspices of the United Nations over the next two years. Since the programme of work had unfortunately been too full in 2000 for the necessary measures to be taken, the General Assembly expressed regret in the draft resolution that it had not been possible to hold the consultations foreseen in resolution 54/206, decided to postpone the further development of a new international development strategy until after the aforementioned meetings had taken place, and further decided to retain the issue in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session. He trusted that the Committee would adopt the draft resolution by consensus. 2. The Chairman announced that Burkina Faso had become a sponsor of the draft resolution on the transit environment in the landlocked States in Central Asia and their transit developing neighbours (A/C.2/55/L.19) submitted under agenda item 92 (a), "Macroeconomic policy questions: trade and development", and that Armenia, Belarus, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Israel, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Philippines and the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution on the United Nations University (A/C.2/55/L.24) submitted under agenda item 97 "Training and research". The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m. 