%%%ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS|RUSSIAN FEDERATION|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. GENERAL E/C.12/4/Add.10 27 November 2001 ENGLISH Original: RUSSIAN Substantive session of 2002 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS Fourth periodic reports submitted by States parties in accordance with articles 16 and 17 of the Covenant Addendum RUSSIAN FEDERATION* [15 November 2001] * The third periodic report concerning the rights covered by articles 1-15 of the Covenant (E/1994/104/Add. 8) was considered by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights at its sixteenth session in 1997 (see E/C.12/1997/SR.11-14). The information submitted by the Russian Federation in accordance with the guidelines concerning the initial part of reports of States parties is contained in the core document (HRI/CORE/1/Add.52/Rev.1). GE.02-40184 (EXT) CONTENTS Page The right to self-determination (art. 1) 4 Guarantee of rights (art. 2) 4 Equal rights of men and women (art. 3) 9 The right to work (art. 6) 9 The right to the enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of work (art. 7) 14 Trade union rights (art. 8) 20 The right to social security (art. 9) 21 Protection of the family (art. 10) 29 The right to an adequate standard of living (art. 11) 33 Health protection (art. 12) 41 The right to education (art. 13) 54 Rights in the field of culture and science (art. 15) 67 Annexes Activities carried out by procurators' offices in supervising observance of the public's employment and other rights and protecting the rights and interests of minors (1998-2000). 76 Trends in the indicators for industrial accidents and occupational diseases in the Russian Federation 78 Indicators of occupational disease for the period 1997-99 in the Russian Federation (per 10,000 workers) 78 Relative proportions of cases of acute and chronic occupational disease and toxicosis in the whole Russian Federation, 1997-99 78 Minimum social guarantees 79 Average cash income per capita in the constituent territories of the Russian Federation in November 2000 80 Proportion of the population whose income falls below the minimum subsistence level 83 Minimum subsistence levels and numbers of population living in poverty 83 The Russian Federation's housing stock in 2000 84 Housing conditions in the Russian Federation 84 Abortions in the Russian Federation for the period 1990-99 84 Maternal deaths in the Russian Federation for the period 1990-2000 84 Annexes (continuation) Infant mortality in the Russian Federation for the period 1988-2000 85 Infant mortality ratios for 2000 (number of deaths before the first birthday per 1,000 population) 85 Child vaccination coverage in the Russian Federation, percentages 86 Morbidity rates for the population of the Russian Federation, by class and type of disease (number of patients diagnosed for the first time per 100,000 population) 86 Establishments providing supplementary education for children under the auspices of the Russian Ministry of Education 86 Educational establishments for children with health deficiencies 87 Profile of the population's cash income. 88 1. Article 5, paragraph 3 of the Russian Federation's Constitution states: "The federated structure of the Russian Federation shall be based on its state integrity, a uniform system of state power, delimitation of scopes of authority and powers between the bodies of state power of the Russian Federation and the bodies of state power of the Russian Federation's constituent members, equality and self-determination of the peoples in the Russian Federation". 2. Over 140 nationalities and ethnic groups live in the Russian Federation. The Russian Federation is made up of 21 republics, 6 territories (krai), 49 regions (oblast), 1 autonomous region and 10 autonomous areas (okrug), each with its own constitution or charter and its own legislation. 3. To extend its constitutional provisions concerning the self-determination of peoples, the Russian Federation adopted the Act "National cultural autonomy" in 1996, and the Act "Guarantees of the rights of indigenous peoples whose numbers are small" in 1999. National cultural autonomy is a form of national cultural self-determination in which citizens belonging to specific nationalities come together into one community, on a freely organized basis, in order to resolve independently matters relating to the preservation of their independence, language, education and culture. By 2000, eleven ethnic groups in the Russian Federation had availed themselves of the law on establishing national cultural autonomy: Ukrainians, Kurds, Germans, Roma, Azerbaijanis, Lezgins, Belorussians, Tatars, Koreans, Serbs and Jews. 4. Further information concerning this article is contained in paragraphs 1-14 of the Russian Federation's third periodic report submitted in 1994. Guarantee of rights (article 2) 5. In the Russian Federation, "Man, his rights and freedoms shall be the supreme value. It shall be a duty of the state to recognize, respect and protect the rights and liberties of man and citizen" (Article 2 of the Constitution). 6. This proclamation of the principle of protecting the rights and freedoms of man and citizen implies a state obligation to establish special institutions for that purpose. They include the courts, the bodies that protect public order, the procurate, and the human rights institute. 7. In its decision "Certain matters relating to the courts' application of the Russian Federation's Constitution in the administration of justice" of 31 October 1995, the Supreme Court ruled that, in their consideration of cases, the courts "shall be required to proceed from the commonly recognized principles and norms of international law, as enshrined in international agreements, conventions and other documents (including the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), and that, in compliance with article 15, paragraph 4 of the Constitution, the Russian Federation's international treaties shall be a component part of its legal system. The same constitutional norm also provides that if an international treaty of the Russian Federation establishes principles which differ from those stipulated in Russian domestic law, the principles of the international treaty shall apply. 8. The Supreme Court, acting in accordance with its own jurisdiction, has also provided the courts with clarifications concerning the specific types of cases that touch on the matters proclaimed by the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Political rights (human rights, work and wages, the protection of worker's interests, the family and children, public health, and participation in cultural life). These clarifications concern the procedures to be used by the courts in examining complaints about violations of citizens' rights and freedoms, and in prescribing criminal sanctions, measures to tackle drug addiction and crime prevention measures. The existence of such clarifications reflects Russia's lack of practical experience in applying the legislation relating to labour (including women's employment), the activities of joint-stock companies, taxation, the consequences of marital break-ups and the fate of the children involved, and environmental conservation and the use of natural resources. 9. A gradual reform of the judicial system is being carried out with a view to improving the state legal system, strengthening the judicial power, enhancing the courts' independence, and ensuring that the courts apply the legislation correctly. 10. The many important laws enacted in recent years include "The status of the courts in the Russian Federation", "The judicial system of the Russian Federation", "The judicial division of the Russian Federation Supreme Court", "The lay magistracy", "Military courts in the Russian Federation", and "People's assessors in federal courts of general jurisdiction in the Russian Federation". 11. The law on the lay magistracy has provided the basis for establishing a lay magistrates' institute, and lay magistrates have already begun work in 33 of the Federation's constituent territories. At the end of 2000, the State Duma adopted the first reading of a bill to establish administrative courts. 12. Verification of the constitutional validity of laws, including those relating to citizens' complaints concerning their economic, social and cultural rights, is the responsibility of the Constitutional Court. During the period 1995-99, the Constitutional Court gave 105 judgements. Twenty of these directly concerned the protection of citizens' economic, employment, social and housing rights. 13. One of the main tasks of procurators is to supervise observance of the population's economic, social and cultural rights by federal ministries, public representatives and the executive authorities. 14. The experience that procurators have gained from such oversight to date reveals a number of improvements in this sphere in respect of compliance with the law. The situation has been facilitated by the growing attention being devoted to legitimacy and law and order by the agencies of representative and executive power at both central and local level, the adoption of a whole series of federal laws, the adoption of constitutions and charters by the constituent members of the Federation, and the establishment of local self-governing bodies. 15. However, owing to the social and financial constraints, violations of citizens' rights still occur in the Russian Federation, as in former times. A gulf exists between constitutional principles and actual experience. 16. There are many reasons for this situation, the main ones being inconsistencies in federal legislation, a nihilistic attitude in legal circles and the intrusion of parochial and narrowly departmental interests into the law-making process, failure to define precisely the powers of the federal authorities and the constituent members of the Federation, failure to use the machinery established for approving the laws promulgated by governmental bodies at all levels, and the absence of an efficient governmental monitoring system. Just as in the past, Russia's people are offered only weak protection by the courts. 17. More than 237,000 violations of human and civil rights and freedoms were uncovered by procurators during 1998 and the first half of 1999. 18. Procurators appealed against some 45,000 unlawful legal transactions. A total of 59,000 submissions were made requesting immediate remedy against alleged violations of civil rights and freedoms. 19. Recently the forces of law and order have placed particular emphasis on checking compliance with the legislation intended to guarantee economic, social and cultural rights. 20. Thus, on the instructions of the President of the Russian Federation, inspections of compliance with Federal Act No. 181 of 24 November 1995, " Social protection for the Disabled", were carried out in every part of Russia, resulting in the finding that many disablement, pensioners' and veterans' benefits have only declarative force. The people affected are not always granted housing and free medicines, and have to wait several months for payment of their pensions and allowances. In 1999, the number of violations of elderly persons' rights discovered and dealt with by procurators increased in half of the constituent members of the Russian Federation, including Moscow and St. Petersburg, Ryazan, Kaluga, Saratov, Orenburg, Irkutsk, Kirov, Kaliningrad, Chitinsk and Amur regions, the Republics of Kalmykia and Sakha (Yakutia), and Stavropol Territory. The main reason for this infringement of the rights of the disabled and elderly is lack of funds at all levels, coupled with the absence of the machinery to implement specific legal provisions. 21. Almost 16,000 violations of disabled and elderly persons' rights were discovered in the period under review. 22. With a view to bringing about a real improvement in the situation, the Procurator General requested the Russian Government to introduce changes in the existing legislation exempting the disabled from payment of State duties in cases involving property disputes, to introduce a wide-ranging federal programme for rehabilitating the disabled, including the procedures for its implementation, and to introduce supplementary legislation designed to improve social protection for the disabled. 23. Procurators now attach great importance to compliance with the pension laws, owing to the longstanding failures to pay pensions. An investigation into the Russian Federation Pension Fund mounted by the Procurator General's Office revealed a number of violations, including improper use of monetary resources, the illegal practice of paying off debts to enterprises and organizations by means of promissory notes, and non-observance of the procedure for granting the right to pay by instalments. Managerial staff in some of the Fund's departments were found to have committed abuses. 24. In order to eliminate these breaches of the law affecting the activities of the Pension Fund and its regional offices, procurators recorded over 800 submissions and protests, filed more than 140 actions, and instituted 13 criminal cases. 25. The results of these inquiries were discussed by a top-level meeting at the Office of the Russian Federation Procurator General. The need to strengthen working relations between the Procurator General's Office and the Pension Fund was acknowledged, especially with regard to complaints concerning unlawful acts committed by constituent members of the Federation having a bearing on central federal jurisdiction, and procurators took measures to address the situation. The matter of the timely payment of pensions has now been resolved to a large extent. 26. Investigations into compliance with the Act "Medical insurance for citizens of the Russian Federation" revealed evidence of violations centred on refusals to levy insurance premiums and on excessive disbursement of the funds received. The Procurator General instituted criminal proceedings against the management of the Federal Compulsory Medical Insurance Fund on charges of their having committing abuses and exceeded their statutory powers. 27. In certain cases, medical institutions are illegally demanding payment, including from minors, for services they are supposed to deliver free of charge. For example, in Sverdlovsk region some preventive care facilities have charged fees for issuing health and accident reports and copies of medical certificates. Excessive prices are being asked for services, the list of services to be paid for has been expanded, and categories such as veterans, the disabled and Chernobyl "liquidators" have lost their entitlement to free medical care. 28. Contrary to the relevant legislation, members of the public are being denied the right to obtain fringe health benefits under voluntary health insurance agreements over and above those included in compulsory insurance programmes, and the procedure for concluding such agreements is being flouted. 29. In 1999, the Procurator General called for an inspection of compliance with the legislation on higher education, which revealed that access to higher education was becoming increasingly dependent on parents' social and material standing. It was also found that students were being asked to pay for places that had already been allocated under the federal budget. As a result of the inspection, the Procurator General made representations to the Ministry of Education, and the information was transmitted to the Federal Government and the State Duma. 30. In 2000, the Procurator General's Office inspected compliance with the legislation on initial and intermediate occupational training in 30 constituent members of the Federation, in the process discovering flagrant violations of the Constitution and the Education Act; discriminatory clauses were being included in the entrance requirements of training establishments, payment was being demanded for regular state-provided training, grants were being reduced, and the rights of trainees who were orphans or who had been deprived of parental care were being ignored. 31. Procurators have taken steps to address the above-mentioned violations. 32. The Procurator General also examined the situation regarding observance of the rights and freedoms of the population living in the administrative districts of the Far North, ascertaining that the "support for the northern territories" proclaimed by governmental departments in fact remained only rhetoric. Programmes undertaken at the federal level were not being implemented, and no one at the federal level was responsible for them. With the consent of the Russian Ministry of Finance, there was widespread acceptance of practices in which direct budgetary funding for production purposes was replaced by cross-cancelling of debts, with commercial banks issuing credits and bills that carried high subsequent interest payments. 33. The authorities in the northern territories have committed many violations of the laws concerning citizens' rights. In the past half-year alone, procurators in 13 northern regions have uncovered some 6,500 such violations, including 3,000 unlawful legal transactions. In defence of the poor and needy, they have filed over 2,600 protests, recorded some 4,100 statements, and initiated 4,200 court actions. Following this investigation, the Procurator General is considering bringing criminal proceedings against officials of "Goskomsevero", on charges of having caused material damage to state interests amounting to almost 1.1 billion roubles. 34. Out of the 273,000 infringements of human and civil rights and freedoms uncovered by procurators, almost two thirds concern the labour laws. Illegal dismissals are being permitted on a wide scale, and delayed salary payments and breaches of labour protection regulations are becoming increasingly common at enterprises under all forms of ownership. Every year, the courts restore the rights of up to 20,000 illegally dismissed workers. 35. More than 138,500 occupational safety checks carried out by governmental labour inspectors in 2000 revealed almost 1.5 million violations of workers' rights (1.7 million in 1999). More than 135,500 court orders were issued in dealing with them. Almost 33,000 officials were found to be administratively liable (fined) for gross violations. 36. Following governmental labour inspectors' inquiries into accidents in the manufacturing sector, over 15,000 files were sent to procurators with a view to initiating criminal proceedings; the result was 1,300 court cases, with 100 persons being sentenced. 37. Problems of protecting social rights persist in the area of occupational safety in Russia, as the statistics indicate: in only the first half of 2000 (figures supplied by the trials department of the Russian Supreme Court) there were more than 307,000 trade disputes, including 16,500 prosecutions involving the mutilation or loss of a bread-winner. 38. In the first half of 2000, the Procurator General of Russia mounted a routine investigation of compliance with the legislation by departments of the federal labour inspectorate. The investigation found that the measures these departments used in checking observance of labour legislation were not only clearly inadequate, but also inappropriate to the unfortunate circumstances which had developed in that sphere: the checks carried out by the inspectorate do not cover all the areas of compulsory state inspection, administrative failings and failures to observe accounting procedures were found at regional inspectorates, and government inspectors do not always comply with the regulations governing the investigation and recording of industrial accidents. 39. According to the Russian State Committee on Statistics (Goskomstat), industrial injuries were sustained by 151,800 workers (35,000 women; 570 under 18's), of whom 4,400 died (255 women; 23 under 18's). The number of people whose capacity for work was reduced so that they had to be transferred to other duties for at least one day per week on health grounds was 5,300, including 927 women. The industrial injury rate was 5.1 per 1,000 workers. The number of workers first diagnosed with an industrial disease in the year in question was 7,500. The loss of working time at the entities concerned arising from temporary incapacity for work caused by injuries was 4.3 million person-days. 40. The statistics supplied by Goskomstat show that in recent years the trend has been relatively positive with regard to the number of industrial injuries sustained in the Russian Federation: in 1996, the figure was 212,500; in 1997, 185,200; in 1998, 158,000; in 1999, 153,000; and in 2000, 151,800. The same is true of the number of industrial accidents leading to death before the year 2000, except that the absolute number of industrial deaths went up again in that year: in 1996, 5,420 deaths; in 1997, 4,730; in 1998, 4,290; in 1999, 4,260; and in 2000, 4,400. Again, Goskomstat's figures indicate that, in 2000, virtually one in six people worked in conditions which did not meet public health standards. In the industrial, construction, transport and communications sectors alone, 1.47 million people worked in conditions characterized by excessive noise, ultrasound and infrasound levels, 350,000 suffer high levels of vibration, and 1.75 million work in conditions polluted by excessive dust or gas. 41. Violations of the laws governing occupational safety and industrial safety practices were found at enterprises under all forms of ownership, but mainly in private enterprises, and mainly in the Republics of Altai and Komi, and in the Archangelsk, Kamchatka, Nizhny Novgorod, Tambov, Tomsk and Yaroslavl regions. In this sector of the economy, 80 per cent of workers and employees work in unfavourable conditions. 42. Procurators are taking steps to deal with all breaches of labour legislation. In the current year, they uncovered over 60,000 such violations, including almost 14,000 unlawful legal transactions. For the purpose of restoring workers' violated rights, over 13,000 protests were filed, almost 11,000 applications to remedy legal violations were made, over 6,000 people were subjected to disciplinary, administrative and financial proceedings, almost 16,000 petitions went to the courts, and almost 200 criminal cases were initiated. 43. In recent times, violations of the housing laws have multiplied. A large proportion of cases concern the issuance of unlawful legal documents imposing restrictions on people's rights to receive housing or housing subsidies, housing privatization, and the housing of minors and of citizens unable to look after themselves. An investigation carried out by the Procurator General has revealed evidence of malpractice by officials in connection with the provision of housing subsidies to persons moving from regions of the Far North and similar localities to live in Kamchatka Region. 44. In 1997, the Office of Human Rights Commissioner came into existence in the Russian Federation (Federal Constitutional Law No.1 on "The human rights commissioner in the Russian Federation"). The incumbent's duties include examining complaints of abuses of human rights and freedoms and mounting investigations into them, for which purpose he may visit institutions and agencies responsible for enforcing punishment without the need for special permission. He is also responsible for keeping the Russian authorities and public informed about observance (non-observance) of the fundamentals of personal legal status in the Russian Federation, and about Russia's fulfilment (non-fulfilment) of its international commitments with regard to the recognition, observance and protection of human and civil rights and freedoms in accordance with the generally accepted international legal norms and principles. Equal rights of men and women (article 3) 45. Information relating to this article is contained in paragraphs 92-94 of this report, in Russia's fifth periodic report on its implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW/C/USR/5) submitted to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in 1999, and in the Russian Federation's report on its implementation of the Platform of Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women (attached). The right to work (article 6) 46. The processes taking place in the labour market have been shaped to a large extent by the consequences of the 1998 financial crisis. Since 1999, the number of people in employment in Russia has risen. By comparison with 1998, the number of employed persons has increased by 1.4 million, reaching 65 million by the end of 2000. 47. The overall number of the unemployed stood at 6.6 million on 1 July 2001 (9.6% of the economically active population), and the number of persons registered as unemployed at state employment offices was 1 million. The average time spent looking for work is 5.8 months. 48. The biggest cuts in workforce over the period 1996-2000 occurred in the fields of science and scientific services, industry, transport and communications. At the same time enterprises and organizations involved in general commercial activity, communal housing provision, consumer services and the power industry experienced a certain increase in employment. The workforce engaged in the wholesale and retail trades and in public catering is increasing steadily. 49. Acute problems of unemployment persist in the territories. At the beginning of 2001, the numbers of the registered unemployed in 48 constituent territories of the Russian Federation exceeded the average for the whole country. In the regions where the situation was worst (the Murmansk and Kirov regions, the Republics of Dagestan, Tuva and Ingushetia, and the Chukchi, Koryak, Nenets, Aginsky Buryat and Evenk Autonomous Areas), the levels of registered unemployment were two or more times greater than the Russian average. 50. Concealed unemployment (significantly greater than the number of officially unemployed) is concentrated mainly in unprofitable enterprises - which represent about 50 per cent of the total - and also in single towns and in areas where labour market conditions are at their worst. At the macro-level, it acts as a kind of buffer between effective employment and open unemployment, preventing the latter attaining avalanche-like proportions and thus avoiding a sharp rise in social tensions. Experts estimate that concealed unemployment in the Russian Federation concerns 12-13 million people. 51. Having peaked in 1998, involuntary partial employment has begun to decline gradually over the past two years. In the first quarter of 2001, managerial bodies transferred 800,000 people to partial employment. The number of workers offered unpaid or partially paid leave by their management was 1.1 million. Partial employment was most marked at enterprises and organisations in industry, construction, transport, science and scientific services. 52. To a certain extent, the policy of supporting the real economy has led to growth in the numbers of people employed in the economy. Goskomstat estimates that in 2000 this increase amounted to 600,000 compared with 200,000 in 1999; the absolute number of people employed in the economy was 64.6 million. By the end of 2000 the total number of the unemployed, using the ILO method, was 7 million, or 9.8 per cent of the economically active population. Those officially registered unemployed numbered 1.1 million, or 1.4 per cent of the economically active population. By the end of June 2001, the total number of the unemployed, using the ILO method, was 6.6 million, or 9.6 per cent of the economically active population. The total number of officially unemployed persons was 1 million, or 1.4 per cent of the economically active population. 53. Women are in the most difficult situation as regards the labour market. In 2000, the total number of women officially registered as unemployed at state employment offices was 710,000 (over 68.9% of the official total). The average period of unemployment for women was 2 months (6 months for men). By the end of 2000, the number of officially unemployed women stood at 710,000 (71% of the official total). The average period of unemployment for women had risen to 6.2 months. 54. At the end of 2000, 78 per cent of unemployed parents with underage or disabled children were women, as were 93 per cent of unemployed single parents and 75 per cent of unemployed parents with more than one child. At the end of 2001, the respective figures were 76.5 per cent, 94 per cent and 75.3 per cent. 55. The reasons for this preponderance of women among the unemployed are the drastic cutting of jobs in "women's" industries, the abolition of a number of civil service technical grades normally dominated by women, and the fact that women are not able to compete as well in the labour market owing to the interruptions to their working lives (pregnancy, childcare, etc.). 56. In order to promote jobs for unemployed women, they have been included among the high-priority groups targeted under the national employment programme. They thus enjoy the right to privileged treatment as jobs are created, in the following order: single mothers or mothers with several children whose charges are disabled or under-aged; disabled women; women of pre-retirement age, etc. 57. Regional employment programmes devote considerable attention to women's employment. In addition, special programmes are being devised to improve the lot of unemployed women; they include a range of measures focussing on job placements, career guidance and retraining, job retention and job creation. The main measures being taken to boost women's employment are: placement in existing posts and in jobs protected by quotas; vocational training and retraining in accordance with labour market requirements; temporary employment, including public; promotion of entrepreneurial initiatives by women and their self-employment; retention and creation of jobs for women. 58. In 2000, two and a half million women approached state employment offices for help in finding a work placement (53% of the total number of users). The employment service assisted 1.7 million women in finding paid employment (52.1% of those placed in jobs). In 2000 over 371,000 women were involved in social work. The employment services helped around 20,000 previously unemployed women to start their own entrepreneurial activities. 59. Additional information is supplied in the Russian Federation's report on its implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. development of a system offering young people initial and further occupational training, and retraining, together with help in joining the labour market; special job placement programmes for young people, such as "New start"; incentives designed to make young people remain longer in mainstream education. 61. Alongside the burgeoning nation-wide unemployment, there has been a noticeable increase in discrimination against the disabled in the labour market. By 1 January 2000, the Russian Federation had 10.6 million disabled inhabitants, of whom almost 50 per cent were of working age. Every year, 1 million more people are recognized as disabled. On that date, only 15 per cent of disabled people of working age had a job. By the end of 2000, the ranks of the officially unemployed included 39,700 disabled persons, of whom 86 per cent were receiving unemployment benefit. In 1999, the federal government submitted a report to the ILO on Russia's implementation of ILO Convention No. 159 on Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (Disabled Persons), in which it described in detail its policy and the main measures being taken in Russia to address the problem of employment for the disabled. 62. The Russian Government is attempting a balanced approach to its employment policy, on the one hand not allowing mass unemployment to surge out of control, and on the other not interfering with the release of superfluous labour as the economy is restructured. 63. Accordingly, the Government intends to step up its measures designed to stimulate output and improve the financial situation of enterprises. The main thrust of its general economic, budgetary and lending policy is to boost investment activity and carry out major investment programmes designed to create jobs. The Government's current labour market policy is geared to the following main concerns: continuing to secure employment through a policy of providing state support for the real economy and making maximum use of the potential offered by domestic and foreign investment in the economy and the mobilization of people's savings; offering strengthened support for the regions worst affected by labour market problems, in particular by ensuring that they can transfer payments on time; improving the operational effectiveness of employment offices with regard to the provision of appropriate retraining and job placements for laid-off workers, and reducing long-term (more than one year) unemployment; boosting small and medium enterprises; amending employment legislation with a view to strengthening the social support network available to the unemployed, ensuring that the amount of benefit more closely reflects work experience, period of insurance and reasons for dismissal, clarifying the criteria used in defining people as unemployed, and making more effective use of the State Employment Fund; ensuring that all policy aimed at increasing employment genuinely helps to overcome the downturn in production and restore gradual growth; enhancing public employment by improving its status, widening the nature and scale of its operations and changing the conditions affecting access to such employment; developing and improving the systems of occupational and in-service training; protecting the national labour market. 64. As a further guarantee in this regard, the Russian Government has adopted a Federal programme to boost employment for the period 1999-2000 (Governmental Decree No. 828 of 24 July 1998), whose main objectives are job creation and retention, the raising of work effectiveness, the development of small enterprises and non-traditional forms of employment, and the formulation of specific governmental employment measures jointly with the town planning authorities in territories where labour market conditions are at their worst. 65. Particular attention is being devoted to the reorganization of occupational training at all levels and to retraining, especially for young people and the unemployed, with the overall objective of making training more suited to the requirements of the free labour market. The current situation is so unbalanced that three fifths of university graduates, one third of trade school graduates and three quarters of those leaving technical schools do not take up employment in the field in which they were trained, while almost a quarter of all unemployed young people have diplomas from high school or occupational training establishments. 66. The main problem is to overhaul the system of occupational training and in-service training which existed before the reforms. Most employers, imposing harsher conditions on workers against a background of increasing unemployment, do not take the necessary steps to retrain their workers or to regenerate or create productive staff training arrangements. The average interval between workers' retraining periods has increased since 1991 from five to nine years. In 1998, the number of workers who had undertaken training in industry was two times less than in 1991, and the number of those who had improved their qualifications was six times less. In 1998, about 1.5 million workers received training in industry, and 1.9 million workers and 1.1 million specialists and managers improved their qualifications. 67. In 1998 the Russian Government submitted to the ILO its report on Russia's implementation of ILO Convention No. 142, the Human Resources Development Convention, giving detailed information. 68. With regard to the issue of discrimination in the field of labour and employment, article 37 of the Russian Constitution states that "Everyone shall have the right.... to remuneration for work without any discrimination...". Moreover, article 16 of the Labour Code forbids direct or indirect discrimination in the field of labour and employment in respect of race, nationality, sex, creed, political beliefs or social origin. This matter has been covered in detail in the Russian Government's report on Russia's implementation of ILO Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in respect of Employment and Occupation, submitted to the ILO in 1999. 69. The widespread illegal migration of labour remains a serious problem in Russia, exacerbating the tensions in the labour market. In light of this situation, the Government issued a decree establishing a federal migration programme for the period 1998-2000, subsequently extended to 2001. The main aims of this programme are to strengthen state control over migratory flows, deal with the negative consequences of spontaneous migration, create the conditions for unimpeded implementation of migrants' rights, and protect migrants' legal rights and interests. 70. In 2000, according to official statistics, 2, 132, 293 foreign workers from over 150 countries were recruited to work in the Russian Federation. The largest groups comprised workers from Ukraine (63,797, or 29.96%), followed by China (26,222; 12.32%), Turkey (17,847; 8.38%), Viet Nam (13,256;6.23%) and Moldova (11,895;5.59%). 71. The greater part of this foreign workforce was used in construction (83,766), industry (26,725), public catering outlets (25,913), farming and forestry (20,132) and commerce (18,272). 72. During the first half of 2001, some 120-125,000 foreign workers were recruited from over 30 countries (latest figures) to work in the Russian Federation. The largest groups came from Ukraine (29.06%), Turkey (7.96%), China (12.85%), Viet Nam (6.04%) and North Korea (4.3%). As before, foreign labour was used mainly in construction, trade, public catering, and farming and forestry. 73. The significant levels of partial employment, the low wages and delays in paying them, and the lack of effective control over job placement in the private sector, especially in small and medium enterprises, are all attributable to the wide-scale introduction of secondary and unofficial employment. Experts estimate that almost 8 million people have a second job. In 2000, almost 1.8 million people were officially hired by large and medium enterprises under civil contracts to occupy two jobs at once. The highest numbers of such people were to be found in insurance, arts and culture, education and science, health care, public catering outlets and construction. The number of persons working in the unofficial sector for whom this kind of employment is the only source of income is estimated to be 7.5 million. 74. The legal provisions governing labour and employment were supplemented by the following major new laws during the period 1996-2001: Federal Act No. 125 of 24 July 1998, "Compulsory social insurance against industrial accidents and occupational diseases"; Federal Act No. 181 of 17 July 1999, "Fundamentals of occupational safety in the Russian Federation"; Federal Act No. 22 of 4 February 1999, "Regulation of worker remuneration in public-sector organizations"; RSFSR Act No. 1032-1 of 19 April 1991, "Employment in the Russian Federation", Revision No. 36-FZ of 20 April 1996, and subsequent amendments and additions, the latest dating from 7 July 2000. 75. The State Duma of the Federal Assembly is currently examining the Government's draft labour code, which will regulate the employment of Russia's citizens on the basis of modern labour relations. The draft is designed to achieve a balance between workers' and employers' interests, to increase workforce mobility and to reduce the effect that hidden processes exert on the labour market. It proposes gradually to squeeze out "informal" working practices and replace them with widespread registered employment, thereby bringing greater equilibrium to the labour market and minimizing unemployment. A greater role is envisaged for contractual agreements in labour relations, initially on the basis of strengthened collaboration between trade unions and employers. The role of individual labour contracts will also be strengthened considerably, with greater scope for the use of fixed-term individual contracts, simplification of the procedure used by employers to cancel them (while maintaining the required level of protection for workers' rights and interests), and a widening of the range of considerations governed directly by contracts. The Government reserves the right to consolidate and give expression to guarantees of labour rights for mandatory application throughout the national territory. At the level of collective bargaining, sectoral, regional, occupational and other types of organizations will be established, thus genuinely enhancing the level of workers' labour guarantees. Individual contractual arrangements will become the main means of establishing, with his direct involvement, a worker's working conditions and remuneration, of defining the nature and content of his work duties, any special circumstances conditioning their fulfilment, and the workers' capabilities, and of widening the scope for applying the various types of incentives. 76. In response to the delays and failures occurring in the payment of salaries, the existing legislation on employer liability has been strengthened by the adoption of Federal Act No. 48 of 15 March 1999 entitled "Supplementary article 145 (1) to the Russian Criminal Code", which sets out the liability measures (fine, deprivation of the right to exercise certain occupations for a fixed period, deprivation of freedom for up to seven years) applicable for non-payment of wages, pensions, grants, benefits, etc. The right to the enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of work (article 7) 77. The Russian Federation is a party to the following ILO conventions: No. 14 concerning Weekly Rest in Industry, 1921; No. 81 concerning Labour Inspection, 1947; No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration, 1951; No. 106 concerning Weekly Rest in Commerce and Offices, 1957; No. 155 concerning Occupational Safety and Health, 1981. The Russian Government has submitted periodic reports on its implementation of these conventions, as follows: No. 14 in 1994; No. 100 in 1996; No. 106 in 1994; No. 155 in 1996. The Russian Federation has ratified Conventions Nos. 81 and 155 in 1998, and no questions relating to Russian Government's submission of initial reports in relation to the application of their provisions were received in 1999. The Russian Federation has not ratified ILO Conventions No. 129 (1969) concerning Labour Inspection in Agriculture, No. 131 (1970) concerning Minimum Wage Fixing, and No. 132 (1970) concerning Holidays with Pay (Revised). 78. In Russian law there is as yet no clear definition of the term "salary" or "wages". Under the heading "Remuneration for labour", article 77 of the Russian Labour Code states that "payment for a worker's labour is conditional upon his personal working contribution and the quality of his work, and shall not be restricted to a maximum amount", and that "no reduction whatsoever of a worker's wages shall be permitted on grounds of sex, age, race, nationality, religious belief, or membership of public associations". 79. Under a bill adopted by the State Duma on 27 October 1999 entitled "Amendments and additions to the Labour Code of the Russian Federation", articles 77 and 78 were reworded as follows: "Article 77. Remuneration for labour The wages of every worker shall be conditional upon his skills, the difficulty of the work he performs and the quantity of labour he invests therein, and shall not be restricted to a maximum amount. No discrimination whatsoever shall be permitted in determining and altering wage amounts and terms. Men and women shall be guaranteed equal remuneration for work of equal value. Article 78. Amount of minimum wage The amount of the minimum wage is a social requirement, and shall be determined by federal law for the purpose of regulating wage levels. The minimum wage shall be guaranteed to workers by the state. The minimum wage shall be introduced simultaneously to the whole territory of the Russian Federation. The wages of a worker who has completed the standard number of monthly working hours and performed his working duties (work quota) shall not be lower than the amount of the legal minimum wage. The amount of the minimum wage shall not include extra payments, allowances, bonuses and other payments of an incentive nature, payments for working in particular climatic conditions and in areas subjected to radioactive contamination, and other entitlements". 80. In the draft of the new Russian Labour Code submitted to the State Duma in 1999, the term "wages" (oplata truda or zarabotnaya plata) denotes the prescribed remuneration a worker receives for completing his working duties. 81. The minimum wage is defined as the lowest amount of wages payable to unskilled workers performing simple duties under normal working conditions. 82. The rate of pay (salary) shall be the fixed amount of wages a worker receives for fulfilling his work quota (working duties) at a certain level of difficulty (skill level) in a single month. 83. The economic transformations of recent years have significantly weakened the influence exerted by governmental departments on working relations and sharply reduced central government's influence on wage-setting, restricting it to the so-called "public sector". State and municipal enterprises comprise only 11 per cent of the national economy, including 5 per cent accounted for by industry and construction. Over 60 per cent of the Russians active in the economy work for enterprises outside the direct influence of State and municipal departments. The Russian economy may be divided into four sectors differentiated by wages: enterprises and institutions which receive funds from the national budget, i.e. the public sector, mainly comprising governmental institutions at the federal and regional levels and institutions concerned with education, science, culture and health care; state institutions enjoying significant financial autonomy (these include mixed-ownership enterprises in which the state holds the controlling share); privatized enterprises transformed into joint-stock companies; new private companies. 84. In 2000, the population's income totalled over 3,742.3 billion roubles, and its expenditure 3,640.3 billion roubles. Wages still provided the basis for meeting the living requirements of the population (over 50 million economically active people), and comprised more than 65.6 per cent of people's monetary income. The income derived from entrepreneurial activity in 2000 amounted to 12.6 per cent, that from social transfers 13.4 per cent, and that from property over 7.4 per cent. 85. In 2000 the average monthly wage in Russia was 2,223 roubles (79 US dollars). The proportion of workers with wages equal to or below the subsistence level was 40 per cent. 86. The gulf between the highest and lowest workers' wage levels across the 36 main branches of the economy and industry in 2000 amounted to a factor of 12-13. The highest wages were enjoyed by workers in the sectors that actively exploited a monopoly situation in the domestic market and favourable conditions for marketing their products world-wide. The lowest wages were in agriculture and the socio-cultural sector. 87. The problem of low wages was made worse by late payment. At the beginning of 2001, over 9 million people working in 55,000 enterprises and organizations were owed outstanding wages equivalent, on average, to twice the monthly wage bill for the entities concerned. 88. In 1999 the Russian Government submitted to the ILO its periodic report on Russia's application of ILO Convention No. 95 (1949) concerning Protection of Wages. 89. The minimum wage is set by Federal Act No. 82 of 16 June 2000 entitled "The Minimum wage". On 1 July 2000, this amounted to 132 roubles per month, on 1 January 2001, 200 roubles per month, and on 1 July 2001, 300 roubles per month. The act stipulates that the minimum level set for relevant benefits and other social payments shall be equivalent to100 roubles. In the third quarter of 1999, the minimum wage amounted to 7.9 per cent of the subsistence level. 90. Wages in the public sector are set in accordance with the Unified Wage Scale introduced in December 1992. The Scale allows for 18 wage categories, each with a set of corresponding coefficients relating to the first category which are revised regularly to take account of inflation, the cost of living and the national budgetary situation. 91. In accordance with Federal Act No. 22 of 4 February 1999, "Wage setting for workers in public-sector organizations", and Governmental Resolution No. 309 of 10 March 1999 concerning "Increases in Unified Wage Scale pay rates (salaries) for workers in public-sector organizations", the minimum rate in the first wage category in 1999 was 110 roubles. In the third quarter the minimum amount of expenditure with respect to the first category of the Unified Wage scale represented 10.5 per cent of the average subsistence level for the whole of Russia. The ratio between the highest and lowest categories of the Unified Wage Scale (categories 1 and 18) was 1: 8.23, with the rate of pay in the lowest category set at 110 roubles and that in the highest set at 905 roubles. With effect from 1 April 2000, Governmental Order No. 282 of 30 March 2000 raised, by a factor of 1.2, the Unified Wage Scale pay rates for workers in the public sector. 92. Wage coefficients are approved by the Federal Government in agreement with the national trade unions' and employers' associations (articles 1 and 3 of the above-mentioned Federal Act No. 22 of 4 February 1998). 93. For persons in government service, earnings are paid in the form of monetary wages or allowances determined by decree of the Russian President. The wages comprise basic pay, supplements payable to higher categories (first-class rank, diplomatic grade) and special conditions relating to state service, length of service and productivity bonuses. Allowances are paid in fixed amounts. They are determined on the basis of the wage, the supplements and other payments. 94. In order to provide social guarantees for those in government service, their wages and allowances are index-liked to price rises over the same periods as those applicable to public-sector workers. 95. Across the board, the wage system in Russia is in need of reform, and a set of measures is being drawn up with a view to gradually resolving this problem. One of the Government's main areas of concern in this context is how to change the formula used to determine the minimum wage. The minimum wage has been maintained at a level significantly beneath the value of the average subsistence level for the whole country (less than 10 per cent at the end of 1999). The result has been the impairment of the incentive function of wages; the minimum wage, instead of acting as a minimum guarantee, has taken on the unintended role of the standard used to define social benefits and administrative payments. 96. Careful thought is now being given to restoring the incentive function of the minimum wage, bringing it closer to the value of the subsistence level, and separating it from social benefits. It is proposed to introduce new rules on minimum wage indexing under which amounts will be determined by correlating a minimum amount of wages with the value of a subsistence minimum set every year by the Federal Budget Act. The frequency of minimum wage indexing will depend on the inflation level. 97. Other issues being examined carefully are the vitally important one of raising the real value of wages in all branches of the economy and all types of enterprise, significantly increasing their relative significance in manufacturing output (services) and in people's monetary incomes, and restoring their incentive role. 98. The legislation currently in force in Russia contains no discriminatory provisions with respect to remuneration for work of equal value. 99. At the same time, there are certain differences between men's and women's average incomes, mainly due to so-called segregation in the labour market and the existence of "women's" and "men's" occupations with differing skill levels and correspondingly different levels of pay. For example, according to the Russian State Committee for Statistics (Goskomstat) the average monthly pay of women in large and medium enterprises is almost 30 per cent lower than that of their male colleagues. Also, a "leakage" of male workers is occurring towards better paid sectors formerly reserved for women in Russia, such as commerce, public catering, finance and insurance. 100. Additional information on this matter has been submitted in Russia's report on its implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 101. During the reporting period, the following changes and additions have been made to Russia's national legislation concerning the right to the enjoyment of just and favourable working conditions. 102. On 17 July 1999, the Federal Act "Fundamentals of Labour Protection in the Russian Federation" was adopted. The act clearly delimits the departmental powers of the Russian Federal Government and of the Federation's constituent members, and sets out their obligations to introduce labour protection units in organizations engaged in production. The act defines the sphere of application of the labour protection laws, and also develops and expresses more accurately individual workers' rights in each type of employment as they correspond to the labour protection requirements. In this way, it incorporates every worker's entitlement to compulsory employer's insurance against industrial accidents and occupational diseases. 103. The inclusion in the above-mentioned act of a provision concerning the compulsory introduction of a labour protection unit by productive organizations employing over 100 workers, together with a requirement not to abolish such units, will greatly strengthen in-house capabilities for resolving complex labour protection issues. 104. A number of additional employer obligations have been introduced into the act which make them more accountable for failure to comply with labour protection requirements or to protect workers' interests. 105. The act's coming into force emphasizes the increased attention being devoted to labour protection in governmental agencies and economic entities at all levels, by both employers and workers, and will facilitate a more disciplined approach to production, improved monitoring of compliance with labour protection requirements, and better training delivery and testing of workers' knowledge (including managers) in the labour protection field. As a result, industrial accidents and industrial diseases are expected to decline, leading to a reduction in costs to the State and an improvement in workers' social situation. 106. The Federal Act " Compulsory Social Insurance against Industrial Accidents and Occupational Diseases" offers safe protection for the interests of those injured at work. The act's introduction and application have made it possible to eliminate almost entirely the problems relating to compensation payments. 107. The experience gained to date in applying the legislative and other regulatory instruments adopted in the field of social insurance against industrial accidents and occupational diseases shows that there is a need for substantial amendments to the current sectoral and sub-sectoral classification based on categories of occupational risk. There is a need to increase the number of classified sub-sectors so that the scale of insurance contributions is more commensurate with the overall cost of the compensation payments sustained in industry. To achieve this, the Ministry of Labour, the National Social Insurance Fund and the Ministry for the Economy have been collaborating with federal departments and the national association of industrialists. At the end of 2000, Federal Act No. 17, "Rates of compulsory social insurance against industrial accidents and occupational diseases", was completed. It establishes the insurance rates for groups of economic sectors and sub-sectors on the basis of 22 occupational risk categories (formerly 14) and amounts ranging from 0.2 per cent to 8.5 per cent (formerly 0.2 to 10.7) of accumulated salary, for all types of income. 108. The task of bringing the amount of insured persons' contributions more closely into line with the actual cost of compensation sustained in production will continue. Further progress towards this goal will be made when the rules governing insurance rate reductions and surcharges are approved and brought into force in 2001. 109. Work is currently continuing on formulation of the legal measures needed for full implementation of the Federal Act on Compulsory Social Insurance against Industrial Accidents and Occupational Diseases. 110. In 2000 the Ministry of Labour and the National Social Insurance Fund jointly organized training in labour protection for the various categories of insured person. In over 250 training organizations, selected by competition, almost 175,000 people received training. The Russian Social Insurance Fund disbursed 164 million roubles for this purpose. 111. During the period from 1995 to June 2001, 17 intersectoral labour protection codes were approved, the Russian Government endorsed by decree the "Provisions concerning the investigation and reporting of industrial accidents"; the documents to be used for those purposes were approved; the Russian Government endorsed by decree the "Provisions concerning procedures for notification, investigation, recording and reporting of occupational diseases (toxicosis); and the "Regulations on the provision of special clothing, footwear and other means of personal protection for workers", and the "Sectoral rules on the free issue to workers of special clothing, footwear and other means of personal protection" were also approved. 112. As regards occupational health and safety, in the Russian Federation there are currently almost 1,000 intersectoral and almost 700 sectoral regulatory instruments in legal force. 113. There are over 250 regulatory instruments in force concerned with the minimum conditions of occupational health and safety. 114. State supervision and monitoring of compliance with the labour protection regulations is the task of the Federal Labour Inspectorate and other bodies belonging to the executive authorities; these entities have the right to perform supervision and monitoring within the limits of their powers. 115. The legislative methods employed in Russia with regard to dangerous, heavy and harmful types of work range from an overall ban on the performance of such work by women and minors, to sectoral or occupational restrictions on work involving specific substances or reagents, and specific restrictions applicable only to pregnant and breastfeeding women. 116. As part of the 1998-2000 special federal programme on improving working conditions and labour protection, the Government has approved, by Decisions Nos. 162 and 163 of 25 February 2000, new schedules of heavy, harmful and dangerous work which may not be performed by women or by persons younger than 18. 117. The above-mentioned schedules were compiled in accordance with scientifically based medico-biological criteria relating to the evaluation of working conditions, which were developed specially to establish indicators applicable to work done by women, and indications and contraindications applicable to work done by minors. The categories were approved by the Ministry of Health with the agreement of the Ministry of Labour. 118. In drawing up these schedules, due attention was paid to the provisions of the ILO Conventions which Russia has ratified. 119. The actual situation regarding labour protection is that wide-scale industrial injuries are occurring owing to the tendency to retain harmful industrial practices and use outdated machinery, equipment and processes. An investigation carried out at enterprises in 11 branches of the economy has revealed that 1,585,000 people suffered from injuries and temporary incapacity for work in 1998, including 640,300 in the manufacturing sector alone. In the same year 4,300 people died of injuries sustained while working in industry, including 1,700 in manufacturing, 600 in construction and 500 in the transport sector. 120. Every year, an average of one in eight of those who suffer injury while working in industry do so because their workplace does not comply with the safety regulations or because compulsory labour protection regulations have not been observed (Appendix 2). 121. As Appendix 2 makes clear, in recent years there has been a decline in industrial injuries, mainly owing to the overall reduction in time worked by staff resulting from the leave taken without pay at the management's behest, the fall-off in the numbers of employees in the sectors examined, and the closure of the most dangerous factories. 122. Losses of working time caused by incapacity for work due to injuries suffered at the enterprises and organizations covered by the investigation amounted to 4.3 million man-days, including 1.9 million in manufacturing. The average period spent absent from work by those who sustained an industrial injury during the year was almost a month (28.3 days in the sectors which participated in the investigation into industrial injury levels). 123. Work carried out under harmful conditions is the cause of many occupational diseases. Appendices 3 and 4 show data supplied by the Ministry of Health on numbers of patients diagnosed with an occupational disease. 124. In the past five years, according to Ministry of Health data, 53,661 people were registered as having been diagnosed for the first time with an occupational disease. 125. Mainly as a result of substantial cuts in the funding available for improving working conditions, the higher noise and vibration levels emanating from machinery that is more often than not obsolete, and a fall-off in the provision of medical services in the regions, the indicator for the number of occupational diseases per 10,000 workers showed an increase, from 1.437 to 1.694. There is a growing need to perform assessments of workstation conditions and to certify work compliance with labour protection requirements in organizations, and to ensure that the ensuing deficiencies are dealt with. 126. For the purpose of implementing the Federal Act entitled "Ratification of ILO Convention No. 81 of 1947 concerning Labour Inspection, and its 1995 Protocol, ILO Convention No. 150 of 1978 concerning Labour Administration, and ILO Convention No. 155 of 1981 concerning Occupational Safety and Health", a new Federal Act No. 181 of 17 July 1999 entitled " Labour fundamentals in the Russian Federation" and Governmental Decision No. 1035 of 9 September 1999 entitled "State supervision and monitoring of compliance with national legislation on labour and labour protection" have been adopted. 127. In accordance with Presidential Decree No. 934 of 18 June 1996 on "Preparation for the social reform programme", the Russian Government approved a social reform programme for the Russian Federation for the period 1996-2000 (Governmental Decision No. 222 of 26 February 1997). The programme provides for reforms in the spheres of labour and labour relations (labour protection, protection of citizens' labour rights, growth of social partnership), employment and the development of management potential, migration policy, social insurance reform, pension provision, the social welfare system, and other areas of social concern. Trade union rights (article 8) 128. The Russian Federation is a party to ILO Convention No. 87 of 1948 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize, and Convention No. 98 of 1949 concerning The Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining. The Russian Government submitted periodic reports on its application of these conventions to the ILO, in 1996 in the case of Convention No. 87, and in 1997, 1998 and 1999 in the case of No. 98. 129. Guarantees pertaining to the right to form trade unions are contained in article 30 of the Constitution, which states: "1. Everyone shall have the right to association, including the right to create trade unions in order to protect one's own interests. The freedom of public associations' activities shall be guaranteed. 2. No one may be coerced into joining any association or into membership thereof." 130. The implementation of this right is assured by Federal Act No. 82 of 19 May 1995 entitled "Public associations" and Federal Act No. 10 of 12 January 1996 entitled "Trade unions, their rights and operating guarantees". 131. Trade union activities are also regulated by Chapter XV of the Russian Labour Code, under the heading "Trade unions. Worker participation in the management of enterprises, institutions and organizations". 132. Article 2 of the Federal Act "Trade unions, their rights and operating guarantees" states, under the heading "Right to association and trade unions", that "A trade union is a voluntary public association of citizens brought together by common industrial and occupational interests according to their type of activity, and created for the purposes of representation and the protection of their socio-occupational rights and interests. All trade unions shall enjoy equal rights. Everyone who has reached the age of fourteen and is engaged in a labour (occupational) activity shall have the right to establish trade unions at his own choice to protect his own interests, to join them, to carry out trade union activities and to leave trade unions". This right is exercised freely, without prior permission. Citizens of the Russian Federation living beyond its borders may be members of Russian trade unions. 133. Foreign citizens and stateless persons living within the borders of the Russian Federation may be members of Russian trade unions, except in the cases prescribed by federal law and by Russia's international agreements. 134. Under the existing legislation, no restrictions are placed on the right of certain categories of workers to join or establish a trade union; this holds even for governmental employees, including military personnel and the staff of the Interior Ministry. Thus, in practice, governmental employees of all grades attached to the executive authorities join the union of employees of government institutions. Those working as civilians in the armed forces have formed a federation of unions of the Russian armed forces. 135. In accordance with article 2, paragraph 5 of the Federal Act "Trade unions, their rights and operating guarantees", trade unions have the right to form their own associations on a branch, territorial or other basis that incorporates a specific occupational identity - All-Russia associations of trade unions, interregional associations of trade unions, territorial associations of trade union organizations. Trade unions and their associations have the right to collaborate with the trade unions of other countries, join international trade unions and other associations and organizations, and to conclude treaties and agreements with them. 136. The largest trade union association in Russia is the Russian Federation of Independent Trade Unions, which belongs to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. 137. Russian law grants Russian workers the right to strike. Article 11 of Federal Act No. 119 of 31 July 1995, "Principles of governmental service in the Russian Federation", imposes a restriction in the form of a ban on strikes by government employees. Under the Federal Act entitled "The status of military personnel", military personnel are banned from participating in strikes or in any other suspension of their military duties used as a means to settle matters relating to their military service. 138. Since there have been no recorded instances to date of strikes mounted by military personnel, Russia has no experience of enforcing such a ban. 139. By comparison with 1999, in 2000 the level of strike activity declined significantly, both with respect to the number of organizations on strike (89%; 925 organizations) and the number of participants (86%; 35,000 people). 140. In May 1999, Federal Act No. 92 entitled "Russian Tripartite Committee on the Governance of Socio-occupational Relations" was adopted. The main aims of this Committee, which comprises representatives of the All-Russian trade union associations, the All-Russian employers associations and the Russian Government, are to regulate socio-occupational relations and to reconcile the socio-economic interests of the parties involved. 141. On 31 July 1999 the Regulations of the Russian Tripartite Committee were approved; these confirm the executive authority of its work and clarify its decision-making. 142. In order to facilitate timely and complete implementation of the agreements reached during discussions between the All-Russian trade union associations, the All-Russian employers associations and the Government, a general agreement was signed at the beginning of 2000 to cover the period 2000-01. This agreement obliges the parties to combine their efforts with a view to stabilising and promoting the economy, increasing the real value of wages, and restoring the function of wages as an incentive to greater productivity and higher incomes. The right to social security (article 9) 143. The Russian Federation has not ratified ILO Conventions No. 102 of 1952 concerning Minimum Standards of Social Security, No. 121 of 1964 concerning Employment Injury Benefits, No. 128 of 1967 concerning Invalidity, Old-Age and Survivors' Benefits, No. 130 of 1969 concerning Medical Care and Sickness Benefits, and No. 168 of 1988 concerning Employment Promotion and Protection against Unemployment. 144. Article 7 of the Constitution declares that "The Russian Federation shall be a federal state, whose policies shall be aimed at creating conditions which ensure a dignified life and free development of man", and that "The Russian Federation shall protect the work and health of its people, establish a guaranteed minimum wage, provide state support for family, motherhood, fatherhood and childhood, and also for the disabled and for elderly citizens, develop a system of social services and establish government pensions, benefits and other social security guarantees". 145. The following types of social security exist in the Russian Federation: the health service; sickness benefits; pregnancy and family benefits; old-age benefits; invalidity benefits; benefits to cover loss of the main breadwinner; industrial injury benefits; unemployment benefit; grants to assist with children's birth and upbringing. 146. In order to guarantee the population's social rights, Federal Act No. 178 of 17 July 1999, "State social assistance", was adopted. This law establishes unified legal and organizational principles for the provision of state social assistance to needy families or to impoverished individuals who live alone. 147. In 1999, Federal Act No. 165 of 16 July 1999, " The principles of compulsory social insurance", came into force. The act defines the scope and subjects of compulsory social insurance, the types of social risk and the social insurance applicable to them, the rights and obligations of insured persons and insurers, and also how social insurance is to be administered and funded. 148. The provision of state social assistance is intended to meet the following objectives: to maintain the living standards of needy families and needy persons living alone whose average income falls below the subsistence level set by the relevant constituent member of the Russian Federation; to achieve well-directed and efficient use of budgetary resources. 149. In accordance with article 11 of the Federal Act "State social assistance", the amount of such state aid shall be defined by the laws of the Russian Federation's constituent members. 150. State social assistance is offered either once or for a period of not less than three months in the following forms: a) cash payments (social benefits, subsidies, compensation and other payments); and b) assistance in kind (fuel, food, clothing, footwear, medicines, etc.). 151. State social assistance is provided out of the national budget, the budgets of the constituent members of the Federation and local budgets. 152. In order to ensure that veterans may live an active life, respected and appreciated by society, on 12 January 1995 Federal Act No. 5 entitled "Veterans" was adopted (and subsequent amendments and additions thereto). This offers veterans privileges with regard to: pension provision, taxation, payment of benefits; the allocation, acquisition, construction and maintenance of living accommodation; payment of communal housing fees and commercial costs; medical care, orthopaedic services and prosthetics, treatment at sanatoria and health spas, purchase of medicines and medical products; use of means of transport and payment for travel; job placement, training, retraining and working conditions; access to the services of institutions providing communications and cultural and sporting facilities; access to social services and to welfare and legal assistance. 153. Sickness benefits are paid at the rate of 60 per cent of salary for at least five years' continuous service, 80 per cent of salary for 5-8 years' continuous service, and 100 per cent of salary for more than eight years' continuous service (or when there are three or more dependent children in the family). The minimum amount of benefit is equivalent to 90 per cent of the minimum wage. 154. The old-age pension offered on the usual terms is available to men who have reached 60 years of age having worked for at least 25 years, and women who have reached 55 years of age having worked for at least 20 years. The pensionable age and length of service are reduced for persons who have worked either underground or in especially harmful and difficult conditions, and for certain other categories, including women who have had five or more children and raised them up to the age of eight, the mothers of children disabled since infancy, and persons with a first-degree visual disability. 155. The pension amounts to 55 per cent of salary, plus one per cent of salary for each full year worked in excess of the normal requirement for a pension. Pensions calculated by this method may not exceed 75 per cent of salary. 156. The average monthly salary for pension purposes is calculated on the basis of the 24 months worked prior to the application for a pension, or any 60 months worked consecutively during the entire working period leading up to the application. 157. The minimum amount of pension due in respect of a length of service which meets the minimum requirements for a full pension shall not be less than the amount fixed by federal law. 158. The amount of pension due in respect of incomplete length of service (not less than five years) is calculated proportionately in accordance with the amount of full pension set for men's 25-year length of service and women's 20-year length of service. 159. Supplements to the pension are payable in respect of non able-bodied dependants (two thirds of the minimum pension per elderly dependant), and the care of a pensioner who has first-category disablement or who is at least 80 years old (amount equal to the old-age pension). 160. At the end of 1999, according to statistics supplied by the Russian Ministry of Employment, there were 38 million pensioners living in the Russian Federation. 161. In order to strengthen the relationship between employment pensions and length of service, and taking into account the national increase in wages, Federal Act No. 113 of 21 July 1997, "Procedures for assessing and supplementing State pensions" was adopted. Under this law, the amount of an employment pension is calculated in accordance with an individual pension coefficient (IPC). Pensions calculated on the basis of the IPC are reviewed on a quarterly basis following submission by the Russian State Committee for Statistics (Goskomstat) of information concerning fluctuations in the average national monthly salary. Increases to pensions not calculated in accordance with the IPC are effected not less than four times per year by means of index-linking to the increase in the average national monthly salary. 162. The existing pension legislation provides for the granting of two pensions in the cases specified in article 5 of Federal Act No. 340-1 of 20 November 1990, "State Pensions in the Russian Federation" (as revised by Federal Acts Nos. 72 of 7 May 1995, 110 of 1 June 1991, 163 of 14 July 1999 and the Act of 29 December 2000). The categories concerned are war invalids, Second World War combatants, persons disabled by non-specific disease, severe industrial injury and other causes, widows whose new husbands died in the war with Finland, the Second World War or the war with Japan, and the parents of combatants who were called up to serve. 163. Federal Act No. 27 of 1 April 1996, "Individual (personalized) accounting in the state pension insurance scheme" sets forth the legal basis and organizational principles of individual (personalized) accounting of data for the citizens covered by the Russian Federation legislation on state pension provision. 164. Federal Act No. 75 of 7 May 1998, "Non-state pension funds in the Russian Federation" is intended to improve pension provision for the population by regulating the legal, economic and social relations involved in the creation, operation and winding-up of non-state pension funds, and by establishing the guiding principles for state monitoring of their activities. 165. A non-state pension fund is a special kind of legally constituted and non-commercial social organization whose activities are confined to providing non-governmental pensions for its members on the basis of agreements. 166. The activities of such a fund are to accumulate pension contributions, allocate fund reserves and keep records of the fund's obligations, independently of the state pension system. 167. The Russian Government is examining the question of reforming the pension system. The Presidential Committee for Pension Reform, established by Presidential Decree No. 137 of 8 February 2001, has approved a programme of reform for the whole Federation. 168. In order to standardize payment patterns and the repayment of debts to the Pension Fund in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 1647 of 28 December 1998, "Supplementary measures on the normalization of accounts with the Russian Federation Pension Fund", and Federal Law No. 56 of 30 March 1999, "The budget of the Russian Federation Pension Fund for 1999", measures have been taken to restructure the debts of the organizations concerned with insurance premium payments. To increase the financial resources of the Pension Fund, the Government of the Russian Federation has adopted decisions authorizing it to borrow from the Savings Bank and issue its own securities (notes and bonds). 169. Thanks to the stabilization of its income during 1999, the Pension Fund had succeeded in fully meeting its obligations, in terms of the payment of outstanding pensions and the timely payment of current pensions, by 10 September of that year. During 1999 pensions were re-indexed twice (by a factor of 1.12 on 1 May and by a factor of 1.15 on 1 November), and two increases were made to the amount of the differentiated rebate received by the most disadvantaged categories of pensioner. All pensioners received a single rebate in April and October 1999. 170. Federal Law No. 81 of 19 May 1995, "State benefits for citizens with children", establishes the following five types of benefit in relation to motherhood, childbirth and child-rearing: maternity benefit; a one-time payment of benefit for women who have registered at a hospital in the early stages of pregnancy; a one-time payment of benefit on the birth of a child; monthly benefit during leave taken to care for a child, until the latter is eighteen months old; monthly child benefit. 171. The following are entitled to maternity benefit: women who belong to the state social insurance scheme, and women who have been dismissed owing to the liquidation of an enterprise, institution or organization during the twelve months preceding the day of their registration as officially unemployed; women studying at vocational training institutions on day-release from their normal employment (initial, intermediate, higher and postgraduate levels); women performing contractual military service, and those of all ranks serving in units of the Interior Ministry and the institutions and departments of the penal system; women attached as civilians to Russian military units situated on the territory of a foreign State in circumstances covered by the Russian Federation's international treaties; all the above-mentioned categories of women when adopting a child. 172. Since 1999 a special adoption benefit has been available. Workers who adopt a child may be granted leave from the day of adoption for up to 70 days from the adopted child's date of birth, and for up to 110 days from the date of the children's birth if two or more are adopted. 173. The following amounts have been set for pregnancy and family benefits: average wage (income) at place of work for women subject to the State social insurance scheme, and also women among the civilian contingent in Russian military units situated on the territory of a foreign State in circumstances covered by the Russian Federation's international treaties. The procedure for calculating the average wage (income) shall be determined by the Government of the Russian Federation; 100 roubles for women dismissed as a result of the liquidation of an enterprise, institution or organization during the twelve months preceding the day of their registration as officially unemployed; a grant for women studying on day-release from their normal employment at vocational training institutions at the initial, intermediate, higher and postgraduate levels; a monetary allowance for women performing contractual military service and those of all ranks serving in units of the Interior Ministry and in the institutions and departments of the penal system. 174. The right to a one-time payment over and above pregnancy and family benefit is granted to women who have registered at a hospital in the early stages of pregnancy (up to the twelfth week). The amount payable is 100 roubles. 175. The right to a one-time payment in respect of a child's birth (adoption up to the age of three months) is granted to one of the parents or to a substitute. 176. In the event of the birth (adoption) of two or more children the benefit is payable for each child. The amount of the one-time grant paid for a birth (adoption) is 1,500 roubles. 177. The following are entitled to benefit in respect of leave taken in order to care for a child until it reaches the age of eighteen months: the mother, father, other relative or guardian who is actually caring for the child and is subject to the State social insurance system; a mother who is studying on day-release from her normal employment at a vocational training institution (initial, intermediate, higher and postgraduate); a mother performing contractual military service or serving at any rank in an internal affairs unit or an institution or department of the penal system; a mother dismissed during her pregnancy, maternity leave, or leave taken to care for a child until it reaches the age of eighteen months, owing to the liquidation of an enterprise, institution or organization, including enterprises, institutions, organizations or military units located beyond the frontiers of the Russian Federation; a mother who is part of the civilian contingent of a Russian military unit situated on the territory of a foreign State circumstances covered by the Russian Federation's international agreements; a mother dismissed during her pregnancy, maternity leave, or leave taken to care for a child until it reaches the age of eighteen months, owing to the expiry of her employment contract at a military unit situated beyond the frontiers of the Russian Federation, or because of her husband's transfer from such a unit to the Russian Federation; 178. The amount of the monthly allowance payable during leave taken to care for a child aged up to eighteen months is 200 roubles, irrespective of the number of children being cared for. 179. Entitlement to child benefit is granted to one of the parents (adoptive parent, guardian) of each child born, adopted or taken into guardianship who lives with him or her, until the child's sixteenth birthday (the eighteenth birthday in the case of a child in non-specialized education), in families whose average income does not exceed the value of the subsistence level set in the relevant constituent territory of the Federation. 180. Monthly benefit in respect of a child aged up to sixteen (up to eighteen for a child attending an institute of non-specialized education), amounting to 70 roubles, is paid by the social security service at the family's town of residence. Monthly child benefit is increased by 100 per cent if the child is looked after by a single mother, by 50 per cent in cases where the child's parents avoid paying maintenance or, in other circumstances defined in the Russian Federation legislation, the recovery of maintenance is impossible, and also by 50 per cent in respect of the children of those called up for active military duties. 181. Families whose average monthly income exceeds the value of the subsistence level set in the relevant constituent territory are not entitled to receive monthly child benefit. 182. Benefit in respect of care for a sick child aged up to seven years is paid to one of the parents or to another member of the family (legal representative) for the whole period in which outpatient treatment is given or the carer has to remain in hospital with the child, and the same benefit in respect of a child older than seven is payable for a period of not more than 15 days, unless medical opinion deems that a longer period is necessary. 183. Benefit in respect of care for a sick child is payable for the first seven calendar days, and for the first ten calendar days to single mothers, widows (widowers), divorced women (men) and the wives of conscripted servicemen, the amount varying from 60 per cent to 100 per cent of salary depending on length of continuous service. From the eighth calendar day onwards - the eleventh in the case of single mothers, widows (widowers), divorced women (men) and the wives of conscripted servicemen - the same benefit is payable at the rate of 50 per cent of salary irrespective of continuity of service. 184. Benefits in respect of care for a sick child aged up to three years or a disabled child aged up to sixteen years whose mother is ill are paid in accordance with the standard rules. 185. Federal Act No. 122 of 7 August 2000, "Procedure for determining the amounts of grants and social payments in the Russian Federation" which sets fixed amounts for benefits in 2001 rather than percentages relating to a minimum wage, provides for the annual updating of benefit amounts. 186. The funding of state benefits for those with children is assured by the Russian Federation Social Insurance Fund, the federal budget, and the budgets of the constituent territories of the Russian Federation. 187. Alongside the social guarantees enjoyed by citizens in the form of the benefits paid at federal level, additional measures are taken in the constituent territories to support families with children, in the framework of the regional social support programmes. The amounts of benefit set by the legislation may be topped up by additional payments for the most needy families, such as those with many children or with a parent missing. 188. The rules guaranteeing material assistance in the event of temporary incapacity for work are underpinned by the Russian Federation Labour Code, whose article 240 states that the payment conditions and amounts pertaining to state social insurance benefits shall be stipulated by law. 189. In 1998 the law entitled "Compulsory social insurance against industrial accidents and industrial diseases" was adopted, which sets forth the legal, economic and organizational basis for compulsory social insurance against accidents and illnesses suffered in the workplace and establishes the procedure by which workers may seek compensation for injury to life and health suffered in the course of their contractual duties, and in other circumstances defined by law. 190. In order to implement Presidential Decree No. 729 of 26 June 1998, "Matters relating to the Federal Compulsory Social Insurance Fund", Governmental Decision No. 857 of 29 July 1998 approved the Fund's statute, which stipulates that the Fund shall give effect to governmental policy on compulsory public health insurance as a component part of the state social security system. 191. Workers who suffer incapacity while carrying out their normal working duties may be paid monetary compensation equivalent to their salary (or part thereof) in accordance with the degree of incapacity for work caused by the industrial accident or industrial disease, additional amounts in respect of disablement (treatment, prostheses, etc.), a one-time payment in prescribed cases, and compensation for moral injury. 192. Industrial injury benefit is payable at the rate of 100 per cent of salary pending certification of disablement. After certification, the amount paid corresponds to the proportion of the average monthly salary received during the previous twelve months, depending on the degree of incapacity for work suffered. The benefit is paid until the worker recovers or until he begins receiving disablement pension. 193. The pension for the first and second disablement categories is set at 75 per cent of salary, and that for the third category at 30 per cent. The disablement pension for members of the first and second categories with incomplete service records cannot be less than two thirds of the minimum old-age pension. 194. The social pensions of disabled persons in the first category, including those disabled from childhood in the first and second categories and disabled children aged eighteen, are equivalent to the minimum old-age pension. The social pensions of those in the third disablement category are equivalent to half the minimum old-age pension. 195. In the event of the death of a main provider, members of the family who are unable to work and who were dependent on him/her are assigned a pension set at 30 per cent of the main provider's salary for each incapacitated family member, and which may not be less than two thirds of the minimum old-age pension; a child who loses both parents receives one and a half times the amount of the minimum old-age pension. 196. In accordance with the Federal Act of 19 April 1991, "Employment in the Russian Federation" (as amended by Federal Acts Nos. 36 of 20 April 1996, 85 of 30 April 1999, 175 of 17 July 1999, 195 of 20 November 1999 and 122 of 7 August 2000), those acknowledged as officially unemployed must be citizens with no job or salary who have registered at a State employment office in search of suitable work, and who are actively looking for, and ready to start, employment. The procedure for registering citizens as unemployed is laid down by the Government of the Russian Federation. 197. Benefit for unemployed persons who have been dismissed for any reason is calculated as a percentage of the average salary received over the last three months at the previous place of work (60 per cent during the first three months of unemployment, 45 per cent thereafter) if, in the 12 months preceding the start of their unemployment they had paid work for not less than 26 calendar weeks but did not work a full day (week) or did not work a full day (week) which can be converted to 26 calendar weeks on a full-day (full-week) basis. 198. However, in all cases this benefit may not exceed, nor amount to less than 20 per cent of, the minimum subsistence level set officially in the relevant constituent territory of the Federation. Unemployment benefit may not be less than 100 roubles. 199. Benefit equivalent to 20 per cent of the official subsistence minimum for the relevant constituent territory (but not less than 100 roubles) is payable to persons officially registered as unemployed who are either seeking work for the first time having never worked, those attempting to resume working life after a break of longer than one year, or those who have been dismissed for any reason by an organization during the twelve months preceding the start of unemployment and who have not completed 26 calendar weeks of work in that period. 200. Persons who are entitled to an old-age pension under the regulations on the basis of their overall length of service, including pensions in reduced circumstances, but who have not reached pensionable age, may continue to receive unemployment benefit beyond the 12-month limit at the rate of two calendar weeks for each year worked in excess of the official length of service requirement. 201. Unemployment benefit may not be paid for longer than twelve months, except in the cases defined by existing law. The overall payment period may not exceed 24 calendar months calculated cumulatively within a period of 36 calendar months. 202. Persons on the official unemployment register who suffered irradiation as a result of the Chernobyl disaster or other radiation accidents may receive a further grant in addition to their unemployment benefit, in accordance with the Russian Federation Act "Social protection for citizens suffering from the effects of radiation as a result of the accident at Chernobyl nuclear power plant". 203. Additional payments are made in respect of persons being supported by someone on the unemployed register, the latter's benefit being increased by 10 per cent of the minimum subsistence rate set in the constituent territory concerned; such payments may not amount to less than 50 roubles per person. Such additional payments may not exceed 30 per cent of the minimum subsistence rate. 204. Expenditure on unemployment benefits after the abolition of the Russian Federation State Employment Fund on 1 January 2001 will be met from the federal budget. Protection of the family (article 10) 205. The Russian Federation is a party to ILO Convention No. 103 of 1952 concerning maternity protection, ILO Convention No. 138 of 1973 concerning the minimum age for beginning work, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Russian Government submitted reports to the ILO on its implementation of Conventions Nos. 103 and 138 in 1997 and 1996, respectively. Russia's second periodic report on implementation of the rights of the child was submitted to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 1997 and considered in September 1999. 206. There is no single term used to express the idea of family in Russian legislation. In regulatory and legal documents the concept is treated differently according to the particular field and objective. For example, Federal Act No. 134 of 24 October 1997, "The minimum subsistence level in the Russian Federation", states that, for the purposes of granting social assistance, the family comprises "persons bound by kinship and (or) related by marriage, who live together and maintain a shared household". 207. According to the Russian Federation Civil Code (article 22) people do not attain active civil status until they are eighteen years old. Minors (aged 14-18) have the right to conclude civil law transactions with the agreement of their parents, adoptive parents or guardians. A minor aged 16 may be declared as having full civil status if he is employed under an employment agreement or contract, or undertakes a business activity with the agreement of his parents, adoptive parents or guardians. Such a declaration is made by decision of a board of trustees with the agreement of both parents, the adoptive parents or the guardian, or, in the absence of such agreement, by a court. 208. The main body of legislation regulating marital and family relations is the Russian Federation Family Code, which came into force on 1 March 1996. 209. According to article 12 of the Family Code, matrimony requires the mutual and voluntary consent of the man and woman proposing to marry, both of whom must also be of marriageable age. Marriage between the following is not permitted: couples in which one member is already registered as married to another person; close relatives (relatives by direct line of ascent and descent - parents and children, grandfather, grandmother and grandchildren); full brothers and sisters and half brothers and sisters (having the same mother or father); adoptive parents and their adopted children; couples in which one member is recognized by a court as being not fully of age owing to a mental disturbance (article 14). 210. In the event of failure to comply with any of the above-mentioned conditions, the marriage is deemed null and void (article 27). A husband or wife whose rights have been violated by the contracting of the marriage is entitled to demand its annulment, and a procurator may do so if the marriage was contracted without the voluntary consent of one of the parties, as a result of constraint, deception or error, or because the condition of the party concerned at the time of the marriage was such that he or she was incapable of understanding or controlling his or her actions. 211. Efforts are currently being made to establish the "National plan of action to advance the situation of women and enhance their role in society, for the period 2001-05", and a women's and children's health service has been created to ensure that they have access to skilled medical care. 212. During the period 1995-2000, the basic concepts of a state social policy for improving the situation of children in the Russian Federation by 2000 were implemented (The National Plan of Action in the Interests of the Child). The draft of the corresponding plan for the period until 2010 has now been completed. Since 1993 there has been a Presidential programme called "Children of Russia", and 2001 saw the start of special two-year federal projects for improving children's situation in the Russian Federation, under which measures are being introduced to tackle the most acute problems affecting families with children. 213. The main aims of family policy are defined in Presidential Decree No. 712 of 14 May 1996. They comprise: guaranteeing the conditions needed to overcome negative tendencies and stabilize the situation of Russian families; ensuring that workers with children enjoy conditions enabling them to combine work with the fulfilment of their family responsibilities; fundamental improvement of the family health system; strengthening of the assistance provided to families for the upbringing of the children. 214. The Government's family policy is based on the notion of independence and family autonomy in decision-making concerning its own development. Accordingly, the Government assumes responsibility for protecting the family from poverty and neglect arising from enforced migration, natural or man-made disasters, wars and armed conflicts. 215. State measures to guarantee the rights of the child include: state benefits for families with children; income-tax concessions for citizens with children; introduction of social services departments for families with children, etc. 216. Several categories of family are entitled to additional concessions intended to eliminate the inequalities their children suffer for economic, geographical and other reasons. 218. As part of the effort to support families, greater emphasis is being placed on the provision of direct social assistance, especially concerning the payment of state benefits. 219. In the Russian Federation a number of legal, administrative and socio-economic measures are being taken to protect motherhood. 220. Women are entitled to 70 calendar days' maternity leave (84 for a multiple pregnancy) prior to partition and 70 calendar days thereafter (86 for a difficult birth and 110 for the birth of two or more children). Maternity leave is calculated cumulatively and is granted to women irrespective of the actual number of days used prior to the birth. 221. Women can receive necessary medical assistance, maternity benefits, a one-time payment for registering with a hospital in the early stages of pregnancy, a one-time payment on the birth of a child and monthly payments during leave taken to care for a child until it reaches the age of eighteen months. 222. According to Goskomstat, over 252,000 persons aged 15-17 were active in the economy in 2000 (over 214,000 in 1999). Twenty-four per cent of these adolescents were working in agriculture, 29 per cent in industry and 14 per cent in commerce and public catering facilities. 223. In the Russian Federation all categories of children are entitled to protection of their rights and to receive social assistance. 224. In recent years the growing trend in the number of orphaned children and children abandoned without parental care has been reversed. In 2000, the overall number of orphans was 662,500, of whom more than 72 per cent were being brought up by a family (329,000 were in the care of guardians or custodians, and 153,500 in adoptive families). In accordance with the Russian Federation Family Code, local autonomous agencies for custody and guardianship monitor the upbringing of the above-mentioned children and ensure their rights and legal interests are protected. Regular monitoring of the living conditions and upbringing of the children in substitute families virtually excludes the possibility of their being exploited. Should a child's health suffer through exposure to work, the custody and guardianship agencies can remove the child from his family and decide on his future. 225. In the national and local institutions for orphans and abandoned children, a social programme of "work therapy" is organized for children, which takes into account their development and state of health. 226. The work undertaken by children with physical or mental incapacity takes account of their abilities and the advice of a physician or the decision of a board convened to assess his fitness for work. 227. Under the Federal Act entitled "Amendments and additions to the Russian Federation Education Act", it is forbidden to recruit the students and pupils of public educational establishments for work not included in their programme of study, without their and their parents' (legal representatives') agreement. 228. With a view to improving the situation of orphans and abandoned children and protecting their rights, a special federal programme called "Orphaned children" was started in 1993; it is now included with the special federal programmes for improving children's situation in the Russian Federation for 200102. In 1996 the Federal Act "Additional guarantees of social protection for orphans and abandoned children" was adopted. This law provides additional guarantees in respect of labour, education, medical care and housing. In particular, it entitles such children to receive free vocational education, larger student grants, free medical treatment and free visits to sanatoria and rehabiliation camps and health spas. A quota system helps them in finding employment. 229. Following a decision by the Federal Government, an interdepartmental programme of measures to prevent orphanhood and improve the situation of orphans and abandoned children has been drawn up and approved for the period 2001-02. The Russian Government has adopted Decision No. 374 of 14 May 2001 entitled "Immediate measures for improving the situation of orphans and abandoned children". 230. The above-mentioned instruments provide for a range of measures designed to reform custody and guardianship agencies and the educational establishments for orphans and abandoned children, develop the types of family structure available to orphans, support the families who raise and educate such children, and improve the regulatory and legal framework protecting the rights of children left without parental care. 231. As of 1 January 2001, the Russian Federation's social protection agencies were providing a social pension to over 675,000 people aged under eighteen with a physical or mental disability. The significant increase in the number of disabled children by comparison with 1999 (592, 200 children) is due to the re-definition in that year of disabled children as being under eighteen, in accordance with international standards. 232. On the whole, such children are brought up in families (some are taught in correctional schools), with a mere 4.3 per cent living in boarding establishments for children with a physical disability. 233. The Russian Federal Government's policy on the disabled is to ensure that they have the same possibilities as other Russian citizens of realizing their civil, economic, political and other rights and freedoms as enshrined in the Russian Constitution, in accordance with the universally recognized principles and rules of international law and Russia's international treaties. 234. In 2000 the Russian Government adopted the following decisions: "Ratification of the regulations governing the hand-over of children for adoption and the monitoring of their upbringing and education in their adoptive families in the Russian Federation, and of the regulations governing the placement of children into the care of the Russian Federation's consular authorities, be they citizens or persons without citizenship"; "The activities of foreign agencies and organizations with regard to the adoption of children on the territory of the Russian Federation"; and "The interdepartmental committee on matters concerning the adoption by foreign citizens of children who are citizens of the Russian Federation". 235. In accordance with the Russian Federation Family Code, the Government has adopted a decision entitled "Ratification of the procedure for establishing a central register of abandoned children". 236. In October 2001, Federal Act No. 44 of 16 April 2001 entitled "National databank concerning abandoned children" came into force, which lays down the procedure for setting up and using the databank in question. 237. With regard to international collaboration on this matter, both the UNICEF programme of joint action and the Russian Government's programme cover the following main concerns: the protection of health and development in early childhood; young people: health and development (preventing the spread of drug-use and Aids); children in need of basic protection (development of boarding establishments, rehabilitation of disabled children, preventing neglect, etc.); society and the protection of children's rights (introduction of authorized regional children's rights institutes, development of the juvenile justice system, dissemination of knowledge about the Convention on the Rights of the Child, etc.). The right to an adequate standard of living (article 11) 238. Current living standards in the Russian Federation are characterised by the rapidly spreading horizontal and vertical differentiation of society and the formation of several powerful social groupings with very different living standards and lifestyles. Across the country, a number of models are emerging which offer social and economic possibilities for developing human potential on the basis of different income levels, regional characteristics and type of habitation. 239. The different social layers and groupings have been able to adapt in their different ways to the current economic circumstances and use them to further their own interests. The prolonged national crisis, which came to a head in 1998, brought with it a substantial reduction in the material and financial resources available to the Government and spiralling national debt - external in particular; these, together with the social gulf created by the Government's efforts to restructure the economy, exacerbated the situation, providing the conditions for the further growth of social and material inequality and the erosion of the social economy. 240. After years of market reforms, the actual cash income of the population fell by a factor of 2.1 compared with 1991 (48.3 per cent), real wages by a factor of 2.3 (43 per cent) and actual pensions by a factor of 2.4 (41 per cent). 241. The population's cash income in 2000 exceeded 3,700 billion roubles. The proportion represented by remuneration, including hidden earnings, was almost 65.6 per cent, the income from entrepreneurial activity 12.6 per cent, and that from social transfers 13.4 per cent. In 2000, hired labour (including hidden labour) accounted for almost 40 per cent of GDP. The average monthly wage in 2000 was 2,223 roubles, the average pension 694.3 roubles, and the average monthly minimum subsistence level per capita was 1,210 roubles. 242. The average cash income levels of the richest ten per cent of the population outstripped those of the poorest ten per cent (assets ratio) by a factor of 14.0 in 1999, and by 13.7 in 2000. The level of the average monthly wage was equivalent to 79 US dollars in the first half of 2000, the decimal coefficient for salaries being 34. 243. The average individual cash income in May 2000 stood at 2,548.3 roubles - an increase of 27.5 per cent over the same period a year before. 244. At the same time, the regional differences in cash income levels remained substantial. 245. Those constituent territories of the Federation with the highest cash incomes, exceeding the All-Russian monthly average by a factor of two or more, are: in the Central federal region - Moscow (9,504.2 roubles), in the Urals federal region - the Yamal-Nenets autonomous area (11,598.5 roubles), the Khanty-Mansi autonomous area (8,645.9 roubles) and the Tyumen region (6,783.4 roubles). 246. In only 19 regions out of 88 (not including the Chechen Republic) does individual cash income exceed the Russian average. 247. The lowest average incomes are found in the republics of the south federal region and individual territories of the Privolga, Siberian and Central federal regions. In 13 constituent territories of the Federation, the average monthly income in May 2001 was less than half the Russian average. 248. In May 2001 the lowest coefficient of average monthly income in relation to the national average (38.2) was that of the Ingush Republic (south federal region). In the Ust-Ordynsky Buryat and Aginsky-Buryat autonomous areas (Siberian federal region) these levels were 26.4 per cent and 40.9 per cent, in the Republic of Mari El (Privolga federal region) 36.7 per cent, in the Ivanono region 35.6 per cent, and in the Komi-Permyak autonomous area 35.7 per cent. 249. The highest minimum subsistence levels in 1999 were those set by the Far-Eastern, Northern and Central federal regions. The prices for basic goods and services in Moscow far exceeded those in some other cities. The monthly minimum subsistence level set in Moscow by agreement of its tripartite committee (the local council, trade union federation and workers' federation) in 1999 amounted to 2,830 roubles for women and 2,810 roubles for men. 250. In the Russian Federation the official indicators of poverty used are the number and proportion of a population whose cash income falls below the minimum subsistence level. 251. Federal Act No. 134 of 24 October 1997 (as amended on 27 May 2000), "The minimum subsistence level in the Russian Federation", lays down the legal basis for setting and calculating a subsistence minimum, for the purposes of providing the Russian people with state guarantees of a minimum cash income and carrying out other social protection measures on their behalf. 252. In 2000 the proportion of the population whose cash income fell below the value of the subsistence minimum was 30.2 per cent, and in 1999, 28.7 per cent. Apart from the groups normally in need of social protection (pensioners, families with many dependants, the unemployed, the disabled, etc.), this cohort includes a significant number of public-sector workers. Among other measures it has taken to alleviate this problem, the Government has raised the salary of certain groups of public-sector workers by 150 per cent. 253. The following instruments have been adopted in order to give effect to the law concerning the minimum subsistence level: Federal Act No. 201 of 20 November 1999 (as extended by Federal Act No. 97 of 13 July 2001) entitled "The consumer basket for the whole Russian Federation"; Governmental Decision No. 192 of 17 February 1999 entitled "Methodological guidelines on determining the consumer basket for the main socio-demographic groups in Russia and in the constituent territories of the Russian Federation"; and Governmental Decision No. 494 of 5 July 2000 entitled "Assessment of consumer baskets in constituent territories of the Russian Federation". 254. The Government of the Russian Federation has also adopted Decision No. 152 of 22 February 2000 entitled "Procedure for estimating the earnings and calculating the income per capita of needy families and individuals for the purpose of granting state social assistance" and Decision No. 1096 of 29 September 1999 entitled "Determining a procedure for calculating and estimating the value of per capita income, for the purpose of establishing entitlement to receive child benefits". 255. The adoption of a complete regulatory and legal framework for implementing the Federal Act "The minimum subsistence level in the Russian Federation" established the basis for determining the minimum subsistence level to be taken into account in providing state social guarantees for needy citizens - the minimum wage and old-age pension, grants, benefits and other social protection measures. 256. In addition, the change to a new method of calculating the consumer basket has led to an increase in the value of the subsistence minimum, which in turn has meant that more people now have a cash income below the minimum subsistence level. As a result of the change to a new method of determining the subsistence minimum, which triggered greater volumes of the low-level expenditures needed to sustain human health and lives, the value of the subsistence minimum rose to a level 15 per cent higher than it had been when calculated by the earlier method. For pensioners, it even rose by 25 per cent, for children by 20 per cent, and for the active working population by 12 per cent. 257. The problems of the poor have been made worse by widespread non-payment of salaries, resulting in arrears of 77 billion roubles at the end of 1998. Steps taken by the Government reduced this to 56 billion roubles by 1 September 1999. In addition, a wide-ranging campaign was launched to recover unpaid salaries through the courts. In 1998, 33 billion roubles were recovered in this way, and by 31 December 2000, the total of unpaid salaries stood at 31.7 billion roubles. 258. The minimum subsistence level per capita for the fourth quarter of 2000 was 1,285 roubles, which increased by a factor of 1.2 by the corresponding quarter of 2001 using a comparable method of calculation. The value of the subsistence minimum for the active working population was 1,406 roubles, that for pensioners 926 roubles and that for children 1,272 roubles. The cost of the minimum selection of food products included in the subsistence minimum for the fourth quarter of 2000 was 644 roubles, or 102.1 per cent of the corresponding selection in the third quarter. 259. Across Russia's regions, the value of the subsistence minimum fluctuates from 65 per cent to 36.7 per cent in relation to the national average. In 1999 the highest value for the minimum subsistence level (in the Koryak autonomous area) was 4.9 times the lowest value (in Ulyanovsk region); in 1998 the corresponding factor was 5.4. 260. Calculation of the minimum amounts of subsistence for the constituent territories of the Federation in accordance with the Federal Act "The subsistence minimum in the Russian Federation" will take place in 2001, once the Ministry of Labour has evaluated the proposed consumer baskets for the main socio-demographic groups in the constituent territories and their introduction by the legislative authorities of the territories. 261. In order to give effect to the right to adequate nutrition, the Government is taking measures to regulate the manufacture and sale of food products. Particular emphasis has been placed on standardization, in order to ensure the quality and safety of the food products on sale. 262. A Federal Act entitled "State regulation of agro-industrial products" has been passed, which establishes the legal framework for economic actions taken by the state in the agro-industrial sector. 263. Steps are being taken to strengthen state regulation of the production and sale of ethyl alcohol and alcoholic goods. In this context, amendments and additions have been made to Federal Act No. 18 of 7 January 1999, "State regulation of the production and sale of ethyl alcohol and goods containing alcohol and spirits", in order to tackle illegal alcohol production, protect the market from the incursion of low-quality goods and increase the available quantity of legally produced products of proven quality. 264. The domestic food industry can meet approximately three quarters of the population's nutritional needs. In 2000 (according to provisional data) the levels of demand met were: 70 per cent for meat products, 87 per cent for dairy products and 67 per cent for vegetable fats. From January to May 2001 Russia imported more than 904, 000 tonnes of cereals at a cost of 113.1 million US dollars (36.4 per cent of the total compared with 40.6 per cent in the corresponding period last year), of which 149,900 tonnes came from the USA and the European Union at a cost of 25.1 million US dollars. 265. The food supply system has deteriorated during the years of reform. Consumption of meat, dairy products, vegetables and gourds, and fruit has gone down. In 2000 (preliminary figures) individual consumption of meat and meat products fell from 75 kg to 43 kg. In 1990 consumption of milk and milk products fell from 386kg to 215kg, and of vegetables and gourds from 89kg to 84kg. By contrast, consumption of potatoes increased in 1990 from 17 kg to 123kg. 266. All this points to the need for urgent measures designed to strengthen the state's role in the expansion of agricultural productivity and in protecting and regulating the market for foodstuffs. To this end, the Government is introducing special laws, decrees and programmes, and is developing new approaches to agricultural production which reflect its status as a sector of vital strategic importance. 267. The Government has adopted a decision concerning the introduction and further development of wholesale foodstuff markets, of which thirty currently exist. Specialists are being trained to work in wholesale food markets, whose distribution mechanisms determine the balance of supply and demand. 268. The Government has also adopted Decision No. 940 of 12 December 2000 entitled "Russian Federation Governmental Committee for matters concerning the agro-industrial sector". Similar committees have been set up in the constituent territories. 269. One of the major tasks of the above-mentioned Committee is to supervise implementation of the major components of the Government's agro-industrial policy for the period 2001-10. 270. In accordance with article 40, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Russian Constitution, "Everyone shall have the right to a home. No one may be arbitrarily deprived of a home. State bodies and organs of local government shall encourage home construction and create conditions for the realization of the right to a home." 271. On 30 March 2000 the Government approved the basic framework of a long-term state housing policy designed to create the conditions for allowing citizens to realize their constitutional right to a home. 272. The main function of state housing policy is to provide the conditions for a lasting and effective turnover of reasonably priced dwellings which meet the public's demand for accommodation. Measures will be taken to provide social protection during the transition to a market-based system of financing public housing. 273. In the process of introducing its housing reforms, the Government has established a legal framework for developing the housing sector. Since the very start of the process in 1992, over 200 legislative and other regulatory instruments have been approved in respect of house construction, the public housing network and housing transactions. 274. The Russian Federation State Committee for Housebuilding and the Public Housing Network is supervising the drafting of a Russian Federation Housing Code, whose adoption will pave the way for completion of a legal framework that will regulate housing matters on a wholly new footing and renew and transform the main institutions concerned with housing legislation in accordance with the Constitution. 275. In accordance with article 40, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, " Low-income citizens and other citizens defined by law who are in need of housing shall be housed free of charge or for affordable payment from governmental, municipal and other housing funds in conformity with the norms stipulated by the law." 276. At present several legislative and other instruments ensure that the categories of the population concerned receive social assistance. They include Presidential Decree No. 1815 of 2 October 1993 entitled "Measures to prevent vagrancy and begging", Federal Act No. 122 of 2 August 1995 entitled "Social services for the elderly and the disabled", Federal Act No. 181 of 24 November 1995 entitled "Social protection for the disabled in the Russian Federation", Federal Act No. 195 of 10 December 1995 entitled "Fundamentals of social services for the population of the Russian Federation" and Federal Act No. 178 of 17 July 1999 entitled "State social assistance". In addition, in accordance with sections 1, 4, 7 and 8 of the special federal programme to strengthen measures against crime for the period 1999-2000, a draft federal law has been drawn up entitled "Social assistance for persons who have served a criminal sentence in the form of deprivation of freedom". Russia's housing stock comprises 2,779 million square metres. 277. Over 73 per cent of the available housing stock has running water, 69 per cent waste-water disposal facilities, 73.3 per cent central heating, 63.8 per cent bathrooms, 59.4 per cent hot water, 70.1 per cent gas and 16.1 per cent electrical hotplates. 278. Dilapidated and dangerous housing accounts for 65.4 million square metres, or 2.4 per cent, of the available stock. 279. Out of the 54,892,000 apartments in the whole of Russia, over 745,000 (1.4%) are communal [kitchen and toilet facilities shared by a number of people]; these are inhabited by over 3 million people, or 2 per cent of the population. 280. There are over 5.36 million families on the waiting list for better housing, of whom 777,000 live in communal apartments and over 640,000 in boarding houses. Over 1.79 million families (33.4 per cent) have been on the waiting list longer than ten years. Last year 248,600 families (2%) were taken off the waiting list and moved into better accommodation. 281. The largest groups among those waiting are found in St. Petersburg (25%), Lipetsk region (18%), Tyumen region (17%), the Republic of Bashkortostan and Olyanovsk region (each 16%), and the Republic of Tatarstan, Voronezh, Vologda and the Khabarovsk territory (each 15%). 282. At the beginning of 2001 the rural housing stock amounted to 766.2 million square metres, of which 86% was privately owned. The total area of such housing accounted for by privatization and private house building increased by half as much again during the period 1991-99. In the same period, the municipal housing stock almost fourfold, and the volume of housing owned by central governmental shrank by a factor of seven. 283. During the period 1991-2000 the rural housing stock grew by 66 million square metres; although new construction in this period reached 90.1 million square metres, one third of it replaced dilapidated, dangerous and other dwellings. 284. The greater part of the rural housing stock has no basic public utilities. Compared with urban housing, it has half as much provision of running water, waste-water disposal and central heating, and four times less hot water provision. Seventy two per cent of rural settlements have no central water supply, and 96 per cent no sewage system. 285. With regard to the availability of engineering services the situation of rural households is as follows: running water 39.4 per cent; central heating 29.5 per cent; bathrooms 23.5 per cent; gas 73.9 per cent; hot water supply 17.2 per cent; and electrical hotplates 2.6 per cent. 286. Owing to the shortage of good-quality drinking water, the majority of rural areas are at risk of an epidemic. Many rural inhabitants use water from wells, rivers and natural reservoirs for cooking and other domestic purposes. Only 28 per cent of rural settlements have running water. 287. People in rural localities enjoy on average 19.8 square metres of living space per person, compared with 19.1 square metres in towns. In three constituent territories of the Federation (Tver, Pskov and Novgorod regions) the amount is 27 square metres per person, and in eight territories it is less than 15. 288. Professionals (doctors, teachers, and certain others) working in rural localities are entitled to free apartments with heating and lighting. They retain this right when it comes to claiming their pension, provided they have worked for at least ten years in rural areas. 289. Housing provision for those working in agriculture varies markedly according to age and level of seniority. Managers and senior professionals enjoy 30 per cent more living space for each family member than unskilled workers, and farmers half as much again as the average farm worker. 290. Young people who have not managed to acquire a house or apartment by the age of 30 now face far worse housing problems than did previous generations. 291. Housing for agricultural workers with large families (six or more people) is far more scarce than for smaller families or single people. Large families have on average 9.9 square metres of living space per person, with 29 per cent of them having only 7 square metres per person. For single people, the corresponding figures are 21 square metres and 19 per cent. 292. The majority of rural inhabitants would prefer to solve their housing problems by building their own dwelling in the country, but many cannot because of insufficient income. 293. In order to tackle the rural housing problem, a special federal programme entitled "Your own home" was launched in 1996, a substantial part of which comprises a sub-programme called "A home for country people". In constituent territories of the Federation, regional house-building programmes have been started which allow individuals to borrow money from support funds in order to build a house in their rural area. The funds bring together all the fiscal and non-fiscal sources available for building individual dwellings and ensure that the services needed to complete the construction projects are provided. 294. These measures have tripled the volume of private housing construction in rural areas since 1991. 295. By 1999 the ongoing land reform in Russia had produced changes in the pattern of land ownership. Alongside the governmental and municipal sectors, a new class of owners had emerged - citizens and corporate entities. 296. The reorganization of 23, 500 state collective farms has brought into existence over 44,000 new agricultural enterprises under various types of ownership, and 116.2 million hectares of agricultural land has been privatized. In the process, 11.8 million rural inhabitants have become owners of a plot of land. 297. As part of the reorganization of farming, many land users were offered the opportunity to quit collective farming and start their own enterprises on either of the following two legal bases: peasant farmers (farmers); 261,700 (a total of 15.3 hectares of land placed at their disposal); agricultural associations and societies, commercial co-operatives and non-commercial organizations (these now hold 141.3 million hectares of agricultural lands). 298. The amount of land now in private use is 13.2 million hectares, including 6.2 million hectares for cultivation (15.5 million families), 1.3 million hectares for collective and individual garden plots (14.1 million families), 0.4 million hectares for collective and individual horticultural plots (5.1 million families), 0.5 million hectares for the construction of individual dwellings (5 million families), and 4.8 million hectares for collective and individual livestock breeding concerns (1.8 million families). 299. Out of the 10.9 million landowners who received the relevant documentation, two thirds exercised their right to change the use to which their land is put; 75 per cent of that group (5.4 million) now lease their land. In 13 constituent territories of the Federation, all those granted title to a plot exercised their right, while in a further five territories 95 per cent did so, in six more 80 per cent did so, and in nine more 70 per cent did so. At the same time, in the Sakhalin region the level was only 0.7 per cent, and in the Smolensk region 4.4 per cent. Less than 20 per cent of owners exercised their right in five territories, and in 13 territories the take-up varied from 20 to 40 per cent. 300. The basis for the reform of land is the federal legislation. At the same time, for the lack of a new Land Code, many issues are resolved on the basis of laws enacted by self-governing local authorities in the constituent territories. The adoption of a Land Code will make it possible to: limit the scope of local authority regulation of land issues in the constituent territories of the Federation; establish mechanisms for regulating the purchase, sale and rental of land and settling mortgage transactions relating to agricultural lands, and for transferring land to competent managing organizations; regulate the problems relating to land registration in agriculture; establish criteria enabling the quality and economic value of agricultural land to be reflected accurately in its price. 301. In 1999 the transformations in the agro-industrial sector continued, with the aim of building a mixed economy, creating a large agricultural production sector based on semi-commercial types of management, and developing agro-industrial integration in various forms. 302. The majority of agricultural organizations have been reorganized and re-registered in accordance with the legislation in force. The proportion of agricultural enterprises in the state sector of the agrarian economy is 9 per cent, with the remainder accounted for by enterprises rooted in private ownership of land and property. 303. The agrarian sector now contains enterprises under several different forms of ownership and management. By the end of 2000 there were 27,600 large and medium enterprises in agriculture, of which 18,500 (67%) were associations of all kinds, mixed-stock companies and producer co-operatives. 304. In the regions, work continues on the task of bringing the constitutive documents of agricultural enterprises into line with the provisions of the Russian Federation Civil Code and the Federal Acts on "Co-operation in agriculture", "Joint-stock companies" and "Limited-liability companies". 305. As part of the process of adapting agricultural manufacturing to market economic conditions, various types of integrated systems are being formed in the agro-industrial sector: joint-stock companies, co-operatives, unions, associations, financial industrial groups, and also holding companies, including businesses concerned with agricultural production, processing, services, trading and banking. The integrated systems will bring together the production, processing, services and sales aspects in a way that facilitates policy agreement, develops productive capacity and ensures improved control of investment. 306. The task of strengthening the legislative basis for the various types of organization continues. Bills currently awaiting approval are "Special developmental characteristics and legal standing of joint-stock companies in agriculture", and "Companies with limited liability in the sphere of agricultural production"; a bill is being drawn up concerning "Sector-specific manufacturers' associations (unions) in agro-industry". 307. The work of establishing a mixed agrarian economy will continue in the medium term. The main areas of activity will be: refining the legislative structure to reflect the different types of organization; bringing the constitutive documents of all types of enterprise into line with the current legislation; developing and introducing sound mechanisms for the establishment of large-volume agricultural production based on small enterprises; ensuring that land and capital is concentrated under effective ownership: leasing and distribution of plots, granting of entitlement to use plots and to purchase plots and shares in property, lifetime rental and lifetime tenure; amalgamation of ailing enterprises into more effective units; strengthening the internal structures of enterprises through more thorough accounting, greater autonomy for individual departments, and improved training and selection of senior staff; further improving agricultural co-operation and agro-industrial integration across the board. 308. The continuous downward trend in industrial productivity in recent years has been accompanied by a certain reduction in the man-made burden sustained by the environment. At the same time, there are still urgent problems relating to the contamination of agricultural land and water bodies by heavy metals, fluorine and other dangerous toxins emitted by industrial concerns. Livestock breeding also poses a serious threat to the environment and human health, especially pig farming and poultry plants. Despite the fact that the numbers of livestock and poultry have decreased in virtually all the constituent territories of the Federation as a consequence of outdated methods, obsolete equipment and poor land-use, the large stockbreeding concerns continue to operate in environmentally hazardous conditions. 309. Current Russian legislation seeks to protect the environment and assist sustainable development. 310. Presidential Decree No. 440 of 1 April 1996, which proclaims the principle of Russia's transition to sustainable development, calls for agricultural development based on environmentally progressive farming methods adapted to local conditions, measures designed to enhance soil fertility and protect it from erosion and contamination, and a system of social protection for the rural population. 311. The "National plan of action to protect the natural environment in the Russian Federation for the period 1999-2001" specifies the environmental problems which must be resolved as a priority, provides guidance on achieving this in the next few years, and sets out urgent measures for upgrading the existing environmental protection network, including measures designed to reduce the strain on the environment generated by Russia's agro-industrial sector. 312. The Russian Government has adopted a series of programmes intended to stabilize and reform the agro-industrial sector, and also special programmes for stabilizing and improving the environmental situation throughout the Russian Federation, with particular emphasis on making the agro-industrial sector more responsible. Examples of the main initiatives are: "Integrated state programme to improve soil quality in Russia", "Special federal programme to stabilize and improve agro-industrial production in the Russian Federation for the period 1996-2000", the special federal programmes on "Furtherance of land reform in the Russian Federation for 1999-2002", "Improving the ecological condition of the River Volga and its tributaries, and rehabilitating and preventing the further decline of the Volga basin system for the period until 2010", and "Waste". There are also special programmes concerned with improving the natural environment and human health in specific areas where the natural environment is in a particularly poor state: examples are Orenburg, Tula and Sverdlovsk. 313. The above-mentioned measures, once put into effect, will not only prevent agro-industrial concerns from causing further environmental damage and reduce the man-made burden inflicted on farming by the large-scale industry, but will also pave the way for a changeover to less environmentally harmful methods which will ultimately produce better food for the population. Health protection (article 12) 314. Since 1993 the main focus of the legislative activities being carried out by all the branches of state power has come to be the drafting of basic federal laws defining the principles that underpin the work of Russia's national health service. It is these principles which have shaped the Russian Federation's system of medical law. 315. The most important and revolutionary legal instrument in this regard is "Fundamentals of the legislation on public health protection, 1993", which is the first legislative document to examine public health protection from a nation-wide prospective. Its provisions touch upon a wide range of public issues, and not simply the health system. 316. In addition to basic laws, the past decade has seen the adoption of legislative documents to regulate specific aspects of the health service. Examples are the laws on "Psychiatric assistance and guarantees concerning its availability to the public", "Donation of blood and its components", " Transplants of human organs and (or) tissues", and the governmental decisions entitled "Special federal programme on the development of the medical products industry for the period 1998-2000 and thereafter until 2005" (1998), "The licensing of pharmaceutical businesses and of wholesale trading in drugs and medical products" (1999), "State monitoring of drug prices" (1999), and "Procedure for the supply of information on activities relating to the sale of narcotics and psychotropic substances, and the recording of operations involving such activities" (2000). 317. The same period has also brought the adoption of statutory instruments regulating legal relations in matters with an influential bearing on public health, such as "Protecting the public against epidemics" (1999 - second amendment), "Quality and safety in food products" (2000), "The air in the atmosphere", "Natural healing resources, healing locations and health resorts" and "Radiation protection for the public". 318. The adoption of the law on "Immunoprophylaxis of infectious diseases" provided the legal basis for reducing the number of infectious diseases (controllable infections) which currently pose a serious threat to the nation's health. 319. The Federal Act "Narcotics and psychotropic substances" provided backing to the Government's commitment to comply with the international laws and agreements on narcotics and created the conditions for effective international collaboration to tackle the illegal trafficking of narcotics. 320. Over the past decade, more than thirty laws have been adopted dealing with health care and public health protection. 321. The following 21 bills (draft federal acts) are currently undergoing parliamentary scrutiny: "Traditional and folk medicine (homeopathy)"; "Medical products"; "Amendments and additions to the Federal Drugs Act" (with particular emphasis on control of the importation of drugs into the Russian Federation); "Health care in the Russian Federation" (adopted at first reading on 27 January 1998; second reading scheduled for 2001); "Amendments and additions to the Federal Act "Narcotics and psychotropic substances" (concerning the strengthening of state controls over the trafficking of narcotics, psychotropic substances and their precursors, and also the revision of the laws relating to the medical examination of persons with drug addiction and their treatment with drugs); first reading scheduled for 2001; "Amendments and additions to RSFSR Act "Medical insurance for citizens of the Russian Federation" (concerning the curtailment of the insurance infrastructure in the system of compulsory medical insurance, state regulation of the latter, and state monitoring of the targeted use of its resources); adopted at first reading on 11 June 1998, second reading scheduled for 2001; "Amendments and additions to the Federal Drugs Act " (concerning support for the national producer); examination scheduled for 2001; "Amendments and additions to article 11 of the Russian Federation Act "Donation of blood and its components" (concerning the revision of the term "public transportation"); adopted at first reading on 19 April 200, second reading scheduled for 2001; "Amendments and additions to the Federal Act "Monitoring the treatment in the Russian Federation of diseases caused by HIV infection"; due for consideration in 2001; "Sport for children and young people in the Russian Federation"; not yet considered - first reading scheduled for 2001; "Pathological-anatomical examination"; first reading scheduled for 2001; "Forensic medical examination"; first reading scheduled for2001; "Legal basis of bio-ethics and guarantees regarding its control"; first reading scheduled for 2001; "Advertising of medical services, medical products and drugs"; due for consideration in 2001; "Regulation of the private medical sector"; first reading scheduled for 2001; "Basic matters concerning health resorts in the Russian Federation"; first reading scheduled for 2001; "Restricting the smoking of tobacco"; adopted at second reading in June 2001; "State support for the health-spa city of Sochi, for the period until 2003"; scheduled for consideration in 2001; "The health-spa region of federal significance "Caucasian Mineral Springs"; scheduled for consideration in 2001; "The Russian Red Cross society, and the use of the Red Cross symbol and the term "Red Cross" in the Russian Federation"; scheduled for examination in 2001; "Preventing the spread of tuberculosis in the Russian Federation", taken up by the State Duma and the Council of the Federation for three readings, rejected with a number of observations. The drafters and the federal executive bodies concerned are working urgently to amend this bill in accordance with the observations of the President of the Russian Federation. 322. In accordance with the "Blueprint for the development of health care and medical science in the Russian Federation", approved by Governmental Decision No. 1387 of 5 November 1997, and the "Blueprint for public health care in the Russian Federation for the period until 2005", approved by Governmental Order No. 1202-r of 31 August 2000, the structural changes to the health care system continue. These blueprints embody the main aspects of the reforms being carried out in respect of the control systems, funding and sectoral operations. Their objective is to create a more efficient type of health service that uses less expensive medical technology, without reducing the volume of treatment or lowering quality. 323. This process has been complicated greatly by the socio-economic and political factors which have emerged. It has become necessary to adopt a series of instruments providing assurance of people's rights to health care and free medical assistance, as guaranteed by article 41 of the Constitution. In particular, in 1998 the "Programme of state guarantees concerning the provision of free medical assistance to the population of the Russian Federation" was adopted (Governmental Decision No. 1096 of 11 September 1998); amendments and additions were later introduced by means of Governmental Decisions Nos. 1194 of 26 October 1999 and 907 of 29 November 2000, with the aim of refining the system. 324. Article 41 of the Constitution stipulates that the state must fund and carry out federal programmes to protect and improve public health. Thus, since 1993 a presidential programme called "Children of Russia" has been in operation which includes the special federal programmes "Safe motherhood", "Disabled children", "Children of Chernobyl", and the programmes "Diabetes", "Urgent measures to tackle tuberculosis in Russia for the period 1998-2004", "Improvements to the Russian medical emergency services", "Anti- HIV/Aids", "Preventive vaccines" and others. Since 1999, the programmes on safe motherhood, disabled children and the children of Chernobyl have been funded completely from the federal budget. 325. Governmental Decision No. 625 of 25 August 2000, "Special federal programmes for improving children's situation in the Russian Federation, for the period 2001-02" authorizes the special federal programmes on safe motherhood, disabled children, the development of the All-Russian children's centres "Eaglet" and "Ocean", the development of social services for families and children, preventing neglect of minors and their involvement in crime, gifted children, orphans, children whose families are refugees or have been forcibly resettled, and "Children of the North". The main aspects of the special federal programmes are reflected in regional programmes being carried out in virtually all constituent territories of the Federation. 326. During the course of the special federal programmes on family planning and safe motherhood (1998-2000), a national family planning service was established (448 centres for family planning and reproduction and 70 perinatal centres, most of them provided with office, audio and video equipment, and endoscopy equipment). There are now 15 young people's centres providing adolescents with medical and social advice, as well as a network of related public organizations. More than 90 obstetrics centres in the regions of the Russian Federation now have medical diagnostic apparatus (ultrasound, endoscopy, foetal heart monitoring), bringing modern technology to bear on the birth process and the perinatal aspects. 327. As before, the sources of health care funding derive from the state budget. Budgeting at all levels accounts for 62 per cent of the overall structure of health care spending, compulsory insurance contributions 19 per cent, fee-based services to the public 4.8 per cent, the resources of organizations and enterprises 12.8 per cent, and voluntary insurance 1.4 per cent. 328. Budgetary disbursement on health care for 2000 was set at 1.9 per cent of all federal spending, compared with 1.8 per cent in 1999, thus providing the public with better assurance of its constitutional right to free medical assistance in state and municipal health care facilities. 329. Greatest priority was attached to mother and child protection measures, child vaccination, improving the materials and equipment in children's hospitals and health resorts, and implementing the above-mentioned special federal programmes. 330. Within the framework of the special federal programme "Urgent measures to tackle tuberculosis in Russia for the period 1998-2004", over 2.98 million roubles have been spent on supplying children's hospitals with anti-tuberculosis drugs. First priority is given to the territories worst affected by tuberculosis. As a further measure, X-ray equipment to the value of 15 million US dollars has been purchased. 331. In 1998 the population of the northern regions benefited from medical equipment worth over 70 million roubles and 3 million US dollars, dietetic treatments worth 5 million roubles and medicines worth 30 million roubles. 332. In 1998 the cost of the medicines dispensed to veterans in outpatient care throughout Russia amounted to 800 million roubles. Steps are being taken to implement the agreements between the Russian Ministry of Health, the Federal Compulsory Medical Insurance Fund and the main executive organs of the constituent territories concerning joint action to fulfil the territorial programmes intended to provide free medical assistance to Russia's people. 333. Against the background of socio-economic instability, strong attention is being paid to the issue of social protection for medical workers. A federal law on "Professional liability insurance for medical workers" is currently in preparation, together with other legal and regulatory documents. 334. The constraints affecting the supply of medicines to hospitals and members of the public have eased to some extent, owing to the adoption of a series of governmental decisions to regulate the procedures and conditions for the supply of medicines and medical products to exempted categories of the population: "State measures to control the price of medicines"; No. 374 of 30 March 1999; "Guaranteed provision to the public of essential and important medicines, and situations in which certain categories of the population are given privileged access to medicines"; No. 393 of 8 April 1999. (The Russian Ministry of Health ensures the supply of the minimum range of medicines needed for health care. All pharmaceutical outlets and organizations will be required to stock them); "Additions to the register of essential and important medicines and medical products, the profits from whose sale by all legally recognized types of enterprise shall not be taxable"; No. 546 of 20 May 1999; 335. Furthermore, the system under which medicines are produced and purchased for hospitals has been reorganized. In particular, Presidential Decree No. 305 of 8 April 1997, "Immediate measures to prevent corruption and reduce public spending with regard to the purchase of products to meet national requirements" authorizes procedures for the purchase of medicines by tender. 336. In recent years the reproductive health indicators for women in a number of age groups (fertility, age of transition, adolescents) have shown a declining trend, and the figures for abortions and for maternal and child mortality and morbidity remain high. 337. A prominent feature of the current situation regarding women's reproductive health is the level of gynaecological disease. In the past five years the indicators for the prevalence of these per 100,000 women have risen: by 46 per cent for endometriosis, by 30.5 per cent for inflammatory ailments, and by 21.8 per cent for complications during pregnancy, birth and the postnatal period. Almost 15 per cent of married couples are affected by infertility, of which 50-60 per cent is due to the woman. 338. The quality of life of poorer women continues to decline. The past ten years have seen a more than threefold rise in cases of anaemia during pregnancy, and a significant increase in cases of pregnancy-related kidney and cardio-vascular disease. In the same period the number of women suffering from late toxicosis during pregnancy increased threefold. The proportion of normal births declined sharply to 31.1 per cent for the whole of Russia, and in some constituent territories this figure was 25 per cent. 339. The situation regarding the health of neonates is no more positive, with every third child born suffering from a health defect. There is a notably high percentage of premature and immature births, which cost the federal government some 250-300 times more than if the children were born on or near the due date. 340. Russia's paediatric services attach great importance to child immunization, which is carried out in accordance with a national inoculation schedule. In the past five years, a high national rate of coverage has been achieved, starting with children in their earliest years. Since 1997, injections against viral hepatitis and rubella have been introduced into the national schedule, as well as re-vaccination against parotitis. In 1999 the level of coverage for all types of inoculation exceeded 95 per cent. 341. This consistently high level of child immunisation has brought about a steady decline in diphtheria and measles and a noticeable reduction in cases of whooping cough and parotitis; there has not been a single case of poliomyelitis resulting from natural polio virus. The vaccination of children against tuberculosis during the current epidemic is preventing children from contracting the most serious forms of the disease. 342. Maternal mortality, one of the most important indicators of women's health and health care provision, is two and a half times greater on average in the Russian Federation than in Europe; the figure for Russia in 2000 was 39.7 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. 343. Despite the steadily improving national indicators for perinatal and infant mortality (from 17.4 per thousand in 1994 to 13.2 in 2000, and from 18.6 per thousand in 1994 to 15.3 in 2000, respectively) the levels remain high. The main causes of infant deaths are problems arising in the perinatal phase (44.2%) and congenital defects (23.1%). In 2000 there were 6.7 per 1000 stillbirths per 1000 live births (7.8 in 1994). Overall, child mortality decreased from 15 per 1000 population in 1995 to 15.4 per 1000 in 2000. 344. In recent years the problems of improving public health and reforming the public health care system have been at the forefront of the government's social policy. 345. A series of step-by-step measures to integrate health care and strengthen the public health care system, together with a programme of a more urgent nature, have broadened the sector's material and legal foundations and created the conditions for gradual stabilization of the population's health. 346. The Russian Ministry of Health has formulated and begun to put into effect a set of primary measures in accordance with the "Blueprint for the development of health care and medical science in the Russian Federation and of its public health system, for the period until 2005". 347. Over recent years the Russian Government has gradually formulated a policy on the protection of mother and child. The key instruments here are the CEDAW Convention, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children. Their ratification has led to the adoption of presidential decrees setting out the main planks of the Government's social policy in this area. 348. The following have been adopted as a result of the above-mentioned developments: the "Plan of action for improving children's situation in the Russian Federation for the period 1998-2000"; the "National plan of action for improving women's situation and enhancing their role in society for the period until 2000"; and the Presidential programme "Children of Russia", which includes ten special programmes designed to tackle acute problems in areas relating to mothers' and children's health protection, namely reproductive health, safe motherhood, child disability, and improvements to women's and children's situation and health. 349. Currently it is being suggested that Russia should ratify the Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-Country Adoption, which Russia signed on 7 September 2000, and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children. 350. Approval has been given to an interdepartmental convention on protecting the reproductive health of Russia's population for the period 2000-04. 351. A special federal programme entitled "Healthy child" is being drawn up for implementation over the period 2002-06. 352. Special attention is paid to matters concerning public health provision for small indigenous peoples, and a special federal programme called "Economic and social development of the small indigenous peoples of the north for the period until 2000" has been adopted. The special federal programme "Children of the north" is under way, and activities continue to be carried out in the framework of the international decade of indigenous peoples (1995-2004). 353. Matters of public health protection never fail to feature in the President's annual address to the Federal Assembly. In particular, under the heading "Main aspects of socio-economic policy for 1999-2000" in his 1999 address entitled "Russia on the verge of an epoch", the President noted that Russia supports WHO's "Health for All Strategy", which is basically concerned with health care provision. 354. In the context of Russia's socio-economic policy, the major reform taking place in this sector focuses on the maintenance of the national health service, sound centralized management, the introduction of multi-channelling to health care funding, and the funding of hospitals in accordance with the volume and quality of health care. 355. In the future, the reform process will also be geared to improving the effectiveness of first-level care through greater emphasis on preventive care and treatment at the pre-hospital stage, to which end the work of extending the network of day hospitals and out-patient clinics and introducing a general practitioner service continues. The Ministry of Health has approved a scheme for developing family medicine across the country. 356. The emphasis placed on outpatient care has already seen the percentage of public health problems resolved at this level rise to 75-80 per cent. 357. Not less than 35 per cent of the available resources in this sector - with a further 20 per cent devoted to specialist outpatient care - will be allocated to strengthen first-level health care, including all kinds of preventive treatment. 358. Steps are being taken to reorganize the hospital network and the range of treatment it provides in order to reflect the pace of the developments occurring in diagnostic medicine. The government has instituted a programme for the development of high technology in medicine. Regulations governing the functioning of units to provide intensive care, rehabilitation for the chronically ill and medical-social care are being drawn up. 359. The objective of the current policy is to lower the level of hospitalization from 20 per cent to 17 per cent, the average hospital waiting period from 18 to 14 days, the number of bed-days per 1000 population from 3,500 to 2,700, and reduce the number of emergency service call-outs, by making outpatient care more effective and by linking emergency care provision to the establishment of a general practitioners' institute. The task of strengthening Russia's first-level health care system, including preventive care, will also be helped by the introduction of a system of preventive health centres across the country, based on the former network of health education centres. In many cases the new centres will be combined with sports clinics, Aids prevention and treatment centres and mental health clinics (numbering 82), but there will also be preventive care units in the main establishments (over 1,400). 360. Owing to the extremely varied nature and purposes of these preventive care centres and units, these measures are currently proving relatively ineffective, and the level of coordination between them and other governmental and public bodies when it comes to the joint implementation of shared tasks is still poor. Economic and organizational mechanisms must be put in place in order to encourage the population, the health service and other interested departments to assist in the drive to prevent illness and improve health. 361. Under the auspices of the TACIS Project, pilot schemes are being carried out in Chelyabinsk region and the city of St. Petersburg with the aim of developing models for public health schools, which would help tackle preventive health issues, both within the public health system and at interdepartmental level. 362. In 1999, as compared with 1995, the proportion of hospital deaths in relation to the number of people released from hospital care declined from 1.6 per cent to 1.5 per cent. The number of surgical operations conducted in hospitals rose by 6.7 per cent. There was a drop in the number of post-operative deaths arising from emergency surgery on organs in the abdominal cavity, for all types of acute problems. 363. Growth in the proportion of the population living in rural areas, from 26.1 per cent in 1995 to 27 per cent in 2000, has been accompanied by contraction of the network of rural institutions providing health care. The number of rural hospitals fell by 19.5 per cent, the number of beds by 17.2 per cent, and the number of paramedical and obstetrical centres by 2.6 per cent, significantly complicating the task of providing health care for the rural population. The number of hospital beds fell sharply in the Krasnoyarsk and Altai territories, and in the Irkutsk, Omsk and Tyumen regions. 364. The problems affecting health care have become particularly acute in the areas inhabited by the indigenous minorities of the north, who have a nomadic way of life, and especially in the Taimyr (Dolgan-Nenets), Evenk and Nenets autonomous areas. 365. For the past six years Russia has operated a control system based on the licensing and certification of medical activities and specialists, the production and sale of medicines, and medical equipment, and the accreditation and licensing of medical and pharmaceutical training establishments. 366. Measures are being taken to establish a quality control system for health care, the areas of interaction between the interested parties are being defined, and the regulatory framework governing the relevant institutions is being revised. 367. Urgent measures are being taken to supply the population and the health care institutions with medicines. The Government has adopted a series of important instruments intended to support Russian manufacturers of medical products. 368. The Government is examining the possibility of collaborating further with the World Bank on a project entitled "Promoting the structural rebuilding of the health care system", whose main objective is to improve the efficiency and quality of health care provision through the rebuilding of the medical services, an overhaul of the health system's command structure, the strengthening of federalist principles in order to guarantee the population equal access to health care, and the creation of a unified sector from the economic and legal standpoints. 369. This project, still at the preparatory stage, will promote joint actions for implementing the "Blueprint for the development of health care and medical science in the Russian Federation", as well as part of the governmental programme "Structural rebuilding and economic growth for the period 19972000". 370. In the framework of a World Bank pilot project called "Public health reform" conducted in the Kaluga and Tver regions since 1998, issues relating to the basic principles of family health care are being examined thoroughly: taking measures to prevent cardiovascular diseases and promote the image of the healthy family, improving the work of the services concerned with mother and child protection, and making best use of the funding available for preventive health facilities through a shift from a hospital-based service to an outreach-type service offering preventive care. 371. Life expectancy at birth rose from 64.6 years in 1995 to 65.9 years in 1999. 372. The continuing need for emergency action in the social and economic spheres has meant that the demographic situation remains difficult. 373. The difference between average life expectancy in Russia and in the developed countries is considerable: 15-17 years for men and 7-10 years for women. 374. Across most of Russia, the main reproductive indicators (fertility, mortality, balance of births and deaths) testify to the decrease in people's quality of life. In the past nine years (since 1992) the population of Russia has declined by 3.5 million, or 2.3 per cent. 375. During 2000 the population decreased in 79 out of the 89 constituent territories, where 128 million, or 88.4 per cent of the population, currently live (in 1999 it decreased in 82 territories, and in 1998 in 68). The population rose in the republics of Altai, Dagestan, Ingushetia and North Ossetia-Alania, in the Belgorod and Tyumen regions, in Moscow city, and in the Khanty-Mansi, Yamal-Nenets and Taimyr (Dolgano-Nenets) autonomous areas. 376. The highest rates of population decline in the past year were registered in the Chukchi (4.2%), Koryak (2.7%) and Evenk (2.1%) autonomous areas and in the Magadan region (2.3%). A decline of 1.2-1.4 per cent occurred in the Tula, Pskov, Smolensk, Murmansk, Tver and Sakhalin regions. 377. Since 1990 the child population has declined in both the urban and rural sectors. 378. The difficult socio-economic situation began affecting the rural population before it took on any great significance in the towns and cities. 379. Deaths in the countryside caused by respiratory diseases occur 1.6 times more frequently than in urban areas. 380. Owing to the low birth rate and growing numbers of elderly people, the overall population is ageing still faster. At the end of 1990, there were fewer children than people of pensionable age in 19 regions of the country; nine years later, this was true of 42 regions. 381. As before, the most pressing problem remains the high number of premature deaths. In 2000, the number of able-bodied people who died (631,000) represented 28.4 per cent of the total number of deaths (in 1990 the number was 410,000 or 25%). 382. The trends relating to overall morbidity remain pessimistic, as do those for child and juvenile mortality, and mental illness and alcohol-related diseases are on the increase. 383. In recent years, the epidemics of socially-related diseases have reached alarming proportions. Since 1992 the incidence of active tuberculosis has increased by a factor of 2.4. 384. In 1999 Russia, especially the regions of the far north, was brought to crisis point by the tuberculosis epidemic. According to the official data, by the end of 2000 almost 380,000 people had contracted the disease, and during that year 130,700 were first diagnosed as having it. 385. This was the situation which triggered the special federal programme "Urgent measures to tackle tuberculosis in Russia for the period 1998-2004". 386. The areas causing greatest concern are the republics of Buryatia, Tuva, Khakasia and Komi, the Tyumen region, the Jewish autonomous region and the Evenk autonomous area, where levels are 2-5 times the Russian average. 387. The part of the population most vulnerable to tuberculosis comprises the indigenous minorities. In particular, the 62,000 strong indigenous population of the Altai republic (the Altai), already with the lowest life expectancy of all Russia's peoples, is officially recognised as being the most susceptible to infectious disease. 388. Among the indigenous population of the Kola Peninsula the incidence of tuberculosis is seven times the Russian average. 389. In the past three years the incidence of the disease among adults belonging to the indigenous groups of the Magadan region has risen two and a half times (the incidence of children with tuberculosis is ten times greater than in the southern regions). The incidence of diseases and deaths among the local population in Kolyma has risen catastrophically (the average age of the indigenous inhabitants is 49). According to demographic experts, the historical health reserve of the Magadan region's indigenous people may be exhausted within a few generations. 390. The health care authorities are concerned at the recent appearance of previously rare diseases such as hepatitis A and B and diphtheria. The latter, previously restricted to individual cases, affected 838 people from 1990 to 1999 925 deaths). Other examples are Western Nile fever (34 cases recorded in the Volgograd area in 2000) and Crimean haemorrhagic fever (in Stavropol territory, the Kalmykia and Dagestan republics and the Astrakhan and Volgograd regions there were 83 recorded cases in 2000). 391. Despite the problems encountered in reorganizing the health service, some success has been achieved in tackling a number of dangerous diseases. Thus, the type of trachoma found most often among the indigenous minorities of the northern regions has been eradicated. Since 1997 not a single case of poliomyelitis due to the "natural" virus has been recorded in Russia. The documentation certifying that the Russian Federation is free of poliomyelitis has been approved by the national standards council and sent to WHO for consideration and approval. 392. Owing to the emergence of environmental conditions favouring the spread of the vectors, the relaxation of preventive measures and the worsening socio-economic circumstances, typhoid - previously thought to have been eradicated - has made a re-appearance in Russia. 393. The towns of Anzhero-Sudensk, Prokopyevsk and Novokuznetsk, in the Kemerovo region, are at risk of a typhoid outbreak. The authorities there have issued an order entitled "Measures to prevent the spread of typhoid among the region's population" (the department of social protection and public health has spent over 1 million roubles on drugs to treat typhoid). 394. According to data from the endocrinology research unit of the Russian Academy of Medical Science, iodine deficiency is becoming another matter of concern affecting the whole country. In view of the seriousness of the situation, the Government adopted Decision No. 1119 of 5 October 1999 entitled "Measures to prevent the diseases caused by iodine deficiency". The decision authorized measures to supplement those already being taken under the first phase of the "Blueprint of state policy concerning a healthy diet for the population, for the period until 2005". 395. The environmental and socio-economic problems encountered in the northern regions and elsewhere in Russia have been exacerbated by the spread of drug addiction and alcoholism. Experts estimate that there are now 2-3 million people using narcotics and psychotropic substances. In Kondopoga, a regional centre with a population of 40,000 in the republic of Karelia, a programme called "Hope" [Nadezhda] was launched in 1999 to try to prevent alcoholism, drug-taking and toxin abuse. By the end of the third quarter of 1999, the number of suicides in this town was twice the number recorded for the same period of the previous year. In the city of Novosibirsk a month-long campaign called "Protect our children from drugs" was carried out. The city has 13,000 registered drug users (including 7,000 diagnosed as addicts, of whom 80 per cent inject; 45% of the latter have HIV). 396. In recent years the proportion of the population with HIV has risen sharply, by a factor of 4.6 as compared with 1997. 397. The HIV/Aids epidemic in Russia entered a new phase in mid-1996 with a flare-up of HIV infections among intravenous users in Kaliningrad and a number of other cities (Tver, Novorossiisk, Saratov, Niizhny Novgorod). The number of people discovered to have HIV was 280 per cent higher in 1997 than in 1996. The situation stabilized somewhat in 1998, with an 18 per cent decline in newly identified cases from the previous year. Over 1999 and 2000 the disease again spread because of serious outbreaks in Moscow city, Moscow region and Irkutsk region, which together account for over 70 per cent of the newly reported cases. 398. As a result the total number of HIV cases in the Russian Federation rose sharply to 56,471 in 2000, up to 90 per cent of them infections occurring during intravenous drug use. Incidents of HIV infection have now been recorded in 82 of the constituent territories of the Federation. 399. Of the newly recorded cases of HIV infection, 75 per cent are in young people aged between 15 and 29. 400. The Russian health care authorities and institutions have taken a series of organizational and practical steps to limit the spread of HIV infection. 401. An epidemiological monitoring system is successfully tracking the spread of HIV infection within the country. The early detection and tallying of HIV-positive individuals makes it possible to provide medical and social assistance, to offer prophylactic treatment earlier, and thus to prolong their physical, working and social lives. A system to monitor the safety of donated blood, organs and tissue and immunity-enhancing substances has been set up and is functioning successfully. 402. Funding from the special federal programme to tackle Aids in 1999 enabled the objective, laid down in the Federal Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-related Disease (Prevention) Act, of offering free diagnosis and specific treatment of HIV infection, to be met. Despite a marked rise in the incidence of HIV/Aids, the constituent territories of the Federation were centrally supplied, out of Federal budget resources, with enough diagnostic kits and Timazid to treat HIV infection. The Federal and eight regional Aids centres have been supplied with new, up-to-date laboratory equipment. The Russian Clinical Aids Centre at the Republic Hospital for Infectious Diseases in St. Petersburg has been supplied with the latest generation of drugs for triple-therapy treatment of infected children. Clinical trials of a new drug, Phosphazid, have been successfully concluded. 403. Work with the high-risk groups, particularly intravenous drug users, is still one of the most ways of combating the epidemic. 404. To this end 16 teaching seminars were held in 1999, in collaboration with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/Aids and the Dutch chapter of Mdecins sans Frontires; they were attended by over 300 skilled staff from the Aids centres, drug dispensaries and non-governmental institutions, who were taught new methods of going about the prevention of HIV infection in a drug-taking milieu. 405. A large-scale campaign, "Rational people, rational choices", to inform young people about means and methods of avoiding HIV/Aids and sexually transmitted infections, is still being run in collaboration with the Russian NGO "Focus". Further steps to prevent HIV/Aids in Russia have been devised within the Joint Russian-American Commission on Economic and Technical Cooperation. The US Agency for Economic Development held a two-week training course in the United States on the organization of preventive-care programmes, which was attended by skilled staff from Russian state and non-governmental organizations. Video clips, posters and pamphlets on HIV prevention for young people have been published, marketing research has been conducted into the availability of condoms, and special, low-priced condom selections for young people have been put on the market. 406. Work is now in progress on a new federal HIV/Aids programme of urgent action to prevent the spread in the Russian Federation of HIV-related disease over the period 2002-2007. 407. The indicators for diseases of the respiratory and digestive organs and for complications during pregnancy, birth and the postnatal period remain high. 408. The numbers of the disabled are increasing, especially among people of working age. 409. The loss of labour capacity sustained by the country in recent years because of premature deaths has a number of causes, broken down as follows: injuries and toxicosis, 41.4 per cent of losses; juvenile deaths, 18.1 per cent; diseases of the circulatory system, 9.3 per cent; neoplasms, 6.3 per cent; diseases of the respiratory system, 5.4 per cent; congenital defects, 4.9 per cent; infectious diseases, 3.2 per cent. 410. These are the main causes of the loss of labour capacity to society caused by premature death, which accounts for almost 90 per cent of such losses. In monetary terms, these deaths cost the state over 30 billion US dollars per year. 411. Sport is being promoted as a means of making the country healthier. A Federal Act adopted on 29 April 1999, entitled "Athletics and sport in the Russian Federation", lays down the following principles for governmental policy on physical education and sport: continuity and succession in the physical education provided for the various age groups at all stages of their active lives; taking everyone's interests into account in developing and carrying out the federal programmes to foster athletics and sport, and recognition by the population of responsibility for its own health and physical condition; the granting of autonomy to all sports and athletics associations that comply with federal legislation, and equal entitlement to state support for all of them; creation of favourable conditions for funding athletics/sporting and sporting/technical organizations, the Russian Olympic movement, sports and athletics clubs, and the sports goods industry. 412. Health spas occupy an important place in the rehabilitation of Russia's people. Their retention and further development comprise one of the Government's more socially significant tasks. To this end, Federal Act No. 26 of 23 February 1995, "Natural healing resources, medical rehabilitation centres and health spas" was adopted. The act lays down basic governmental policy and the regulations concerning the study, use, development and protection of natural healing resources, medical rehabilitation centres and resorts in the Russian Federation. 413. A Governmental Decision of 2 February 1996 authorized a special federal programme called "Development of health spas of federal significance", which has led to the introduction of 25 similar programmes in the regions. 414. The data based on many years of observation have made it possible to analyze the correlation between air pollution and sickness rates among the population. In Russia only 15 per cent of town dwellers are in territories whose air pollution level complies with the health regulations. The volume of contaminated material emitted from stationary sources is more than 19 million tonnes per year. 415. Tens of millions of people live in conditions under which the permissible concentration of toxic substances in the atmospheric air is repeatedly exceeded. The number of inhabitants living under the effects of a cocktail of substances ten times more potent than the permissible concentration is 4050 million, while 50-60 million must live with a mixture five times higher. 416. The health protection zones of manufacturing enterprises situated in many constituent territories of the Federation contain between 800 and 100,000 people. 417. Research has revealed a whole series of territories and cities whose natural environment has been devastated: Norilsk, Tolyattin, Bratsk, Cherepovets, Kemerovo, Nizhniy Tagil, and towns of the Perm region and Bashkyria. 418. It has been found that the type of disease varies according to the composition of the emissions and the type of enterprise. Thus, the effects of the emissions from non-ferrous metals are associated with higher levels of cardiovascular disease. The emissions from enterprises processing ferrous metal and from power plants are prevalent among the causes of lung diseases. 419. In the areas around chemical and petrochemical plants there is a greater prevalence of allergic illnesses (dermatitis, asthmatic bronchitis, bronchial asthma and others). High levels of allergic illness have been found in the following towns and cities: Sterlitamak, Voskresensk, Yaroslavl, Perm, Kazan, Volgograd, Kirov and Blagoveshchensk. 420. In recent years it has been established that the heavy metals found in the emissions from copper-smelting plants have a detrimental effect on the genital functions and on embryo growth. In Kirovgrad, Krasnouralsk, Sredneuralsk and the Sverdlovsk region, where the heavy metal concentrations in the air far exceed the permissible level, the incidence of toxicosis per 1,000 women is twice as high as in towns with a relatively clean atmosphere. 421. A study of the distribution of congenital growth defects among children living in major industrial centres where chemical, petrochemical and engineering production is highly developed has found such defects in 108-162 neonates per 10,000 population; the level in rural areas is 39-54 per 10,000. 422. The overall economic situation in Russia is limiting the operations and causing the shutdown of large numbers of manufacturing plants and factories in the industrial regions, which in turn is reducing the volume of emissions of contaminated material into the atmosphere. In these circumstances the emissions from motor vehicles, whose numbers continue to increase in the towns, are taking on a greater role and influence. The percentage of poor-quality samples taken in the vicinity of main roads is considerably higher than in the areas around industrial plants and at permanent sampling stations. 423. In 1997, at a meeting of the governmental committee on the environment and resource management, the national epidemiological inspectorate (Gossanepidnadzor) raised the issue of strengthening the mechanisms that protect the atmospheric air in Russia's major cities from pollution caused by motor vehicle emissions. The committee decided to revise its existing standards for petrol content in order to make it less harmful to the environment, and to align Russia's regulations on the composition of car exhaust emissions with those of the European Commission. 424. The quality of the drinking water available for public consumption remains poor. The state of Russia's watercourses and drinking water is such that the risk of epidemic exists in a large number of constituent territories of the Federation, including the republics of Buryatia, Dagestan and Kalmykia, the Maritime Territory, and the Archangelsk, Kaliningrad, Kemerovo, Kurgan, Tomsk and Yaroslavl regions. 425. In 1999, 29 per cent of the water samples taken by the health authorities failed to meet the existing hygiene standards (28.7% in 1995, 29.0% in 1991). This proportion was three and four times higher (from 39% to 81%) in 18 constituent territories of the Federation, including the republics of Kalmykia and Karelia, the Tomsk, Voronezh, and Arkhangelsk regions and the city of Moscow. 426. Microbiological testing has revealed that 9.4 per cent of water supply points fail to meet the required standards (11.24% in 1995, 13.84% in 1990). The worst levels of microbial contamination are in St. Petersburg (64%) and the republics of Kalmykia, Dagestan and Karachayevo-Cherkessia (33.2%-25.4%). 427. This is the consequence of the increasing pollution of water sources, the unsatisfactory condition of water supply equipment and distribution networks, lack of the necessary cleaning equipment and decontamination facilities for pipelines, and inadequate stocks of the materials and equipment mange supplies in communal housing facilities. The recent increased tendency to cut off water supplies because of non-payment has brought with it the serious risk of epidemics. 428. Surface water bodies, which are virtually all polluted, supply 68 per cent of the water for household and drinking purposes. Only 32 per cent is derived from better protected underground sources. 429. The Russian Ministry of Health is taking measures to overhaul the legislation on water cleanliness. Since 1998 new hygiene regulations pertaining to the quality of central drinking water supplies have been introduced across the country (SanPin 2.1.4.559-96 entitled "Drinking water"). In 1999 preparations for the implementation of this document were completed. 430. The national epidemiological monitoring centre (TsGSEhN) has been instrumental in drawing up a commercial programme of laboratory testing for water quality. 431. The national epidemiological inspectorate is conducting extensive work on the methodology to be used in commercial and governmental testing of water quality. Approval has been given for implementation of the following; "Drinking water", "Drinking water; hygiene requirements relating to the quality of central drinking water supplies; quality control", and "Testing of water for parasitic content". 432. In accordance with an agreement of 27 August 1996 between the Russian Federation and the World Bank, a project called "Medical equipment" is being carried out; the total amount of the loan is 270 million US dollars. The participants include 38 constituent territories of the Russian Federation and more than 1,600 preventive care institutions. Under the project, medical equipment and consumables will be supplied to first- and second-level medical establishments. 433. During the period 1994-98, Russia's hospitals were equipped with 1,150 X-ray and ultrasound systems made by the Philips company, at a total cost of 550 million German marks. This has helped considerably to renew the national stock of diagnostic equipment. 434. In 1999 the public health committee of the Murmansk region carried out a campaign called "Save the child", in which a large joint company (Finland/Sweden/Russia) took part. The company donated medicines and equipment free of charge, including drugs for treating neonatal breathing disorders, analgesics, antipyretics and dressings (total value 20,000 US dollars). The right to education (article 13) The Constitution of the Russian Federation (article 43) guarantees citizens of the Russian Federation the right to education; pre-school, basic general and secondary vocational training in public and municipal educational establishments and institutions are accessible to all and free of charge. Also, according to the Federal Education Act (as amended on 13 January 1996, No. 12), the Russian State guarantees all citizens access to free elementary general, basic general, secondary (full) general and elementary vocational training, and also on a competitive basis, free secondary vocational, higher vocational and postgraduate vocational training in state and municipal establishments and institutions, within the limits of the state educational standards provided the citizen is receiving education at the given level for the first time. Ensuring the right of each child to receive basic general education remains a priority of the education system of the Russian Federation. In the 1999-2000 scholastic year, there were 20.8 million children (in 1998-1999, 21.4 million) being educated in State general education day schools. In 1999-2000 there were 205, 000 fewer children enrolled in the first class than in 1998-1999. The value of education was rated higher among children, as shown by the increase in the number of children continuing their education in the tenth class. Whereas in the 1997-1998 scholastic year 65 per cent of all children finishing basic schooling entered the tenth class, in 1999-2000 66.4 per cent of basic school leavers continued into the tenth class. At the beginning of the 1999-2000 scholastic year, there were 66, 900 State general education establishments in Russia, including 45, 700 village schools. Changes in the network of general education establishments show a trend towards an increase in the number of elementary and secondary schools in towns and at the same time a decrease in the number of basic schools. As compared with 1998-99, in Russian towns the number of elementary schools increased by 21 and secondary schools by 55. In rural areas for the same period the number of elementary schools decreased by 374, basic schools by 163, while the number of secondary schools, as in the towns, increased by 137. Of the general education establishments, there are 15, 400 level I schools (1-3(4) classes), 12, 900 level I-II schools (1-9 classes), and 36, 500 level I-III schools (1-11 classes). The increase in the number of elementary schools and the decrease in the number of basic schools in towns indicates a trend in the school system in towns towards the establishment of large general education establishments. In the four preceding scholastic years, the number of level I-III schools (111(12) classes) with more than 1, 601 students dropped by 59, while the number of level I schools with 61-100 students increased by 150, and the number of level I schools with 121-180 students increased by 80. Elementary and basic schools have a number of advantages compared with level I-III schools. Level I and level I-II schools enable children to be grouped according to specific stages of age development. In addition, the transfer of a child from a level I or level I-II school to a level III school is a factor affecting the social development of the child's personality. A positive trend has been observed towards a decrease in the number of schools operating on two or three shifts, with their total number decreasing to 1,300. In the 1, 700 evening (shift) general education establishments and in the 3, 100 educational-advisory centres there were 489, 600 students (491, 000 in the 1999-2000 scholastic year), and compared with 1998-99 there were 11, 400 fewer students in the 16-17 age group. The number of students entering the tenth class in evening schools decreased compared with the preceding scholastic year by 6, 500. As before, there are a considerable number of drop-outs from evening schools: 20, 600 for reasons of failure, 14, 400 because of systematically being delayed at work, and 8, 300 because of conscription into military service. In addition, the number of children receiving secondary (full) education at residential schools is increasing. While in 1998 there were 6, 500 children in boarding schools, in 1999 that number was 7, 600 (6, 000 in 1997). In 1999, the range of choice in the types of establishment in the education system is continuing to expand. In the 1999-2000 scholastic year in Russia there were 7, 400 schools with classes offering specialized subjects, schools offering specialized subjects, and state gymnasiums and lyces, accounting for 14.9 per cent of the total number of level II and III general education establishments, and attended by 12.8 per cent of children (16.6 per cent in 1998-99). These types of educational establishment are more characteristic of towns, where there are 5, 900 such schools attended by 17.2 per cent of children. In rural areas, 2.6 per cent of children are in schools offering specialized subjects, gymnasiums and lyces. Non-state general educational establishments participate in meeting the educational requirements of children. In the 1999-2000 scholastic year there were 607 establishments of this type, or 0.9 per cent of the total number of general educational establishments (in 1997 - 570, or 0.8 per cent, and in 1998 - 568, or 0.8 per cent). There are 53, 400 schoolchildren attending non-state general educational establishments, or 0.3 per cent of the total number of pupils (in 1997 and 1998 the percentage was 0.2). In the 1999-2000 scholastic year there were 2, 700 children attending level I schools, or 5.2 per cent of the total number of pupils (5.3 per cent in 1998-99); 13.4 per cent attending level I-II schools (16.6 per cent in 1998-99); and 81.4 per cent attending level I-III schools (78.1 per cent in 1998-99). The problem of "children outside education" remains a pressing one. According to data from an exercise carried out in September-October 1999, which took the form of a federal State statistical enquiry entitled "Report on the number of children aged 7-15 not attending educational establishments, and children of no fixed abode as of 1 September 1999" (approved under Decision No. 61 of 26 July 1999 of the Russian State Committee for Statistics), there were 68, 159 children and adolescents in Russia aged 7-15 (0.3 per cent of the total number of minors in this age category) not attending school. Of these, 27, 410 (40.2 per cent) children were not attending for reasons of sickness, of which 23, 788 (86.8 per cent) were not subject to compulsory education and 2, 909 (10.6 per cent) were released for a year. In actual fact, there were 40, 749 minors who, according to the current legislation, should have been attending school (59.8 per cent of the total number of children not attending school), of which 37, 531 (92 per cent) should have been attending general educational establishments. Of these, 2, 598 children and adolescents (6.4 per cent) did not even have an elementary general education; 11, 153 (27.4 per cent) had left educational institutions without receiving a basic general education; 3, 003 (7.4 per cent) had never attended school; 11, 263 (27.6 per cent) had not attended because of the material situation of their parents (legal guardians); 2, 854 (7 per cent) had left educational establishments for elementary vocational training and had not continued their education, and 364 (0.9 per cent) had left educational establishments for secondary vocational training. In addition, it was found that there were 1, 400 children from refugee families or families subject to enforced resettlement aged 7-15 not attending educational establishments (3.4 per cent) of which 1, 389 (99 per cent) were the children of families subjected to enforced resettlement. The survey showed that in the older age groups there were relatively more children who should have been attending school but were not. Thus, approximately 4 per cent of all the 7-year olds who should be attending school are not, whereas the figure for the 15-year olds is 34.7 per cent. A considerable difference was noted in the numbers not attending in different constituent territories of the Russian Federation (from several tens and hundreds of non-attendee minors to several thousands). Such a difference is basically due to the real problems prevalent in certain regions (difficult socio-economic situation, large numbers of children from enforced migrant families, including children from areas of interethnic and military conflict, etc.). In Russia, the average number of children and adolescents subject to compulsory education who are not attending school is 0.2 per cent of the total number of minors aged 7-15 (in the Russian Federation the total number of minors in this age category is 20.7 million). In the interests of the child's personality development, priority is given to the development and introduction of fundamentally new educational courses and the establishment of the most favourable conditions for all-round personality development. Practical implementation of the foundation curriculum in the educational process and of elements of the State educational standards for general education has provided additional guarantees to pupils of a high quality education. The diversity and adequacy of education, and how far it meets the requirements and challenges for development of the economy, culture, science and technology, in the all-Russian, as well as the regional, context, are laid down in the structure and content of the educational courses for "Philology", "Mathematics", "Social studies", "Natural sciences", "Art", "Physical education" and "Technology". In 1999, work continued on updating the curriculum pursuant to the "Provisional requirements for a compulsory minimum curriculum for basic general education" and the "Compulsory minimum curriculum for secondary (full) general education". "Model programmes for basic general education" and "Model programmes for secondary (full) general education" have been elaborated and issued. These model programmes ensure educational consistency throughout the Russian Federation. The programmes indicate the recommended number of hours of study for the basic course elements and it is foreseen that 10-15% of available time will be spent on the regional component of the curriculum. The model programmes are a guideline for establishing author programmes. The programmes include matriculation standards for basic and higher schools. Handbooks on "Evaluating the standards of secondary (full) school leavers" in all subjects have been prepared. These handbooks contain all the documents required by special subject teachers: the compulsory minimum curriculum, the model programme, the school leaving standards, and all possible material for evaluating school leavers. A list of the textbooks and educational aids recommended by the Russian Federation Ministry of Education has been prepared for general educational schools. The first part of the list includes the textbooks required for the compulsory minimum curriculum. The second part includes the textbooks for advanced levels, supplementary academic material for study beyond the compulsory minimum curriculum, and textbooks for optional studies. A catalogue entitled the "Russian textbook" is published annually for general educational establishments, containing a list of textbooks, educational aids, model programmes and recommended methodological material for teachers, parents and pupils. The Russian Federation laws on education and on freedom of worship and religious associations embody the principle of separation of secular and religious education. Pursuant to this, State and municipal educational establishments do not, and may not, give religious instruction, and may not observe any religious ceremonies, rituals or festivals. In view of the current growth of interest in religion as the most important cultural phenomenon in society, the country's schools run courses on the history of religions and religious knowledge. Educational establishments in different regions offer optional courses with a religious content, which includes study of the fundamentals of Orthodoxy, Islam, Buddhism and other religions, and taking into account the interests and questions of participants. The educational level of teachers is continually improving, both in state and non-state general educational establishments, and their work has the most significant influence, among other factors, on the educational level of children. In 1999, 77.3 per cent of the teachers with a higher education worked in state general educational establishments (in 1997, 75.6 per cent of teachers had a higher education, and in 1998 76.4 per cent). In the 1999-2000 academic year, non-state educational establishments employed 709 postgraduates and 110 doctors of science, that is 4.8 per cent of the total number of teachers. It has been estimated that, in the 1999-2000 academic year, for each rural teacher there were 9 pupils, for each municipal teacher 14 pupils, and in non-state establishments 3 pupils per teacher. In schools in the constituent territories of the Russian Federation pupils were tested and certified with a view to determining their educational standard, and the outcome showed an improvement. The rising standard of education is demonstrated by the increase in the number of school leavers with "gold" and "silver" medals. In 1999, 18, 700 school leavers had gold medals, and 49, 500 had silver medals (in 1998 the figures were 17, 900 and 47, 100, respectively). In the Russian education system, priority continues to be given to supporting gifted children. One of the most important instruments for solving the problems associated with establishing the conditions for identifying and developing talented youngsters, and realizing their potential is the special federal programme "Gifted children". Within the framework of the "Gifted children" programme special support is given to the material and technical resources for 6 regional and federal educational establishments for gifted children, which are developing new technologies; the qualifications of the teachers working with these children has improved. The children are given direct financial support: annual state stipends are granted, there is partial funding of children's stays abroad, and assistance is given for children to participate in all-Russia and international olympiads. More than 441, 000 roubles were allocated for the granting of annual stipends. 93 stipends worth 4, 000 roubles each were awarded to gold and silver medallists at all-Russia and international subject olympiads, and to the prize winners and winners of all-Russia and international events in core subjects. Approximately half of the young stipend holders are children of one-parent and low-income families. To support the participation of children in all-Russia special subject olympiads, assistance was given to children from 10 far-distant constituent territories of the Russian Federation (the Jewish Autonomous Region, Magadan, Amur, Chita, Sakhalin and Kamchatka regions, the Republics of Sakha (Yakutia) and Buryatia, and the Maritime and Khabarovsk territories), and the Russian teams were equipped for participation in international olympiads, etc. To support talented youngsters, the Russian Ministry of Culture awards 450 stipends each year for pupils and students at academic establishments for culture and the arts. There are 18 all-Russia projects for work with gifted children, which have received a grant from the President of the Russian Federation. A Programme for the development of education in the Russian education system for 1999-2001 has been elaborated with a view to educating citizens capable of creative work, defending the mother country, displaying moral qualities, and who are family-oriented persons fit to represent his/her nation. The programme focuses on improving educational standards in educational establishments, and on updating the structure and content of education according to the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the Russian Federation Education Act and the national doctrine on education. In recent years the initial vocational training system has been undergoing improvement and reform, in particular to optimize the network of educational establishments by changing their areas of specialization, and by predicting the volume and profile of training and retraining and the attainment of further qualifications needed on a budgetary and extrabudgetary basis for general education school leavers and the adult unemployed population, etc. In the Russian Federation, at the end of 2000 there were 3, 898 elementary vocational training establishments, including 3, 526 day establishments. There was a signficant reduction in the number of establishments compared with 1999 (0.5 per cent) as a result of measures taken to optimize the network of elementary vocational training establishments by amalgamating them in order to make rational use of textbooks, equipment and the budgetary resources allocated for their maintenance. The number of students at elementary vocational training establishments has dropped. In 2000 there were 1, 679, 300 students (315, 000 or 16 per cent more than in 1999), with 1, 591, 700 in day vocational establishments and lyces (15, 300 or 1.0 per cent more than in 1998). The main indicators for guaranteed access to elementary vocational training are the number of pupils in the initial vocational training establishments per 10, 000 of the population and control figures for the number of pupils being enrolled in these establishments. In the Russian Federation there are 116 students at initial vocational training establishments per 10, 000 of the population (114 in 1998). As of 1 January 2000, the initial vocational training system was employing 160 000 [sic] teaching staff, of which 190, 300 (56 per cent) had a higher education, 58, 900 (36.8 per cent) had a secondary specialized education, and 12, 800 (8.0 per cent) had a secondary education. In 1999, the vocational establishments and lyces admitted 21.9 per cent (9th class) general educational school leavers and 15.1 per cent (11th class) general education school leavers (1.2 and 0.4 per cent more, respectively, than in 1998). In the last three years the number of 9th class school leavers entering vocational establishments and lyces has remained constant at about 22 per cent. On the whole, the number of places available in initial vocational training establishments is about the same as the number of students opting for this level of education. Of the 645, 600 young workers graduating from the day initial vocational training establishments in 2000 in the Russian Federation: 341, 100 (52.8 per cent) entered the job market, 67, 700 (10.5 per cent) entered higher education and secondary specialized education establishments, and 11 per cent found no employment because of job shortages. The educational establishments in the Russian Federation trained a total of 769, 600 qualified workers and specialists in 1999. On the whole, in Russia a gradual redistribution of training for workers is taking place with regard to the production industries and non-manufacturing branches in favour of the latter. In 1999 the ratio was 71.6 to 28.4. To supply sectors of the economy with workers and to meet the needs of young people, work has continued in the educational services to develop a social partnership between labour and employment bodies at all levels, initial vocational training establishments, and employers and their associations. The organizational basis for this work is the special federal programme to promote employment in the population of the Russian Federation for 1998-2000, approved by Government Decision No. 828 of 24 July 1998. The education authorities, the labour and employment bodies at all levels, and employers and their associations are participating in projecting the need for worker training, for determining the curriculum for initial vocational training, and harmonizing State educational standards for initial vocational training. The control figures for the enrolment of pupils at initial vocational training establishments starting from 1997 are established and confirmed with the direct participation of the social partners. Under international projects entitled "Reform of professional education and training in the North-western region of Russia", and "Development of educational links and initiatives in higher and professional education - DELFI", supported by the European fund for professional training, the European Commission and other international organizations, new approaches are being developed for establishing interaction between the educational services market and the needs of the labour market, including via the social partnership. For the executive authorities of the constituent territories of the Russian Federation recommendations are being drawn up concerning the implementation of social partnership principles. Also, on the basis of the development of social dialogue, under a cooperation programme with the British Council, the town of Samara has formulated a programme of professional support for children and young people with handicaps. On the basis of the general provisions of the special federal programme for employment assistance for the population of the Russian Federation, a legislative and regulatory basis is being established, the network of initial vocational training establishments is being optimized, and educational methods and information support for educational activity are being established. In accordance with the needs of the changing labour market and taking into account proposals made by the constituent territories of the Russian Federation, Government Decision No. 1362 of 8 December 1999 (list of professions requiring initial vocational training) has been approved. The new list of professions requiring initial vocational training was elaborated and adopted because of the need to meet more fully the socio-economic requirements of the regions and the state as regards training workers and specialists who are competitive on the labour market. The new list has expanded the number of professions for which training is given: it comprises 286 professions (instead of the previous 257). It should be noted that the educational methods and information support for training at the initial vocational training establishments, and the strengthening of their material and technical basis, are ongoing tasks. The right of the child to full participation in cultural and creative life is ensured by the various establishments offering supplementary child education. The main focus of the supplementary child education system is to afford each child a free choice with respect to educational sphere, programme profile and time spent on it; many varied activities are offered for very different interests; the individual nature of the educational process allows each child to satisfy his/her thirst for knowledge and creativity, professional self-determination and self-realization. In accordance with Government Decision No. 1847 of 27 December 2000 and with the aim of maintaining and developing the supplementary child education system, an interdepartmental programme for the development of a supplementary education system for 2001-05 has been established. Opportunities for developing the individual interests and abilities of children are provided for in the Russian Federation by 18, 000 educational establishments for child supplementary education, which come under different departments. Expansion of the network of supplementary education establishments in the education system and of the number of attendees confirm the demand for this type of education by children. From 1997 to 2000 the number of child supplementary education establishments increased by 2, 900 and in 2000 they already numbered 8, 700 (5, 700 in 1997 and 7, 800 in 1998), the number of attendees rose by 1.3 million to 10 million children (4.4 million in 1997 and 7.0 million in 1998). In 2000 in the supplementary education establishments of the education system alone, 38.8 per cent of attendees regularly pursued artistic and technical creative subjects, ecology, physical education and sport, tourism, regional studies, and scientific and research activities. In the Russian Federation there are 3, 579 centres, "palaces" and homes where children can exercise their creativity, as well as other establishments offering a variety of supplementary educational programmes attended by 4.3 million children (in 1998 there were 3, 519 establishments attended by 4.1 million children). Some of the most keenly followed and popular supplementary education activities for children continue to be artistic and aesthetic activities, which are attended by more than 54 per cent of all those going to establishments in the education system. There are 3, 500 supplementary education establishments for artistic and aesthetic activities offering a wide range of opportunities for children's artistic education and which take into account their abilities and interests, including centres for local handicrafts, creative craft shops, studios and other associations enabling early professional orientation and self-determination of the child. By its very nature this work helps establish contacts between generations, and gives families a chance to play an active role in their children's education. An important place in the child supplementary educational system is held by physical exercise and mass sports. In 2000 there were more than 3, 030 children's and youth sport schools and physical training clubs in the education system offering different sports and attended by 2.0 million children, as well as 1, 632 children's and youth sport schools run by the State Sports Committee of Russia, trade unions and other organizations, attended by 790, 200 children and adolescents. In Russia the all-Russia winter and summer games for schoolchildren have been revived, and the mass " Presidential contests" for schoolchildren are becoming established events. The number of children attending sports schools and clubs is constantly on the increase and last year alone the numbers attending establishments of this type run by the Russian Ministry of Education rose by 393, 500, while in the sport establishments run by the State Sports Committee of Russia, trade unions and other organizations the numbers of children rose by 122, 200. Supplementary education for children in ecology and biology is offered at 458 ecology and biology centres, stations for young naturalists, "palaces" and clubs which are attended by 355, 700 children. New establishments of this type have been opened in regions and towns in the Leningrad, Orenburg, Sverdlovsk and Tomsk regions. Supplementary education for children is carried out in associations and scientific societies and takes the form of field (walking tours, expeditions) and correspondence courses which aim to develop the child's interest in the study and conservation of nature, biology, geography, ecology and other earth sciences. At the same time, this is a special part of ecological education which is linked to pre-professional training for future ecologists. Also, on the whole in Russia there has been a noticeable tendency for a reduction in the number of establishments offering ecological and biological subjects, which can be seen as a negative trend since there are fewer opportunities for children to satisfy their needs regarding research and nature conservation. In 1999 compared with 1998, the number of establishments of this type dropped by 30. Activities at the regional level have practically ceased and can be regarded as development co-ordinates for this particular child supplementary education subject in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), in the Arkhangelsk, Kamchatka, Magadan, Murmansk, Novgorod, Sakhalin and Sverdlovsk regions, and in the Jewish Autonomous Region. A major branch of child supplementary education continues to be the development of tourism and regional studies for children. For tourism and regional studies, there are 609 centres, stations for young tourists and tourist bases attended by 427, 700 children. This branch is now linked with the federal special federal programme for the tourism-regional studies "Mother country" movement involving more than a million children. History and culture, feats of arms and the destiny of compatriots, genealogy and traditional handicrafts - these and many more topics are studied by the children and foster their social, personal and spiritual development, and their upbringing as Russian patriots. In 1999 compared with 1998 there was a drop in the number of establishments and children attending (in 1998 there were 634 establishments and 450, 100 children). In recent years in a number of constituent territories of the Russian Federation, centres for children's and youth tourism have been reorganized by simple amalgamation with other establishments (in the Moscow, Novgorod, Chelyabinsk, Kurgansk, Saratov and Kaliningrad regions, and in the Stavropol Territory). Similar centres have been closed down in the Kabardino-Balkarsk Republic, and in the Bryansk, Kaluga, Magadan, and Sakhalin regions. In parallel, a number of establishments that were closed down previously have been reopened, such as the child-youth tourism centres in St. Petersburg and in the Murmansk region. Each year more than 2.5 million children take part in two-day and longer walking tours and study excursions. From year to year there is an increase in the social and pedagogical role of military-patriotic clubs, centres, societies for young commandos, parachutists, border guards, pilots, cosmonauts, sailors and river-men, and there are now more than 300, 000 adolescents attending. Their choice is not random. Opting for the martial arts, a serviceman's career, the history of the army and navy, is usually deliberate. Many of these youths cannot imagine a future or professional career that does not entail joining the army, navy or frontier guards. At present, it is clear that the 500 clubs, centres and other military-patriotic societies in Russia offering military-patriotic education and self-determination for children are too few. The demand for establishments offering this type of supplementary child education, particularly for boys (including " difficult" boys), exceeds the number of military-patriotic societies currently available. In the future, they could provide a serious social-pedagogic foundation for a professional army in the Russian Federation. Following the adoption of the state programme for the patriotic education of citizens of the Russian Federation for 2001-05 the number of these societies is on the increase. An important place is held in the child supplementary education system by establishments offering technical studies: stations and centres, clubs and technical houses. At the present time, in the Russian Federation there are 700 establishments in which 55, 000 scientific-technical and sport-technical societies (sections, groups) teach 600, 000 children and adolescents. However, the changing social conditions are making it much more difficult for establishments of this type to exist. It is becoming increasingly difficult to maintain sport-technical and defence-technical activities: cars and motor sports, planes and model ship building, rocket construction, training vessels and others, despite the fact that developing technical creative skills has a great influence on the socio-economic, scientific and technical and the defence potential of society and the State. The lack of the necessary material and technical resources is leading to a reduction in the quality of supplementary education, which in turn is leading to a drop in numbers in the oldest age group (15-18). Special attention and support are needed for the different forms of distance learning, which have developed in the regions. This has been facilitated the activities of the external physics and technical school of the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation, at the Moscow Physical and Technical Institute. Over the past 33 years, the external physics and technical school has had more than 58,000 students, and the quality of education at the Institute has been demonstrated by the fact that students subsequently enter leading higher education establishments, and many have gone on to follow scientific careers. Over the years the Institute has developed a unique scientific methodological system for distance learning, which enables all capable children to receive supplementary education in physics and mathematics free of charge. Besides the creative societies, there are more than 66, 000 other establishments and societies (more than 11, 000 in the country) in Russia's supplementary education system, including various special interest clubs, societies for research activity, historical research, and many others. To enhance the role and authority of teachers engaged in supplementary child education the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation has established an all-Russia competition for supplementary education teachers entitled " I give my heart to children", which has been held since 1998 for eight nominees, demonstrating the high professional level of teachers and the importance of the competition. With a view to further development and improvement of the supplementary education system, a monthly scientific-methodological journal called "External pupil" has been founded, promoting closer links between supplementary education teachers and the dissemination of leading experience. There are more than 276, 000 qualified teachers, methodologists, psychologists and social teachers employed in the supplementary child education system, 31, 000 of whom have higher education qualifications and 53, 000 have basic qualifications. An unresolved problem remains the refurbishment of the buildings housing the child supplementary education establishments: 41.7 per cent need major repairs, of which 6.1 per cent are considered dangerous. Culture establishments are holding their own in the sphere of children's artistic and aesthetic education, training and creative development, particularly the musical, artistic and choreographic schools and schools teaching the arts. At the beginning of the 1999-2000 academic year there were 5, 800 children's schools of different types teaching the arts in the culture establishment system (in 1998 there were 5, 700). The number of schools is on the increase in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), and in the Irkutsk, Tyumensk and Chelyabinsk regions. At the same time there has been a drop in the number of schools in the Voronezh, Leningrad and Magadan regions, the Stavropol and Khabarovsk Territories, the Republic of Mari-El and so on. The number of attendees in 1999 increased by 30, 200 compared with 1998 and totalled 1, 3 million. The special position of schools teaching the arts is attributable to the fact that they help train the creative personality independent of the future career path, and they also lay the foundations for a professional education in the arts which is essential for education in the secondary vocational culture establishments. Children can still work in children's libraries and visit museums. Children's libraries not only fulfil the basic function of encouraging children to read, but are the basis for education and self-education, and they are centres of informal social gatherings and leisure activities for children. Libraries, particularly in the country, have remained the only cultural institutions that are free of charge. In 1999, free library-bibliographical services were provided by 4, 499 specialized children's libraries, almost 49, 400 local libraries and a network of school libraries (more than 63, 000). It has not been possible to resolve the issue of securing library funds. The situation regarding the provision of books has become particularly difficult in rural branch libraries. Over the past few years many of them have not received a single new title. As before, entrance fees for museums are waived for orphans and for children deprived of parental care who live in children's homes and residential schools, children from the Chernobyl area, disabled children, and children with mental and physical incapacities. Also, in accordance with Government Decision No. 1242 of 12 November 1999 concerning the procedure for free visits to museums by children aged under eighteen, the museums of the Russian Federation have established a museum day with free entrance for all children aged under eighteen. Also, free entrance for all categories of children is provided on International Museum Day (18 May) and the Day of Knowledge (1 September). In 1999 in the Russian Federation there were 1, 979 museums in operation, including 657 branches of different types. The percentage of children visiting Russian museums is 50-80 per cent for provincial museums and 40-50 per cent in the capitals. Educational centres, societies and clubs are being established on the basis of the museums and their activities include pedagogical experiments and new forms of museum work based on familiarizing children and adolescents with national and world culture. There is an ongoing museum-pedagogical programme based on the Russian Museum entitled "Long live the museum!", developed by the Centre for museum pedagogical issues. This project is being implemented in St. Petersburg, Tula, Perm, Tver, Petrozavodsk, Togliatti, Saratov, Rostov-on-Don, and other Russian cities. The programme is geared towards children aged 5 to 17 years. The State Polytechnical Museum has developed more than 30 programmes for participants aged 8 to 17 years. Also involved are the A.S. Pushkin State Museum for Fine Arts and the State Literature Museum. The A.A. Bakhrushin State Central Theatre Museum and the L.N. Tolstoy State Museum and so on - practically all the federal museums (more than 60 organizations) are working on special museum programmes: programmes for kindergardens, elementary schools, programmes for secondary and senior classes, programmes for colleges and lyces, theatre productions (museum-theatre), theatrical evenings, museum games, etc. In the Russian Federation there is a fairly wide network of theatres for young spectators, children's theatres and puppet theatres for young spectators. Their number increased in 1999 (143 in 1997, 148 in 1998 and 150 in 1999), and the number of children visiting theatres is increasing, an indicator of children's need to familiarize themselves with these art forms. In ensuring the right to education, much importance is given to support for and protection of the educational interests of children belonging to the different nationalities and ethnic groups in Russia. Education for children at general educational establishments is provided in 33 native (non-Russian) languages. The number of native (non-Russian) languages in 1999 was 80. In the 1999-2000 academic year there were 3, 551 schools providing instruction in a native (non-Russian) language (3, 555 in 1998-99, and 3, 615 in 1997-98). Schools teaching in a native (non-Russian) language are mainly located in rural areas, and there are 3, 447 such schools. Despite the reduction in the number of schools providing instruction in a native (non-Russian) language, the number of pupils at such schools has increased by 3.4 per cent compared with 1998-99 and totals 252, 600. At the same time, the number of schools teaching a native (non-Russian) language as a subject has increased by 6 per cent. In 1999-2000, there were 1, 792, 200 children studying a native (non-Russian) language, which was 5.3 per cent more compared with the previous academic year. Training staff for national schools for minorities is undertaken by seven pedagogical establishments and, in addition, there are special departments in five pedagogical institutes, one agricultural institute and one fur and pelt institute. A particular role in training staff from the main minorities is played by the A.I. Herzen State Pedagogical University of Russia (faculty for peoples of the North) and the re-established Polar Academy in St. Petersburg. A well-established staff training system for a number of indigenous minorities from the North has been in operation for almost 70 years at the faculty for peoples of the Far North at the Herzen State Pedagogical University, which was opened in 1929. This faculty remains the only one in the world providing instruction in more than 20 languages of the indigenous minorities of the North, Siberia and the Far East. Today there are 300 students and 17 research students (stemming from 26 nationalities) in the day-time department representing 19 regions in the North, Siberia and the Far East. The main focus of the faculty's scientific research activity is "Northern studies: education and culture". The Polar Academy, founded in 1998, trains specialists in the field of state and municipal management, regional studies (ecology and ethno-politics), social work and culturology. There are 425 students from 21 constituent territories of the Russian Federation studying at the Polar Academy, including students from the Yamalo-Nenets, Aginsky-Buryat, Chukchi, Nenets, Khanty-Mansi, Komi-Permyak, Evenk and Koryak autonomous areas. In 1994, the St. Petersburg State University for Technology and Design established a Higher College for the National Industrial Technologies of the Russian Minorities (since 1997 the Institute of Traditional Industries of the Russian Minorities, St. Petersburg State University for Technology and Design). It trains specialists with a higher education in the processing and dressing of skins and pelts, the sewing of fur and hide models, national costumes and shoes and the manufacture of decorative-applied artwork. With a view to improving the education system, the Russian Federation Ministry of Education, the Russian Federation State Committee for the Development of the North, and the Institute of National Education have developed a draft plan for reforming the pre-school and general education system and staff training for a number of indigenous Northern minorities. Similar work is being undertaken in the regions. In particular, the Institute for northern minority group issues of the Siberian branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Yakutsk) has developed a "Development Plan for the Indigenous Minorities of the North of the Russian Federation in the 20th Century", in which education and culture play a leading role. In the 1999-2000 academic year, 281, 200 children with special educational needs were enrolled at 1, 944 special (correctional) educational establishments of eight types (for the mentally retarded, for the blind, for those with impaired sight, for the deaf, for those with impaired hearing, for those who become deaf later on, for physically handicapped children, for children with serious speech defects, and for mentally ill children). Compared with 1998-99, the number of children in these establishments increased by 400, while the number of children in educational establishments for the mentally retarded dropped by 2, 000, and the number of children in educational establishments for children with mental illness increased by 1 800. The number of special classes for handicapped children in general educational establishments has increased. In 1999-2000, there were 216, 300 children in 18, 900 classes (in 1998-99 there were 211, 000 children in 18, 400 classes), and the number of classes for children with retarded mental development increased by 418. There were 21, 100 children in classes for the mentally retarded at general educational establishments, which was 2, 000 more than in 1998-99, and 193, 800 children in classes for children with mental illness, which was 3, 800 more children than in 1998-99. Education for disabled children has special characteristics in view of its complexity (with regard to the psychological-pedagogical and medico-social assistance provided) and the corrective-development focus of education at early stages of developmental problems arising in the children. Activities in the educational establishments for disabled children are organized individually or in groups according to programmes specially tailored for each child and taking into account his/her intellectual and physical capabilites and the doctor's recommendations. Social rehabilitation work is carried out for disabled children in order to prepare them for family life and life in society. Special attention is paid to training for the job market, with a gradual increase in its profile. Deaf children and children with severe sight impairment, for example, successfully master macram, hand and machine knitting, massage, musical instrument making, decorative wood carving and work underground. Mentally subnormal children can work in training studios and production workshops in schools and elementary vocational training establishments. For school-leavers who are unable to find work, rehabilitation workshops and subsidiary shops are often set up at the educational establishments. Interesting experience has been acquired in Mogoch, Chita region, where a "Christian commune" has been set up at a special (corrective) children's home-school for the mentally retarded, comprising nine "families" of mixed ages and sexes. The "families", comprising children and adolescents aged between 2.5 to 18 years, live in detached houses and run their own households. School-leavers go on to special (corrective) initial vocational training establishments which are part of the children's home. In principle, the role of the psycho-medico-pedagogical committee varies with respect to children with development problems - from the way in which children are selected for special (corrective) educational establishments to ensuring the right conditions for optimal individual development, the adaptation and integration of the child into society for each developmental age group. In addition, the problem of staffing the special education system remains; there is a shortage of teacher-psychologists and medical staff. In the special and sanatorium educational establishments and in the special (corrective) classes at general educational establishments for psychological-pedagogical and medico-social rehabilitation and rehabilitation of disabled children there were 95, 000 teachers, including teacher-psychologists, which is more or less the same level as in 1998. The problem of staffing the special educational establishments with specialist psychologists and correctional teachers for those with special disabilities and the subnormal persist. The equipment at the establishments needs to be improved. Special educational establishments do not have the wherewithal to procure the necessary equipment either for individual or for group use, or to order special furniture. The only replenishment source is federal funds and the special regional programmes for "Handicapped children" which, of course, cannot by far meet all the requirements of the educational establishments for children with special needs. In 1999, using funds from the special federal "Handicapped children" programme, special equipment was sent to educational establishments in 80 constituent territories of the Russian Federation for a total amount of 17, 800 million roubles: computer trainers for mentally retarded children and for children with serious speech defects, "Milta" laser therapy units to treat somatic diseases in children with development defects, "Orientir" and "Graphika" rehabilitation units for children with sight problems, sound amplifiers for group use by children with hearing problems, physiotherapy equipment, computer diagnostics to monitor the health of children with developmental disabilities, and soft furniture for activities to correct skeletal-motoric deficiencies. In all 8.4 million roubles were spent on books in Braille, talking and digital recording books, large print editions, embossed visual aids and aids for blind and deaf children. For the first time in a number of years 2.4 million roubles were spent on the publication of a federal set of textbooks for special (corrective) educational establishments for the deaf, hard of hearing and those who became deaf later on, for children with serious sight and speech problems, and also for programmes in special (corrective) educational establishments for mentally retarded children. A positive trend is the development of international collaboration at both the federal and regional levels. Among the joint programmes being implemented in the field of special education, the most significant are the joint projects lasting six years with specialists from Flanders (Belgium) on job training, integration, early childhood autism, psychological-pedagogical medico-social centres and ortho-pedagogy. Recently a project has been under preparation for special education in the Odints district of the Moscow region. In the framework of the "Tempus" international project in Pskov, the "Prisma" centre for early diagnosis and treatment of children with mental and complex development problems has been founded jointly with specialists from Germany, Holland and Italy. In May 1999, an international scientific and practical conference was held on education, upbringing and correction for the given category of children. The establishment of a regulatory and legal basis, the drafting and implementation of legal acts determining the fundamental rights of persons with disabilities and regulating the bases of the State policy applying to them underpin the special education system. However, since there is no Federal Act on the education of handicapped persons (special education), the development of the regulatory and legal basis for special education is experiencing delay and, as a consequence, problems associated with the education of children with special needs are not being properly solved. Improving material and technical resources of general education establishments remains a pressing problem. Reconstruction and building of new premises still cannot keep pace with the process of ageing and wear and tear in general education establishment premises. In the 1999-2000 academic year there were 23, 500 general education establishments (36 per cent) needing major repairs (in 1998-99 there were 24, 500, or 37 per cent), and 5.7 per cent of buildings were classed as dangerous (in 1998-99 6.5 per cent). Only 50.1 per cent of buildings are in good order (89.4 per cent in the town and 33.2 per cent in the country, 54.2 per cent are connected to the sewage system, 67.8 per cent are connected to the water supply, and 75.6 per cent of schools have central heating). There has been some reduction in the number of schools classed as dangerous and the schools requiring repairs, owing to their closure. A considerable number of children continue to be educated in 2-3 shifts on account of the poor condition of school premises. The construction of new schools continues to suffer cutbacks. In 1999, 109, 300 new places were made available (in 1997 the number was 154, 700, and in 1998 it was 123, 200). The structures, fittings and equipment of evening schools are in a critical condition. Compared with 1997, the number of schools sited in their own grounds, dropped by 9.5 per cent to 49.5 per cent; all the remaining schools are located in leased premises. Also, the number of schools with book funds and the volume of textbooks in school libraries is declining. Only 39.4 percent of all schools have a computer room, 69.4 per cent (in the country 59.5 per cent) have a gymnasium, and 76.6 per cent have a dining room or snack bar. For the majority of schools fully equipped language laboratories for foreign languages remain inaccessible. The educational and equipment status of schools at the present time does not meet modern educational standards. Special attention needs to be paid to the equipping of educational establishments with laboratory equipment, educational visual aids, technical training aids and specialized furniture. Considerable quantities of education products are stockpiling in educational-technical industrial storehouses. The general educational establishments are unable to buy them because of a lack of financial resources. In addition, above and beyond the need to equip rooms, there is a need to establish educational systems which would bring about a rapid improvement in the quality of the educational process, to establish the preconditions for sustained motivation for educational activity in participants. World practice is showing a tendency towards a reduction in the amount of demonstration equipment and an increase in laboratory equipment, and more attention is being paid to the manufacture of equipment for technological planning, for research and construction-based laboratory work, which provide the capability for independent research. 539 The existing classroom system and its equipment, for example, does not take account of special teaching needs in small rural schools, in general educational establishments for children of pre-school and elementary school age; there is a need for a fundamentally new education ideology. Rights in the field of culture and science (article 15) 540. In accordance with article 44 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation "Everyone shall have the right to participation in cultural life, to the to use of cultural institutions, and access to cultural treasures". On the basis of this provision, federal acts have been elaborated and adopted. 541. The foundation is the Russian Federation legislation on culture, adopted already in 1992. In 1999 the document was amended to include the right of free entry to museums in Russia once a month for minors. 542. Since 1996, the legal basis in the Russian Federation in the field of culture has been supplemented by a series of new acts, namely: Non-profit organisations" of 12 January 1996; The museum fund of the Russian Federation and museums in the Russian Federation" of 26 May 1996; National cultural autonomy" of 17 July 1996; The cultural treasures transferred to the USSR as a result of the Second World War and located on the territory of the Russian Federation" of 15 April 1998; National art industries" of 6 January 1999; Library matters" of 29 December 1994; State support for cinematography" of 22 August 1996; Science and the state science and technology policy" of 23 August 1996; The status of science" of 7 April 1999. 543. To stimulate support for culture and the arts by attracting extrabudgetary sources of financing, and also state support for private initiatives in the cultural sphere, a draft federal act is being elaborated concerning patrons and patronage in the field of culture and the arts in the Russian Federation. 544. In order to ensure the necessary legal, socio-economic and organizational conditions for the further development of the theatrical arts, the Government of the Russian Federation has passed Decision No. 329 of 25 March 1999 entitled State support for the theatrical arts in the Russian Federation". 545. In addition to the existing structure of executive authorities in the field of culture in nine associations of constitutent territories of the Russian Federation for economic interaction (Northern Caucasus, Greater Volga, Russian North, Far-East and Zabaikalye, Black Earth, Central Russia, Siberian Agreement, North-West, Greater Urals), co-ordination councils for culture have been established, whose mission is to encourage participation by the population in cultural life and display the cultural initiative of groups from the population, nations and regions. 546. On the 22 August 1996, a Federal Act was passed entitled  State support for cinematography in the Russian Federation". Article 6 defines the main areas of activity for the state in maintaining and developing cinematography and lays down the state support system. In particular, state support for cinematography takes the form of: partial state financing of production, printing, release and showing of national films; full state financing of film archiving; subsidised tax, customs, foreign currency and other financial regulation of cinematography activities. 547. To create the conditions necessary for the development of creative, educational, productive, technical, scientific and information basis of cinematography, the Government of the Russian Federation has, by means of a Decision of 18 December 1997, approved the plan for the development of cinematography in the Russian Federation until 2005. 548. The main areas of Government support for cinematography are: production of national films, including films for children and juveniles, national film premieres; maintenance and development of the material and equipment resources for cinematography; creation of the conditions for showing and release of national films; implementation of education and scientific and technical programmes; holding of film festivals and other cultural events; participation in international film festivals and other international cultural events. 549. All cinematographic organisations are entitled to receive state support. 550. To protect the interests of national film producers, and also for the development of international collaboration in the field of cinematography, the State Committee of the Russian Federation for Cinematography approved, by order No. 7-1-19/37 of 17 June 1999, a charter for the national film industry. This charter details what is understood by the term national film, and also affirms a regime for certification of national films as the basis for the provision of state support. 551. To establish a unified state policy for activities associated with the public showing of audovisual productions, affecting the rights and legal interests of cinematographic organisations and citizens, the Government of the Russian Federation passed Decision No. 414 of 28 May 2001, Approval of the provisions for licensing activities related to the public showing of audiovisual productions in a cinema". These provisions lay down a regime for the granting the licences required to show audiovisual productions in a cinema. 552. The Russian Federation actively fosters international links in the field of cinematography, and this is facilitated by its accession on 21 February 1991 to the European Culture Convention and on 30 March 1994 to the European Convention on Cinematographic Co-production. 553. In accordance with Decree No. 885 of the President of the Russian Federation of 6 June 1999 entitled Improving State management in the field of the mass media and mass communication", a Ministry of the Russian Federation for Press, Television and Radio Broadcasting, and Mass Communications was established. 554. To realise the potential of the mass media in cultural life, Decree No. 919 of the President of the Russian Federation of 25 August 1997 entitled Improving State television broadcasting in the Russian Federation" established the all-Russia State "Culture" channel. The channel's mission includes restoration of the cultural and instructional function of State television, partially lost through the appearance and development of commercial conditions in television and radio broadcasting. The "Culture" channel, now the State "Culture Television Channel", broadcasts mainly programmes from the "Golden Fund" of television, and prepares general information about cultural life in the country and abroad. 555. Assistance to the electronic mass media in elaborating programme policy for cultural broadcasting is provided by the State Fund for television and radio programmes, under the Ministry of the Russian Federation for Press, Television and Radio Broadcasting, and Mass Communications. 556. By Decree No. 30 of the President of the Russian Federation of 15 January 1998, the Fund was included in the State collection of particularly valuable cultural heritage objects of the peoples of the Russian Federation. 557. For the 200-year anniversary of the birth of Pushkin, the Fund issued catalogues of sound recordings and cinema-video recordings, including the names of practically all Pushkin's works recorded on electronic media. The catalogue of cinema-video recordings was prepared and issued using a grant from the President of the Russian Federation. The catalogues were distributed free to most of the all-Russia and State regional television and radio companies. 558. The mass media participate in all the national programmes covering significant events in the cultural life of the country (200-year annniversary of the birth of Pushkin, 150-year anniversary of Bunin, 100-year anniversary of Esenin, 140-year anniversary of Novgorod, 850-year anniversary of Moscow, etc.). 559. The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Press, Television and Radio Broadcasting, and Mass Communications supports the Russian State Musical Centre, where the large musical groups which are very popular in the country and known abroad (the Yu.V. Silant'ev Bolshoi concert orchestra, the Academic Bolshoi, etc.), are registered. 560. The system and structure of State television and radio broadcasting enables focused assistance for the cultural development of society through the diffusion of television and radio programmes on the arts to a large audience of television viewers and radio listeners. 561. The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Press, Television and Radio Broadcasting, and Mass Communications gives financial support for periodical publications issued in the regions inhabited by the indigenous peoples of Russia. However, as before the local press should count on help from the regional authorities. 562. Federal budget resources are used to finance State regional television and radio companies engaged in producing and diffusing programmes in the languages of the indigenous minorities. These are mainly the languages of the indigenous population of the North, Siberia and the Far East. Exceptions are the "Karachaevo-Cherkessia"(Abazin) and "Karelia" (Veps) television and radio companies. 563. The "Taimyr" (Nenets, Dolgano, Enets, Nganasan) and the "Gevan", Republic of Sakha (Yakutiya) (Evenkiski, Evensk, Yukagirsk) television and radio companies broadcast programmes in the greatest number of languages of the indigenous minorities. The "Kheglen" television and radio company of the Evenk autonomous area and the republic of Buryatia also broadcast in Evenski; the Nenets "Zapolyarye" and the "Yamal" television and radio companies broadcast in Nenets. 564. The "Komsomolsk" television and radio company in the Khabarovsk Territory broadcasts in Nanaisk, and the "Dalnevostochnaya" television and radio company in Ulchsk and Negidalsk. Some television and radio companies broadcast in two languages of the Northern minorities : the "Koryak" (Koryak, Evenk), the "Chukot" (Chukot, Eskimo) and the "Khanty-Mansi" (Khanty, Mansi) television and radio companies. As can be seen, state support is given for electronic mass media in 16 languages of the indigenous minorities of Russia. 565. The Chukchi autonomous area leads many northern territories in providing information to the aborigine population. 566. The "Krasny Sever" local paper has a monthly supplement entitled "Murgin nutenut" (Our territory) on two typed pages with an impression of 1700 copies in Chukot, Eskimo and Evensk. 567. The State "Chukot" television and radio company broadcasts each month on the radio for 5 hours and 50 minutes in Chukot and 3 hours and 30 minutes in Eskimo. It broadcasts such weekly programmes as "Today in the district", "In regions, villages and brigades", "Nunavut", "We indigenous people", and others. 568. For the past 13 years programmes in Chukot have always been broadcast on the Chukot television network. In 1999 the Chukot television broadcasting time was increased to 4 hours per month. Chukot television has the weekly information broadcasts "Pynylte"and "Ejgyskyn"; the television programmes entitled "Tradition" and "Genealogy" are broadcast in Chukot and (in repeat) in Russian. 569. Once a year Chukchi holds the "Ejnet" gutteral singing and proverbs television festival. The "Ener" television association regularly records television films in Chukot, three of which have been acquired by the State Television and Radio Fund: "Language holiday", "When men cry", and "Stone sail". 570. The main regulation for protecting rights to intellectual property is the 1993 Russian Federation Act entitled Authors' rights and associated rights", which governs relations arising in connection with the creation and use of works of science, literature and the arts, phonograms, stage performances, organisations for broadcasting on the air or by cable. 571. This Act regulates all legal relations in the sphere of authors' rights and associated rights: in the event of infringement of anyone's rights, the courts, after examining (both in civil, and in administrative and criminal proceedings) the issues surrounding the facts of the infringement, will be guided by the regulations of this Act. 572. In the Russian Federation there are a number of international standards in force in this regard. In particular, Russia is now party to two international conventions on authors' rights: the World Convention on Copyright, 1971 and the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1971. In the field of related rights Russia has acceded to only one convention, the Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms. 573. Liability for infringing the copyright legislation and related laws is provided for in the standards of civil and criminal legislation. In addition, in accordance with the Russian Federation Act entitled Competition and limitation of monopolistic activity on the commodities market" (as amended on 2 January 2000, No. 3), the sale of commodities making illegal use of the results of intellectual activity and of equivalent means of individualizing a legal person, or of individualizing a production, works or services constitutes a form of unscrupulous competition. Within the framework of this Act any possessor of copyright is entitled to turn for protection of his violated right to the Ministry of the Russian Federation for Anti-Monopoly Policy and Support of Entrepreneurs, which is entitled to pass a compulsory order on the violator. 574. In recent years considerable work has been done on the legal and regulatory aspects for ensuring the rights of the scientist with respect to the results of scientific research, the protection of intellectual property, propaganda concerning the achievements of Russian science, the exchange of scientific information, and the development of international collaboration. Normative acts have been passed such as the doctrine for the development of Russian science (Presidential Decree No. 884 of 13 June 1996), the Federal Act entitled Science and scientific and technical policy" (No. 1217 of 19 June 1998), the plan for the reform of Russian science for the period 1998-2000 (Government Decision No. 453 of 18 May 1998) and the action plan for implementing this plan (Government Order No. 573-r of 20 May 1998), and also the concept for the state policy of the Russian Federation in the sphere of international scientific and technical collaboration, approved by the Government of the Russian Federation (No. IK-P8-01514 of 20 January 2000). 575. The plan for the reform of Russian science includes provisions for state support of science institutions, strengthening of links between science and society, restructuring the network of scientific organisations, staffing and social policy in the scientific sphere, and the development of information provision. It also notes that scientific knowledge has a direct impact on the social, spiritual and political life of a country. 576. The blueprint for state policy in the sphere of international scientific and technical collaboration has been developed in the framework of a set of measures for reforming Russian science. The blueprint underlines two main priorities for Government policy: increasing the role and proportion of innovative and technological components in the overall structure of international scientific and technical collaboration in Russia and creating world-level market mechanisms and infrastructures for international collaboration. The concept covers the period 2000-2005 and is intended to serve as a long-term guidline. 577. The concept for state policy in the sphere of international scientific and technical collaboration stipulates the importance of enhancing the role and commitment of the scientist and inventor in the selection future trends and the implementation of projects for international scientific and technical collaboration. 578. To promote scientific progress, and also to regulate relations in the sphere of scientific and technical activity, a Federal Act (No.127) was passed on 23 August 1996 entitled Science and state scientific and technical policy". 579. The State Duma of the Russian Federation is currently going through the first reading of the draft Federal Act entitled Innovative activity in the Russian Federation". 580. The normative and legal foundation for preserving and increasing the cultural heritage of the indigenous minorities comprises approximately 170 documents at the international, federal and regional level. 581. To create the conditions for preserving, developing and using the cultural heritage of the indigenous minority populations of the North, various seminars and conferences are held at regular intervals. For example, the international seminar on preserving traditional cultures in the context of economic development, the international conference on writers from indigenous groups in the North, the international symposium and festival entitled "Art of the peoples of the North: traditions and modernity", and the international meeting on development of the culture of minority populations in the North. 582. All events are financed from resources allocated under the Federal programme for the development and preservation of culture and the arts in the Russian Federation (1997-1999), and also from the budgets of Russian Federation constituent territories and local budgets. 583. Resources are allocated for the issue of the thematic issue of the "Severnye prostory" periodical, which is dedicated to the outcome in Russia of the international decade of the indigenous minorities of the North. 584. The Ministry of Culture of Russia has founded the now-traditional All-Russia festival of children's artistic work in the territories of the North, "Follow the sun", the All-Russia festival of artistic work of the indigenous minority populations of the North , "The North - my love", culture days in the republics of Komi and Karelia, Arkhangel region, and the autonomous areas of Chukchi and Komi-Permyak. 585. With the support of the Ministry of Culture, the Scientific Research Institute for the Cultural and Natural Heritage, together with the Smithsonian Institute (USA), has carried out a large-scale cultural and educational project entitled "The crossroads of continents: Alaska-Siberia". 586. In the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) a comprehensive programme is being implemented for the revival of the tradional culture of the peoples of the North, called "Etnos", and in the Khabarovsk Territory there is a special programme on the preservation and revival of the culture of the peoples of Priamyre and the Far North. Similar programmes have been established in the republics of Altai, Karelia and Komi, Murmansk region, and the autonomous areas of Taimyr, Nenets and Khanty-Mansi. 587. An important feature of the revival process is the creation of national culture centres for the indigenous peoples. Thus, the republic of Karelia has a regional centre of coastal culture called "Coastal hut", a folklore ethnographic complex called "Kalevala" and an ethnocultural centre for Veps. 588 The immovable objects of Russia's cultural heritage subject to ecological risk include, above all, those under the direct protection of the Act entitled The protection of historical and cultural monuments". At the beginning of 1999, the State register for historical and cultural monuments of the Russian Federation numbered 84, 826 objects. They included 24, 871 monuments of federal (all-Russia) and 59, 955 monuments of local importance. 589. The condition of almost 80 per cent of the monuments protected by the state are characterised by experts as unsatisfactory. Approximately 70 per cent of the total number of objects need urgent measures to save them from ruin, damage and destruction as a result of different negative influences and processes, including environmental factors. About 40 per cent of all expenditure on objects of cultural heritage is for natural risk factors to the monuments. The chief amongst these are the erosion of shores (both by the sea and man-made reservoirs), transgression of the sea, landslides, land erosion and air pollution. Separate issues are the damage caused by the consequences of the increase in the level of the Caspian sea and the radioactive contamination resulting from the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. In particular, there are 159 historical and cultural monuments in the radioactively contaminated territory of Bryansk region. 590. Transport and industrial vibration have a detrimental effect on cultural and artistic monuments. This factor is affecting objects in Petrozavodsk (ensemble of wooden architecture monuments), Vologda (fortress walls of the Kremlin), Cherepovets (historical centre), Zvenigorod in the Moscow province (walls of the Savvino-Storozhevski monastery), etc. In 1999, in 53 constituent territories of the Russian Federation 113 monuments were recorded as having been lost for ever. 591. In 1999, there were 20 special federal environmental programmes being implemented in Russia. Financing of the programmes was as follows: federal budget - approximately 7 per cent; budgets of the constituent territories of the Russian Federation - approximately 35 per cent; extrabudgetary sources - approximately 58 per cent. 593. The system of legislative acts in the environmental legislation comprises: a) nature conservation legislative acts: Act of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic entitled Protection of the natural environment" (1991); Federal Act entitled Natural healing resources, medical rehabilitation localities and health spas" (1995); Federal Act entitled Ecological assessment" (1995); Federal Act entitled Natural territories under special protection" (1995); Federal Act entitled The hydrometereological service" (1998); Federal Act entitled Protection of the atmosphere (1999). b) nature resource legislative acts: Land Code of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (1991 with amendments); Act of the Russian Federation entitled Mineral resources" (1992 with amendments); Federal Act entitled The animal world" (1995); Water Code of the Russian Federation (1995); Federal Act entitled The continental shelf of the Russian Federation" (1995); Forestry Code of the Russian Federation (1997); Federal Act entitled Payment for the use of water facilities: (1998); Federal Act entitled Inland seas, territorial sea and the zone adjacent to the Russian Federation" (1998); Federal Act entitled The exclusive economic zone of the Russian Federation" (1998); Federal Act entitled Waste products resulting from the productive process and consumption" (1998). 594. In 1999 the system of natural conservation legislation was supplemented with legal acts. By way of example, several special federal acts can be cited: Sanitary-epidemiological well-being of the population", the Merchant Shipping Code of the Russian Federation (chapter on liability for pollution by oil tankers, etc.), Protection of Lake Baikal", Protection of the atmosphere". 595. At the subordinate act level, mention can be made, in particular, of the following Decisions pased by the Government of the Russian Federation: Expansion of the territory of the L.G. Kaplanov Visimski State nature reserve (No. 385, 18 May 2001); Expansion of the territory of the Khkasski State nature reserve (No. 365, 10 May 2001); Establishment of the "Erzi" State nature reserve (No. 992, 21 December 2000); Expansion of the territory of the "Khankaiski" State nature reserve ( No. 865, 17 November 2000); Expansion of the territory of the "Ubsunursk hollow" state natural biosphere reserve (No. 372, 21 April 2000); Expansion of the territory of the "Prisursk" Lazovok state nature reserve (No. 216, 10 March 2000); Expansion of the territory of the Professor V.V. Alekhin Central Chernozem state natural biosphere reserve (No. 298, 7 March 1998); Expansion of the territory of the L.G. Kaplanov Lazovok state nature reserve (No. 369, 5 April 1999); Establishment in the Amur region of the "Norsk" state nature reserve of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for nature conservation (No. 136, 2 February 1998); Establishment in the Nenets autonomous area of the "Nenets" state nature reserve of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for nature conservation (No. 1579, 18 December 1997); Establishment in the Khabarovsk Territory of the "Bolonski" state nature reserve of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for nature conservation (No. 1444, 18 November 1997); Establishment in the Astrakhan region of the "Bogdinsk-Baskunchak" state nature reserve of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for nature conservation (No. 1445, 18 November 1997); Establishment in the Jewish Autonomous Region of the "Bastak" state nature reserve of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for nature conservation (No. 96, 28 January 1997); Expansion of the territory of the Sikhote-Alin State natural biosphere reserve (No. 621, 10 June 1999); Establishment in the Altai Territory of the "Tigirek" State nature reserve of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for nature conservation (No. 1342, 4 December 1999). 596. To ensure fulfilment of Russia's obligations under the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the Montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer, the Government of the Russian Federation passed a decree on the strengthening of measures for state regulation of the production and use of ozone-depleting substances in the Russian Federation (No. 490, 5 May 1999) and on the strengthening of measures for state regulation of the importation into the Russian Federation of ozone-depleting substances and components of their production (No. 1368, 9 December 1999). 597. In 2000, 22,338.6 million roubles were invested by enterprises and organisations of all types of ownership on protection of the environment and the rational use of natural resources. 598. The main volume of natural conservation investments are distributed as follows (in millions of roubles): protection of water resources - 8250.5; protection of the atmosphere - 7946.1; protection and rational use of the earth - 3519.5; protection and rational use of mineral resources - 30.6; protection and rational use of forest resources - 175.8; protection and reproduction of fish resources - 173.1; organisation of reserves and other natural conservation areas - 3.7. 599. An important element of the economic mechanism for regulation in the area of environmental protection is ecological funds, which include the ecological funds of the constituent territories of the Russian Federation and local funds. The practice of having ecological funds has proven economic usefulness, particularly under conditions of severe funding shortages. An important role continues to be played by international collaboration in the field of environmental protection. In 1999, the implementation of joint projects with UNEP continued, including projects on comprehensive management of the environment of the Volga-Caspian region, the model national emergency response plan, support for activities to combat desertification in the CIS countries, strengthening of the national authorities in the field of chemical substance control in CIS countries, harmonization of environmental legislation and sustainable urban development. In the field of environmental protection, collaboration continues to be fostered with other international organizations and programmes such as UNIDO, UNDP, the Council of Europe and the European Union. Russia's national committee affiliated to the World Conservation Union has been created and officially recognized. ANNEX 1 Activities carried out by procurators' offices in supervising observance of the public's employment and other rights and protecting the rights and interests of minors (1998-2000) All violations Complaints filed Annulment and alteration of unlawful legal transactions after complaints upheld Statements made Claims (applications) sent to court/court of arbitration Criminal proceedings brought following procurator's ruling Labour legislation Public housing rights Legislation on pensions and on protecting the rights of the disabled and the elderly Consumer rights Rights and interests of minors Rights of minors to education In the area of employment and labour protection With regard to the protection of life, health, the family, mothers, fathers and children ANNEX 1 (continuation) Rights of minors to education; with regard to the protection of life, health, the family, mothers, fathers and children Legislation on pensions and on protecting the rights of the disabled and the elderly; With regard to the protection of life, health, the family, mothers, fathers and children, ANNEX 2 Trends in the indicators for industrial accidents and occupational diseases in the Russian Federation* Year Number of persons suffering from working incapacity for at least one working day (per 1,000 workers) Number of persons whose incapacity had fatal consequences (per 1,000 workers) Number of persons suffering from occupational diseases (per 10,000 workers) * Since 1996, statistical monitoring of industrial accidents in the Russian Federation has been done in a few sectors only. The sectors which in previous years had low accident levels have been excluded (retail trading, education, scientific and research services, culture and art, finance, administration) ANNEX 3 Occupational disease indicators for the period 1997-99 in the Russian Federation Occupational toxicosis Occupational diseases and disease ANNEX 4 Relative proportions of cases of acute and chronic occupational disease and toxicosis in the whole Russian Federation, 1997-99 Occupational disease Occupational disease and toxicosis Acute Chronic Minimum social guarantees As at 1 January, 2000 As at 1 January 2001 As at 1 August 2001 Minimum pension Disability Group 1 (with attendance allowance) Group 2 Group 3 Length of service payment Social pensions for persons disabled from childhood Group 1 Social pensions for children who have lost both parents and for children of deceased single mothers (per recipient) Social pensions for children who have lost one parent One-time payment at the birth of each child Monthly benefit for leave taken to care for a child until the latter is eighteen months old Monthly benefit for each child aged under sixteen Ceremonial grant Minimum monthly unemployment benefit Average cash income per capita in the constituent territories of the Russian Federation in November 2000 Area Average cash income per capita in Nov 2000 (roubles) Proportion of Russian Federation average (%) Average cash income per capita in May 2001 (roubles) RUSSIAN FEDERATION CENTRAL FEDERAL REGION Belgorod region Bryansk region Vladimir region Voronezh region Ivanovo region Kaluga region Kostroma region Kursk region Lipetsk region Moscow region Oryol region Ryazan region Smolensk region Tambov region Tver region Tula region Yaroslavl region Moscow city NORTH-WEST FEDERAL REGION Republic of Karelia Republic of Komi Arkhangelsk region Nenets autonomous area Vologda region Kaliningrad region Leningrad region Murmansk region Novgorod region Pskov region St. Petersburg city ANNEX 6 (continuation) SOUTH FEDERAL REGION Republic of Adygeya Republic of Dagestan Republic of Ingushetia Kabardin-Balkar republic Republic of Kalmykia Karachayevo-Cherkess republic Republic of North Ossetia-Alaniya Chechen republic Krasnodar territory Stavropol territory Astrakhan region Volgograd region o Rostov region VOLGA FEDERAL REGION Republic of Bashkortostan Republic of Mari El Republic of Mordovia Republic of Tatarstan Udmurt republic Chuvash republic Kirov region Nizhny Novgorod region Orenburg region Penza region Perm region Komi-Permyak autonomous area Samara region Saratov region Ulyanovsk region URALS FEDERAL REGION Kurgan region Sverdlovsk region yumen region Khanty-Mansi autonomous area Yamal-Nenets autonomous area Chelyabinsk region SIBERIAN FEDERAL REGION Altai republic Republic of Buryatia Republic of Tuva Republic of Khakasia Altai Territory Krasnoyarsk region Taimyr autonomous area Evenk autonomous area Irkutsk region Ust-Ordynsky autonomous area Keremovo region Novosibirsk region Omsk region Tomsk region Chita region Aginsky-Buryat autonomous area FAR-EAST FEDERAL REGION Republic of Sakha Maritime Territory Khabarovsk Territory Amur region Kamchatka region Koryak autonomous area Magadan region Sakhalin region Jewish Autonomous Region Chukchi autonomous area Proportion of the population whose income falls below the minimum subsistence level Total (millions) As percentage of overall number ANNEX 8 Minimum subsistence levels and numbers of the population living in poverty Amount of minimum subsistence level, in thousands of roubles per month Numbers of poor Millions of persons As % of overall population First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ANNEX 9 The Russian Federation's housing stock in 2000 Municipal stock 738.0millones de m2 (26.5 %) State stock 175.8millones de m2 (6.3 %) Private stock 1 813.9millones de m2 (65.3 %) Individual 1 617.2millones de m2 (58.2 %) Privatised (from the municipal and state housing stocks) 842.0millones de m2 Housing construction cooperatives and housing cooperatives 112.2millones de m2 (4 %) Mixed ownership 50.1millones de m2 (1.8 %) Public stock 1.7million de m2 (0.1 %) ANNEX 10 Housing conditions in the Russian Federation Average per individual inhabitant (square metres of shared space) Number of families waiting to receive accommodation by the end of the year (thousands) as a percentage of all families Number of families who received accommodation during the year as a percentage of the families waiting for accommodation ANNEX 11 Abortions in the Russian Federation for the period 1990-99 Total number of abortions (thousands) Per 1,000 women of childbearing age ANNEX 12 Maternal deaths in the Russian Federation for the period 1990-2000 Total deaths (absolute number) Number per 100,000 live births ANNEX 13 Infant mortality in the Russian Federation for the period 1988-2000 Number of children dead before first birthday per 1,000 births s Total Boys Girls ANNEX 14 Infant mortality ratios for 2000 (number of deaths before first birthday per 1,000 population) Total population n Urban population Rural population Russian Federation Northern administrative district North-west administrative district Central administrative district Volga-Vyatsk administrative district Central Black Sea administrative district Volga administrative district North Caucasus administrative district Urals administrative district Western Siberia administrative district Yamalo-Nenets autonomous area Easter Siberia administrative district Far-Eastern administrative district ANNEX 15 Child vaccination coverage in the Russian Federation, percentages Infection Age Tuberculosis neonates Diphtheria Age 1 Poliomyelitis Whooping cough Measles Age 2 Epidemic parotitis ANNEX 16 (number of patients diagnosed for the first time per 100,000 population) Illness Infectious and parasitic diseases Bacterial diphtheria Syphilis Gonorrhea HIV-infection Occupational diseases (toxicosis) ANNEX 17 of the Russian Federation Ministry of Education Type of establishment Number of establishments Attendees, in thousands TOTAL including Centres "Palaces" Houses Clubs Children's studios Stations Phildren's parks Schools Museums Health and education camps ANNEX 18 Educational establishments for children with health deficiencies Number of schools s Attendees, in thousand Total of establishments for children with health deficiencies including: Mentally retarded Blind Impaired sight Deaf Hard of hearing and deaf later on Physically handicapped children Children with serious speech defects Mentally children Other schools In addition, classes for children with health deficiencies organized in general educational establishments: Mentally retarded children Mentally ill children ANNEX 19 Profile of the population's cash income All cash income Remuneration for work, including hidden salaries Income from business activities Social transfers Income from property Other incom Whole year 