%%%STAFFING|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|STATISTICAL DATA|PROFESSIONAL STAFF|TOP ECHELON STAFF|GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION|GENDER STATISTICS|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Fifty-eighth session Item 18 (c) of the provisional agenda EFFECTIVE FUNCTIONING OF HUMAN RIGHTS MECHANISMS ADAPTATION AND STRENGTHENING OF THE UNITED NATIONS MACHINERY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS Composition of the staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Report of the High Commissioner 1. The Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 2001/78 of 25 April 2001, requested the High Commissioner for Human Rights to submit a comprehensive report on the staff of her Office. The present report is submitted pursuant to that request. 2. It may be recalled that the official report on the composition of the Secretariat is submitted annually by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly in accordance with a number of Assembly resolutions, the most recent of which are resolutions 49/222 A of 23 December 1994, 51/226 of 3 April 1997, 52/219 of 22 December 1997, 53/221 of 7 April 1999 and 55/258 of 14 June 2001. The latest report is contained in document A/56/512 of 29 October 2001. 3. In accordance with section IX, paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 53/221, the practice of showing the representation of staff according to major geographical groupings has been discontinued. Countries are listed in alphabetical order. 4. Table 1 below shows staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in the Professional and above category, by nationality, grade and gender, on posts subject to geographical distribution, as of 1 December 2001. GE.01-16545 (E) 280102 5. Table 2 below shows OHCHR staff in the Professional and above category, by nationality, grade and gender, falling under the following categories, as of 1 December 2001: (i) staff holding appointments of less than one year; (ii) staff charged to general temporary assistance funds; (iii) staff specifically appointed for mission service; and (iv) staff employed as technical cooperation and project personnel. 6. The following measures implemented by the High Commissioner refer to matters dealt with in Commission resolution 2001/78: (a) Strengthening of the OHCHR Advisory Panel on Personnel Issues. This internal management body has been entrusted with the responsibility of evaluating all recommendations for filling temporary posts at OHCHR headquarters and in the field, upgrading temporary staff, and lateral transfers, with a view to ensuring the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, as well as equitable geographical distribution; (b) Systematic development of job descriptions and consistent advertisement of vacancies in respect of temporary positions at OHCHR headquarters and in the field, and circulation of openings on the OHCHR web site. 7. In an effort to widen the pool of candidates interested in the subject of human rights, the High Commissioner had recommended that the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) establish a human rights occupational group. It was felt that such a measure would contribute to attracting to the area of human rights qualified junior professionals from unrepresented and underrepresented countries. In May 2001 OHRM organized a specialized competitive human rights examination. The examination was open to nationals of 17 member States participating in the 2001 national competitive recruitment examination programme. Table 1 OHCHR staff on posts subject to geographical distribution, by nationality, grade and gender (as at 1 December 2001) Region/Country of nationality Total staff USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 P-1 All F M Algeria Australia Bahamas Bolivia Cambodia Cameroon Canada China Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Denmark El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Guyana Iran (Islamic Republic of ) Table 1 (continued) Ireland Israel Italy Japan Jordan Lebanon Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mexico Mongolia Nepal Netherlands Nigeria Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Republic of Korea Russian Federation Saudi Arabia Senegal Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Yugoslavia TOTAL Table 2 OHCHR staff on posts not subject to geographical distribution, by nationality, grade and gender Country of nationality D-2/L-7 D-1/L-6 P-5/L-5 P-4/L-4 P-3/L-3 P-2/L-2 P-1/L-1 Andorra Argentina Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Central African Republic Chile Colombia Congo Costa Rica Democratic Republic of Congo Dominican Republic Table 2 (continued) Ethiopia Georgia Haiti India Iran (Islamic Republic of) Mali New Zealand Somalia South Africa Tunisia Turkey Uganda Uruguay 