%%%REFUGEE PROTECTION|REFUGEE STATUS|ASYLUM SEEKERS|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|TREATIES|CONSULTATIONS|INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION|

Ministerial Meeting of States Parties Distr. to the 1951 Convention GENERAL and/or to its 1967 Protocol relating to the status of refugees HCR/MMSP/2001/07 20 November 2001 12-13 December 2001 Original: ENGLISH INFORMATION NOTE AGENDA FOR PROTECTION: AN OVERVIEW OF ELEMENTS BEING SUGGESTEDLIKELY ELEMENTS FOR INCLUSION Introduction The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has taken the initiative, in the fiftieth anniversary year of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, to launch Global Consultations on International Protection. For 50 years the 1951 Convention, later amended by its 1967 Protocol, has proved its effectiveness and resilience, as the basic framework for the protection of millions of refugees and others of concern to UNHCR. The past five decades have, though, witnessed substantial changes in the environment in which refugee protection must be provided. New and insidious forms of persecution, the proliferation of conflicts generating mass flight, refugee-producing situations without resolution, protracted exile, a plethora of concerns besetting host countries coupled with unequal burden sharing, a marked rise in smuggling of people for profit, misuse of asylum systems and, in a mixed flow context, the blurring of the line between migration and the quest for asylum, are all part of the newer refugee dynamic. Dilemmas The pursuit ofresult is a worsened refugee protection is therefore increasingly confronted bysituation and at least four sets of quite specific sets of dilemmas for States, in particular, as well as for the individuals concerned.dilemmas confronting States, working together with UNHCR and other protection partners, including NGOs, will NGOs: need to make progress in four broad areas to address them. The preservation ofHow to preserve asylum and the offer of it on acceptable terms, which will inter alia require actionapproaches to redress the deteriorating quality of asylum,as well as the spread of deterrent measures; to help States to devise a principled approach to managing asylum;to improve the management of asylum demands, within a principled framework, and to address the unfortunately increasing trend towards criminalization of asylum-seekers and refugees. GivingHow to give new impetus to revitalizing a too oftencriticized, disregardedor abused protection framework, which will require inter alia action to preserve the foundations,1951 Convention foundationswhile ensuring flexibility to incorporate new protection approaches; and to foster the commitment of States to theall to its central tenets of the 1951 Convention, includingand their more effective implementation and development of new protection tools, approachesimplementation, while ensuring flexibility to incorporate into the international framework new protection approaches and develop new protection tools and standards to address areas not adequately covered by the Convention. How to strengthen partnership in support of the international refugee protection system, which will require inter alia more universal accession to the basic instruments, as well as expanding protection partnerships with non-traditional government partners, with the NGO community, and with the corporate sector. PromotingHow to promote timely and protection-oriented solutions to refugee problems, which will require inter alia action to expand resettlement opportunities, ensure that resettlement continues to function as a complement to other protection and asylum efforts; andapproaches to resolve protracted refugee situations while exploringsituations, realise voluntary repatriation, rehabilitate local integration possibilities. possibilities and expand resettlement opportunities. The Global Consultations on International Protection The Global Consultations on International Protection washavewere launched by UNHCR to situate the Convention back into its proper context and to promote a better understanding of its strengths, its limitations and its potential. It was conceived vened to run on three partiestracks Thethe firstjust of... which is the Ministerial Meeting of StatesParties is the first, more political track of the Global Consultations.Parties. The Ministerial Meeting is expected to adopt a declaration reaffirming support for the 1951 Convention framework. The second track of the Global Consultations has consisted of a series of expert roundtables which are have helped to clarify thedesigned to contributestitute to better understanding and harmonization and humanitarian of interpretation of certain interpretation of certain Convention provisions, in the light of current State practice. The conclusions of the Rountables will be postponedpublished by UNHCR as a contribution to more informed decision making on refugee status and more harmonized resort to convention third track of the Global Consultations, conceived asprovisions. It will also be the basis of a review by UNHCR of the gGuidance it has issued for applying the Convention's refugee definition. The third track is taking the form of a series of discussions in the Executive Committee framework,was structured around the specific and concrete sets of dilemmas described above. concrete problems of protection in mass influx situations, or those experienced in the operations of individual asylum systems or with the pursuit of solutions. These are by and large problems when which the Convention aswas not architected to deal with or which require a framework additional to that offered by the Convention. At the end of the Global Consultations process, UNHCR intends to bring together the number of suggestions it has generated, either by UNHCR or by States and other actors, in an Agenda for Protection activities to strengthen protection for the coming period. This Agenda should serve as a guide to action by UNHCR, and an inspiration for States, NGOs and other protection partners in setting certain objectives for the years ahead. The Global Consultations on International Protection are therefore UNHCR's contribution to spurring reflection and action to revitalize the 1951 Convention framework and retool States effectively to address current humanitarian challenges in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation. Starting to emerge from the Global Consultations process are broad elements that might comprise a joint Agenda for Protection for States, UNHCR and other protection partners. These are set out in Background Note NHCR/MMSP/2001/06.° The elements are provisional only. The Elements of an Agenda for Protection Activities are not submitted for adoption by the Ministerial Meeting. The note on the Elements has been submitted for information, as it summarizes the issues which have come up in the Global Consultations to date, together with suggestions made to address them. The Global Consultations process is In summary the elements to date identified are as follows: Objective 1. Strengthened implementation of the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol To strengthen implementation of the Convention and Protocol, activities are being identified directed towards: Universal accession to the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol Improved individual refugee status determination procedures More harmonized complementary forms of protection for those who might not fall within the scope of the Convention, but require international protection More resolute exclusion of those undeserving of international protection, including those guilty of terrorist acts Strengthened supervision of how the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol are being implemented More harmonized interpretation of provisions of the 1951 Convention, in light of current developments in refugee law Enhanced respect for refugees and recognition of the contribution they can make Adequate arrangements for the reception of refugees More effective and predictable responses to mass influx situations Broader-based registration of refugee populations More resolute handling of the root causes of refugee movements Objective 2. Better protection of refugees within broader migration movements To improve the protection of refugees within broader migration movements, activities are being identified to: Ensure that the needs of refugees and asylum-seekers, including access to protection, are properly identified and met within the broader context of migration management Better document and more effectively respond to the nexus between asylum and migration Strengthen international efforts to combat trafficking and smuggling Better document the nexus between asylum and migration to inform effective responses Foster dialogue and cooperation between UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) in areas of common or complementary endeavors Inform potential migrants of the prospects for legal migration and the dangers of human smuggling and trafficking Increase the likelihood of return of persons found not to be in need of international protection Foster dialogue and cooperation between UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) in areas of common or complementary endeavours Objective 3. The sharing of burdens and responsibilities more equitably and the building of capacities to protect and receive refugees To achieve a more equitable sharing of burdens and responsibilities and to build capacities to receive and protect refugees, certain activities are being identified which should: Make more predictable a degree of responsibility-sharing necessary to enable theto shouldering of burdens ofby first asylum countries Make more effective the international cooperative efforts to strengthen protection capacities in refugee-receiving countries Strengthen protection partnerships within civil society, including with NGOs Better anchor refugee issues within national and regional development agendas Promote the potential of resettlement as a tool of burden-sharing Objective 4. The handling of security-related concerns more effectively To address security related concerns more effectively, activities are being identified that might lead to: The better resourcing of States facing security problems, inter alia to enable them to separate armed elements from refugee populations Seizing the Secretary-General and the Security Council with the issue Better protection of refugee women and children Objective 5. A redoubling of the search for durable solutions The Global Consultations on International Protection will focus more directly on durable solutions for refugee problems in early 2002. At the center is likely to be discussion of the need for more resolute action to resolve protracted refugee situations and thesituations. Better need to promote better understanding of resettlement's strengths andencourage its fuller incorporation into comprehensive protection and solution-focused efforts.efforts will be examined. How and when to rehabilitate local integration as a solution to refugee problems is alsoremains a concern, as will be the need to find ways to remove obstacles to voluntary repatriation, which remains generally the preferred of the three durable solutions. The projected future course The Agenda for Protection will be finalized in 2002 on conclusion of the Global Consultations process. Thereafter its implementation will be a joint responsibility of all protection partners. 