%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|IRAQ|VERIFICATION|NUCLEAR MATERIALS|NUCLEAR SAFEGUARDS|

Letter dated 12 February 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of a letter dated 12 February 2001 from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its annex distributed as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan [Original: English] Letter dated 12 February 2001 from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the SecretaryGeneral I would be grateful if you could arrange to transmit to the President of the Security Council the attached letter (see enclosure) informing the Security Council of the recent safeguards inspection carried out by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq in accordance with the Safeguards Agreements concluded between Iraq and IAEA pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. (Signed) Mohamed ElBaradei Letter dated 12 February 2001 from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the President of the Security Council I refer to my letter of 22 December 2000 (S/2001/26 of 10 January 2001), in which I informed the Security Council of the intention of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to conduct a safeguards inspection in Iraq in accordance with the Safeguards Agreement concluded between Iraq and IAEA pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I am pleased to confirm that, between 20 and 23 January 2001, a four-person IAEA team carried out a physical inventory verification of the declared nuclear material remaining in Iraq under IAEA seal. The Agency inspectors were able to verify the presence of the nuclear material subject to safeguards, which consists of low enriched, natural and depleted uranium. For its part, Iraq provided the necessary cooperation for the inspection team to perform its activities effectively and efficiently. As was the case in 2000, this inspection had the limited objective of verifying the presence of the nuclear material in question. It was not intended nor could it serve as a substitute for the Agency's activities under the relevant Security Council resolutions. The resumption by the Agency of these activities is essential if the Agency is to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it under those resolutions and to provide the necessary assurances sought by the Security Council. I should be grateful if you would kindly arrange for the present letter to be distributed as a document of the Security Council. 