%%%CEASEFIRES|TRUCE SUPERVISION|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|TROOP WITHDRAWAL|UGANDA|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|NEGOTIATION|

Letter dated 20 February 2001 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council On instructions of my Government, I have the honour to forward a statement issued by the Government of Uganda following the Third Summit in Lusaka, Zambia, of signatories to the Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on 15 February 2001 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Daudi M. Taliwaku Ambassador Deputy Permanent Representative/ Chargé d'affaires, a.i. The Government of Uganda strongly maintains that the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement remains the most viable framework for the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in as far as it addresses: (a) The security concerns of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the neighbouring countries; (b) The internal dimension of the conflict through a national dialogue, involving all the Congolese parties with equal say. The Government of Uganda reaffirms its commitment to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in particular to the full implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It supports the Kampala Disengagement Plan and the subsequent sub-plans signed in Harare on 6 December 2000. It is Uganda's ardent hope that all of the other parties to the Agreement will continue moving in the same positive direction, as reaffirmed by all the parties at the Summit of 15 February 2001 in Lusaka. Uganda further welcomes the following recent developments: (a) The improved rapport of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), as this will contribute to the early deployment of the United Nations observers to, inter alia, monitor the disengagement and deployment exercise; (b) The expressed commitment of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the national dialogue under the facilitation of H.E. Sir Ketumile Masire; (c) The planned deployment by the United Nations of MONUC observers on 26 February 2001; (d) Reaching of consensus, at the Lusaka Summit, by all the parties to implement the area-to-area disengagement and redeployment plans. As a demonstration of Uganda's serious commitment to a successful implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and in order to encourage further progress, the Government of Uganda has decided to withdraw an additional two battalions from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and invites MONUC to witness the withdrawal. The two battalions to be withdrawn will be in addition to the five battalions that were withdrawn in August of last year. The Government of Uganda expects the other parties to reciprocate this gesture of goodwill by implementing all outstanding provisions of the Agreement so as to make possible a total withdrawal of all foreign forces, in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement. 