%%%AIRSPACE|IRAQ|AIRCRAFT|UNITED STATES|UNITED KINGDOM|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Identical letters dated 20 February 2001 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 19 February 2001 from Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq. The Minister calls attention to the ongoing wanton aggression against Iraq by United States and British aircraft in the unlawful no-flight zones and to the fact that in the period from 7 to 15 February 2001 they carried out 291 sorties, 99 of them from Saudi Arabia, 128 from Kuwait and 64 from Turkey. The Minister reaffirms the Government of Iraq's condemnation of these acts of aggression against Iraqi territory, and he states that international responsibility for them must be borne by the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the countries that provide the logistic support for this aggression, namely Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey. He urges you to perform the duties assigned to you under the Charter by halting this unwarranted aggression and ensuring that it does not recur. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed A. Al-Douri Ambassador Permanent Representative I should like to inform you that United States and British warplanes based in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey have continued to violate the airspace of the Republic of Iraq. They carried out 291 sorties in the period from 7 to 15 February 2001, 99 of them from Saudi Arabia, 128 from Kuwait and 64 from Turkey, as shown hereunder. 1. In the northern region 64 sorties were flown at speeds of 720 to 780 kilometres per hour and at altitudes of 6,000 to 12,000 metres, as follows: (a) At 1115 hours on 11 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 16 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Zakho, Dohuk, Mosul, Amadiyah, Aqrah, Tall Afar, Rawanduz and Baibo areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1450 hours, drove them off. (b) At 1135 hours on 12 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15 and F-16 aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 14 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Zakho, Dohuk, Ayn Zalah, Tall Afar, Mosul, Amadiyah, Aqrah, Sinjar and Irbil areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1410 hours, drove them off. (c) At 1130 hours on 13 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 16 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Dohuk, Amadiyah, Irbil, Mosul, Aqrah, Tall Afar and Ayn Zalah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1500 hours, drove them off. (d) At 1145 hours on 15 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 18 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Mosul, Irbil, Dohuk, Tall Afar, Ayn Zalah, Rawanduz, Baibo, Zakho and Amadiyah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1430 hours, drove them off. 2. In the southern region 227 sorties were flown at speeds of 720 to 780 kilometres per hour and at altitudes of 9,000 to 13,000 metres, as follows: (a) At 0940 hours on 7 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 19 missions, 10 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and nine from the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Nasiriyah, Qurnah, Amarah, Samawah, Diwaniyah, Qal`at Salih, Lasaf, Ashbajah, Shinafiyah and Jalibah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1055 hours, drove them off. (b) At 1025 hours on 8 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 36 missions, 10 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 26 from Kuwaiti territory, by way of the demilitarized zone, with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Umm Qasr, Artawi, Jalibah, Basrah, Qurnah, Nasiriyah, Busayyah, Salman, Samawah, Shatrah, Shinafiyah, Lasaf, Taqtaqanah, Najaf, Ukhaydir, Diwaniyah, Afak, Hayy, Qal`at Salih, Amarah and Kut areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1440 hours, drove them off. (c) At 1050 hours on 9 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 35 missions, 18 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 17 from Kuwaiti territory, by way of the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait, with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Busayyah, Salman, Rifa`i, Shatrah, Rumaythah, Samawah, Qal`at Salih, Qurnah, Shinafiyah, Nasiriyah, Jalibah, Hayy, Kut and Karbala' areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 2125 hours, drove them off. (d) At 0750 hours on 11 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F15, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 26 missions, 12 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 14 from the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Samawah, Najaf, Hayy, Afak, Ali al-Gharbi, Amarah, Diwaniyah, Umm Qasr, Basrah, Ma`aniyah and Salman areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1030 hours, drove them off. (e) At 0955 hours on 12 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F15, F-16 and F-18 aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 38 missions, 20 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 18 from the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Ashbajah, Busayyah, Lasaf, Jalibah, Salman, Nasiriyah, Basrah, Rumaythah, Qal`at Sukkar, Nukhayb, Hayy, Afak, Amarah, Hashimiyah, Taqtaqanah, Shinafiyah, Diwaniyah and Qurnah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1225 hours, drove them off. (f) At 0805 hours on 13 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F15, F-16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 27 missions, nine of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 18 from the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Umm Qasr, Faw, Artawi, Nasiriyah, Samawah, Shinafiyah, Lasaf, Ashbajah, Karbala', Najaf, Qal`at Sukkar, Qal`at Salih, Salman and Nukhayb areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 2225 hours, drove them off. (g) At 1300 hours on 15 February 2001, United States and British F-14, F15, F-16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 46 missions, 20 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 26 from the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Qurnah, Nasiriyah, Samawah, Diwaniyah, Qal`at Salih, Najaf, Hayy, Afak, Taqtaqanah, Nu`maniyah, Lasaf and Artawi areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1545 hours, drove them off. This aggression illustrates the bellicose attitude being maintained by the United States of America and the United Kingdom towards Iraq. Since 1992, it has become a fixed policy aimed at undermining the country's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and at the systematic and concerted destruction of Iraqi lives, infrastructure and civilian installations. It is a policy that has been affirmed in successive statements made by United States and British officials. The Government of Iraq categorically rejects the two so-called no-flight zones, which were imposed by unilateral decision of the United States of America and the United Kingdom and lack any legal basis. Iraq rejects all the consequences of this illegal decision and, in particular, the flimsy excuses and pretexts used by these States in an attempt to justify their military aggression against our country. The logistic support provided by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey to the Americans and the British has made these countries key partners in the aggression being committed against Iraq, so that they bear full international responsibility under international law. This includes liability for full compensation for the loss and damage, in both human and material terms, that is caused by these illegal practices. The Government of Iraq further renews its call to the countries participating in this aggression to desist forthwith from internationally prohibited acts that violate Iraq's sovereignty, place its security and integrity in grave danger and pose a direct and serious threat to international peace and security. As it condemns these acts of aggression against Iraqi targets and installations, the Government of Iraq urges you to perform your assigned duties as they relate to the maintenance of international peace and security by intervening with the governments of the countries in question with a view to inducing them to halt, end and desist from any resumption of their constant and unwarranted aggression against an independent, sovereign State. (Signed) Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq 