%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|IRAQ|KUWAIT|DEPORTATION|MILITARY PERSONNEL|SMUGGLING|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Letter dated 5 January 2001 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On instructions from my Government, I should like to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 4 January 2001 from Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq, concerning a request for the deportation from Iraq of the Kenyan officer Major Joseph Chelule, who works in the Baghdad liaison office of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM). I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed Al-Humaimidi Chargé d'affaires, a.i. I have previously drawn attention on numerous occasions to the infractions committed by United Nations staff members working in Iraq, taking advantage in the commission of these repeated infractions of the immunities and privileges granted them as staff members working under the auspices of the international Organization. In this instance I should like to inform you that another case is added to the numerous previous infractions, inasmuch as this time Major Joseph Chelule, of Kenyan nationality, who works in the Baghdad liaison office of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM), was apprehended as he was crossing the Iraqi border to Kuwait on 10 December 2000 with 50 (fifty) bottles of whiskey in his possession which he intended to smuggle into Kuwait. Major Chelule hid those bottles in the UNIKOM vehicle bearing plate No. UNIKOM/272, a Toyota bus. Following this act, he was summoned to the Iraqi liaison office in the town of Umm Qasr, the smuggled goods were unloaded from the vehicle, and he confessed his attempt to smuggle the items. This incident and the many other repeated incidents prove that United Nations staff members are exploiting their capacity as international civil servants by taking advantage of United Nations cover to engage in practices that they are fully aware are clearly and unequivocally prohibited by the provisions of Iraqi law. The action of the officer Joseph Chelule constitutes a breach of his mandate as an international civil servant and a violation of the provisions of Iraqi law. Accordingly, I request you to withdraw this staff member from Iraq and to terminate his employment with UNIKOM. (Signed) Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq 