%%%AIRSPACE|DEMILITARIZED ZONES|IRAQ|AIRCRAFT|UNITED KINGDOM|UNITED STATES|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Letter dated 3 April 2001 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 3 April 2001 from Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq. Appended to the Minister's letter is a table showing violations of Iraq's international boundaries committed by United States and British warplanes flying across the demilitarized zone monitored by the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM) in the period from 10 to 23 March 2001. The Minister urges you to instruct UNIKOM to perform its duties in full and to report these violations to the Security Council through you, given that they constitute wanton aggression against Iraq and against its people, its sovereignty and its territory, as well as against United Nations peacekeeping operations, and he asks you to alert the Security Council to its responsibility to halt the aggression and hold the aggressors accountable under international law. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed A. Al-Douri Ambassador Permanent Representative Further to our letter dated 27 March 2001 (S/2001/285, annex), I should like to inform you that United States and British warplanes committed 112 violations of Iraq's international boundaries by way of the demilitarized zone monitored by the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM) in the period from 10 to 23 March 2001. On the basis of the table appended to this letter, the relevant Iraqi authorities have determined that the violations committed were as follows: 1. Armed and hostile aerial activity by the United States and the United Kingdom, violating our international boundaries by way of the demilitarized zone, comprised 112 sorties in the following governorates: Basrah, Maysan, Wasit and Dhi Qar. 2. Our technical systems identified the aircraft violating Iraq's airspace on an almost daily basis as American F-14s, F-15s, F-16s and F-18s and British Tornadoes. 3. All of the armed and hostile sorties that violated Iraq's airspace by way of the demilitarized zone received support from an AWACS aircraft operating inside Saudi Arabian airspace and an E-2C aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. 4. A total of 10 remotely piloted aircraft violated Iraq's airspace from Kuwait by way of the demilitarized zone between 10 and 23 March 2001. All of the violations in question were committed by way of the demilitarized zone in which UNIKOM is stationed. One of UNIKOM's primary responsibilities is to monitor such hostile military operations and to report them and endeavour to halt them immediately. The violations being committed by United States and British military aircraft, in which 10 to 20 of them are used daily, are tantamount to an undeclared war. It is imperative that the United Nations should take the measures that are required in their regard under the Charter, so that the aggression may be halted and those who have committed the violations may be charged with full international responsibility for them, including liability for payment of compensation to Iraq. The statements of UNIKOM to the effect that it is unable to monitor or identify these aircraft cannot be maintained in the light of the scientific and technological capabilities that are available or that UNIKOM is in a position to obtain and utilize in order to fulfil the requirements of its mandate by establishing the identity and country of the warplanes that are violating Iraq's sovereign airspace and thence taking deterrent measures against the aggressors. I accordingly urge you once more to instruct UNIKOM to perform its duties in full and to report these violations to the Security Council through you, given that they constitute wanton aggression against Iraq and against its people, its sovereignty and its territory, as well as against United Nations peacekeeping operations, and I ask you to alert the Security Council to its responsibility to halt the aggression and hold the aggressors accountable under international law. (Signed) Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs Hostile aerial activity violating Iraq's international boundaries from Kuwait, 10-23 March 2001 No. Date From Time Type Sorties Altitude (metres) Speed (km/h) Areas overflown 10-16 March Kuwait F-14, F-15, F-16, F-18 40 (including 6 drones) Basrah, Nasiriyah, Jalibah, Shatrah, Artawi, Rifa`i 17-23 March F-15, F-18 72 (including 4 drones) Basrah, Qurnah, Jalibah, Shatrah, Artawi, Nasiriyah, Qal`at Salih, Kut, Rifa`i Total sorties: 112 