%%%AIRSPACE|IRAQ|AIRCRAFT|UNITED STATES|UNITED KINGDOM|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Identical letters dated 26 May 2001 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 25 May 2001 from Mr. Tariq Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq. The Minister calls attention to the ongoing wanton aggression against Iraq by United States and British aircraft in the unlawful no-flight zones and to the fact that in the period from 23 April to 3 May 2001 they carried out 241 sorties, 90 of them from Saudi Arabia, 107 from Kuwait and 44 from Turkey. The Minister reaffirms the Government of Iraq's condemnation of these acts of aggression against Iraqi territory, and he states that international responsibility for them must be borne by the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the countries that provide the logistic support for this aggression, namely Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey. He urges you to perform the duties assigned to you under the Charter by halting this unwarranted aggression and ensuring that it does not recur. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed A. Al-Douri Ambassador Permanent Representative I should like to inform you that United States and British warplanes based in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey have continued to violate the airspace of the Republic of Iraq. They carried out 241 sorties in the period from 23 April to 3 May 2001, 90 of them from Saudi Arabia, 107 from Kuwait and 44 from Turkey, as shown hereunder. 1. In the northern region 44 sorties were flown at speeds of 720 to 780 kilometres per hour and at altitudes of 6,000 to 12,000 metres, as follows: (a) At 1105 hours on 29 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 14 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Dohuk, Aqrah, Amadiyah and Irbil areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1305 hours, drove them off. (b) At 1100 hours on 30 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 18 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Amadiyah, Zakho, Baibo, Dohuk, Irbil, Rawanduz, Dokan, Ayn Zalah, Tall Afar and Mosul areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1430 hours, drove them off. (c) At 1200 hours on 3 May 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Turkish territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the northern region. They carried out 12 missions, were supported by an AWACS aircraft operating inside Turkish airspace and overflew the Zakho, Amadiyah, Aqrah and Mosul areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1220 hours, drove them off. 2. In the southern region 197 sorties were flown at speeds of 720 to 780 kilometres per hour and at altitudes of 9,000 to 13,000 metres, as follows: (a) At 0905 hours on 23 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 38 missions, 18 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 20 from Kuwaiti territory by way of the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Samawah, Nasiriyah, Salman, Diwaniyah, Najaf, Basrah, Qal`at Salih, Jalibah and Shinafiyah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1130 hours, drove them off. (b) At 0940 hours on 24 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 34 missions, 12 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 22 from Kuwaiti territory by way of the demilitarized zone with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Umm Qasr, Artawi, Busayyah, Jalibah, Salman, Ashbajah, Lasaf and Shinafiyah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1300 hours, drove them off. (c) At 0900 hours on 26 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 40 missions, 26 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 14 from Kuwaiti territory by way of the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Jalibah, Lasaf, Shinafiyah, Diwaniyah, Ukhaydir, Najaf, Taba`at, Walid, Mukr al-Na`am, Nasiriyah and Qal`at Sukkar areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1145 hours, drove them off. (d) At 0905 hours on 27 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, F-18, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 42 missions, 16 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 26 from the Kuwaiti territory by way of the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Nasiriyah, Samawah, Salman, Basrah, Diwaniyah, Najaf, Hashimiyah, Qurnah, Qal`at Salih, Hayy, Artawi and Jalibah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1300 hours, drove them off. (e) At 0835 hours on 28 April 2001, United States and British F-14, F-15, F16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out 34 missions, 12 of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and 22 from Kuwaiti territory by way of the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Basrah, Nasiriyah, Samawah, Najaf, Diwaniyah, Busayyah, Salman, Qal`at Sukkar, Taqtaqanah and Artawi areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1225 hours, drove them off. (f) At 1600 hours on 29 April 2001, United States and British F-15, F-16, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out five missions, two of them from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and three from Kuwaiti territory by way of the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait with the support of an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Salman, Busayyah, Nasiriyah and Jalibah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1805 hours, drove them off. (g) At 0900 hours on 3 May 2001, United States and British F-15, Tornado and EA-6B aircraft coming from Saudi and Kuwaiti territory penetrated Iraq's airspace in the southern region. They carried out four missions from Saudi territory with the support of an AWACS command and control aircraft operating inside Saudi airspace and an E-2C command and control aircraft operating inside Kuwaiti airspace. They overflew the Busayyah and Jalibah areas. Our air defences, acting in self-defence, engaged the aircraft and, at 1220 hours, drove them off. This aggression illustrates the bellicose attitude being maintained by the United States of America and the United Kingdom towards Iraq. Since 1992, it has become a fixed policy aimed at undermining the country's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and at the systematic and concerted destruction of Iraqi lives, infrastructure and civilian installations. It is a policy that has been affirmed in successive statements made by United States and British officials. The Government of Iraq categorically rejects the two so-called no-flight zones, which were imposed by unilateral decision of the United States and the United Kingdom and lack any legal basis. Iraq rejects all the consequences of this illegal decision and, in particular, the flimsy excuses and pretexts used by these States in an attempt to justify their military aggression against our country. The logistic support provided by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey to the Americans and the British has made these countries key partners in the aggression being committed against Iraq, so that they bear full international responsibility under international law. This includes liability for full compensation for the loss and damage, in both human and material terms, that is caused by these illegal practices. The Government of Iraq further renews its call to the countries participating in this aggression to desist forthwith from internationally prohibited acts that violate Iraq's sovereignty, place its security and integrity in grave danger and pose a direct and serious threat to international peace and security. As it condemns these acts of aggression against Iraqi targets and installations, the Government of Iraq urges you to perform the duties assigned to you [under the Charter] as they relate to the maintenance of international peace and security by intervening with the governments of the countries in question with a view to inducing them to halt, end and desist from any resumption of their constant and unwarranted aggression against an independent, sovereign State. (Signed) Tariq Aziz Deputy Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs 