%%%FUNDS|STAFFING|PROFESSIONAL STAFF|GENERAL SERVICE STAFF|

Meeting of States Parties Eleventh Meeting New York, 14-18 May 2001 Decisions on budgetary matters of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for 2002 1. The Meeting of States Parties approves the budget of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for 2002, amounting to US$ 7,807,500, as set out in annex I to the present document, together with the staffing table for the Registry of the Tribunal in 2002, as contained in annexes II and III. 2. With a view to providing the Tribunal with the necessary financial means to consider cases in 2002, in particular those requiring expeditious proceedings, the Meeting approves an amount of US$ 894,300 in 2002 as contingency funds of the Tribunal. The contingency funds shall only be used in the event of cases being submitted to the Tribunal. 3. The Meeting also approves an amount of US$ 50,000 to be appropriated to the Working Capital Fund of the Tribunal in 2002, in order to build up the Working Capital Fund to the recommended level of US$ 650,000. 4. Without prejudice to the application of the provisions of article 19 of annex VI to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in respect of future budgets of the Tribunal regarding the contribution to be made by the International Seabed Authority, the budget of the Tribunal for 2002, including its contingency funds in 2002, amounting to US$ 984,300, and appropriations to its Working Capital Fund in 2002, amounting to US$ 50,000, will be financed by all States and international organizations that are Parties to the Convention. 5. The contributions to be made by States Parties shall be based upon the scale of assessments for the regular budget of the United Nations for the preceding financial year, adjusted to take account of participation in the Convention. The Meeting of States Parties decided that a floor rate of 0.01 per cent and a ceiling rate of 25 per cent will be used in establishing the rate of assessment for States Parties for the budget of the Tribunal for 2002. Professional staff of the Registry of the Tribunal in 2002 Level Function Number of posts Standard costs (United States dollars) Standard costs (United States ASG Registrar D-2 Deputy Registrar P-5 Chief of Administration Head of Conference and Linguistic Services P-4 Librarian Head of Budget and Finance Translator/Reviser Legal Officer P-3 Legal Officer/Information Systems Administrator/Database Manager Translator/Revisera b P-2 Contributions Officer/Budget Associate Legal Officer/Research Administrative Officer (Support/Building Management) Total a New post. b Budgeted at 50 per cent according to United Nations standard salary costs. General Service staff of the Registry of the Tribunal in 2002 Principal level Administrative Assistant (Contributions and Accounts) Computer Systems Assistant Personal Assistant to the President Personal Assistant to the Registrar Administrative Assistant (General Administration) Administrative/Building Coordinator Other levels Personnel Assistant Finance Assistant (Accounts Payable/ Payroll) Senior Security Officer Information/Documentation Assistant Conference Service Assistant Secretary to Deputy Registrar Judiciary Support (Conference Typing Assistant) Pension/Tax/Social Security/Distribution Assistant Linguistic/Conference Secretary Security Officer/Driver Library/Documents Assistant Caretaker/Building Superintendent Receptionist 