%%%TERRORISM|TREATIES|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|PUBLICATIONS|HOSTAGES|CRIMES ABOARD AIRCRAFT|HIJACKING OF AIRCRAFT|AIR TRANSPORT|NUCLEAR MATERIALS|AIRPORTS|MARITIME SAFETY|OFFSHORE INSTALLATIONS|CONTINENTAL SHELF|DIPLOMATS' SECURITY|CONFERENCES|

97-22736 (E) 190997 United Nations A/52/304 General Assembly Distr.: General 28 August 1997 Original: English Fifty-second session * A/52/150 and Corr.1. Item 155 of the provisional agenda* Measures to eliminate international terrorism Report of the Secretary General Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction II. Measures taken at the national and international levels regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism and information on incidents caused by international terrorism A. Information received from Member States B. Information received from international organizations III. International legal instruments related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism A. Status of international conventions pertaining to international terrorism B. Recent developments related to General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 IV. Information on workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism V. Publication of a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations A/52/304 1. The present report has been prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/53 of 11 December 1995, entitled “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to follow up closely the implementation of the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism (resolution 49/60, annex) and to submit an annual report on the implementation of paragraph 10 of that Declaration, taking into account the modalities set out in his report to the Assembly at its fiftieth session (A/50/372 and Add.1) and the views expressed by States in the debate of the Sixth Committee during that session. 2. In paragraph 10 of the Declaration, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to assist in the implementation of the Declaration by taking, within existing resources, the following practical measures to enhance international cooperation: “(a) A collection of data on the status and implementation of existing multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements relating to international terrorism, including information on incidents caused by international terrorism and criminal prosecutions and sentencing, based on information received from the depositaries of those agreements and from Member States; “(b) A compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, based on information received from Member States; "(c) An analytical review of existing international legal instruments relating to international terrorism, in order to assist States in identifying aspects of this matter that have not been covered by such instruments and could be addressed to develop further a comprehensive legal framework of conventions dealing with international terrorism; “(d) A review of existing possibilities within the United Nations system for assisting States in organizing workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism.” 3. By a note dated 31 March 1997, the Secretary-General drew the attention of all States to the Declaration and requested them to submit by 30 June 1997 information on its implementation under paragraph 10 (a) and (b) thereof. By a letter of the same date, relevant specialized agencies and other organizations were also invited to submit by 30 June 1997 information or other relevant material on the implementation of the Declaration pursuant to its paragraph 10 (a) and (d). 4. As at 22 August 1997, replies had been received from Argentina, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Colombia, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Israel, Liechtenstein, Mauritius, Norway, the Republic of Korea, San Marino and Tunisia, and from the International Atomic Energy Agency, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Maritime Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division of the United Nations Office at Vienna, the Council of Europe, the Organization of American States, the Organization of African Unity and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation. 5. Sections II, III and IV of the present report contain information about measures taken at the national and international levels, which is based on materials transmitted by Governments and the international organizations mentioned in paragraph 4 above. Section V refers to the matter of publishing a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 6. With respect to paragraph 10 (c) of the Declaration, the present report does not contain an analytical review of existing international legal instruments relating to international terrorism, since such a review was included in the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the fifty-first session of the Assembly, which also contained several suggestions for possible further action (A/51/336, paras. 6-36). A. Information received from Member States Information on the participation of States in multilateral agreements relating to international terrorism is presented separately in section III. 7. Argentina reported that its national legislation in force on the subject consisted of Act No. 24,530, concerning an Agreement between the Government of the Argentine Republic and the Government of the Italian Republic on combating terrorism, drug trafficking and corruption; Act No. 24,809/97, concerning a Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Argentine Republic and the Government of the Republic of Turkey on combating the illicit smuggling of drugs and psychotropic substances, international terrorism and organized crime; and Act No. 24,059 on domestic security, regulated by Decree No. 1273/92. 8. Argentina has concluded a cooperation agreement against drug trafficking, organized crime and terrorist activities with Italy (1992), which was approved by the National Congress on 9 August 1995, with Turkey (1995), which entered into force on 29 May 1997, and with Israel (1996), which is in the process of being approved at the legislative level. 9. With regard to measures adopted at the administrative level, the Ministry of the Interior, the body with primary responsibility for domestic security issues, has signed various understandings with similar bodies in other States for the purpose of establishing mechanisms for mutual exchange of information and experience regarding the prevention and suppression of terrorist acts. 10. Furthermore, the Ministry has signed with its counterparts in Brazil and Paraguay an understanding to coordinate controls in the “triple border” zone (Puerto Iguazú-Foz do Iguaçú-Ciudad del Este). This agreement provides for a computerized exchange of information between the security bodies at that tripartite point, which is particularly sensitive because of the constant traffic of persons and goods in that section of the border. 11. Bangladesh indicated that it had taken measures to prevent transborder terrorism, including trafficking of women and children, by establishing joint working groups between Bangladesh and India. 12. Burkina Faso provided information regarding relevant articles of its Penal Code.1 13. Denmark reported that during the past year no incidents that were for certain related to international terrorism had taken place. 14. However, on 17 January 1995, at the request of the English right-wing extremist group Combat 18, a Danish right-wing extremist attempted to mail three letter bombs to three different postal addresses in London. One postal address was that of a violent left-wing extremist organization, another that of a woman married to a coloured man. The third letter bomb was addressed to a Combat 18 sympathizer as part of an internal settling of scores. The Danish police authorities had the right-wing extremist under surveillance as he first went to an apartment in Copenhagen, where the letter bombs were prepared, then to Malmø, Sweden, where the letter bombs were posted in a letter box. The Swedish police authorities were informed and subsequently disarmed the three letter bombs, which had been built into video cassettes and turned out to be operational. Technical examinations of the letter bombs showed that a possible explosion would have been limited to detonation of the initiation device. The three principals in the case have been detained for trial. 15. Denmark also indicated that, during the past year, no new legislation had been adopted in this area. 16. Estonia stated that its legal system did not contain specific rules and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism. Individual acts of terrorism were liable for prosecution and punishment in accordance with the Estonian Criminal Code of 1902, paragraphs 64 and 65. 17. Estonia was a party to the following regional multilateral treaties:2 the European Convention on Extradition and its Additional Protocol 2 (both ratified on 19 February 1997); the European Convention on Mutual Assistance on Criminal Matters and its Additional Protocol (both ratified on 19 February 1997); the European Convention on the Transfer of Proceedings in Criminal Matters (ratified on 19 February 1997); and the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons (ratified on 26 February 1997). 18. Fiji provided information on relevant legislation, in particular Part IX of the Penal Code, the Fiji Intelligence Service Decree of 1990, the Civil Aviation (Security) Act of 1994 and the Civil Aviation (Security) Regulations of 1994.3 19. Israel reported that it strongly believed that peace and terrorism could not be reconciled. The Middle East peace process had made significant progress, especially since the Madrid conference of October 1991. That process, however, had been threatened by ongoing acts of terrorism. Peace negotiations could not be advanced when a negotiating party engaged in, supported or tolerated acts of terror. The Government of Israel was convinced that effective action both against terrorism as well as for the advancement of peace could best be achieved through determined and concerted international efforts. 20. In accordance with the above principles, Israel participated in the International Summit of Peacemakers held at Sharm-El-Sheikh, Egypt, on 13 March 1996. Israel strongly supported the efforts of that summit’s co-chairmen, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and President Bill Clinton of the United States of America. The international Summit had placed special emphasis on regional cooperation in the Middle East. In that context, the Government of Israel wished to draw the Secretary-General’s attention to the final statement of the above-mentioned Summit (A/51/91-S/1996/238, annex). That document was indicative of the long-lasting commitment of the participants at the Summit to the struggle against terrorism, on the one hand, and to the advancement of the peace process, on the other. Convinced that strong regional cooperation and coordination could lead to significant progress in the struggle to eliminate terrorism, it fully supported this approach. 21. Concerning the implementation of the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, Israel submitted the following information: (a) Regarding the Middle East peace process (i) Within the framework of the peace process, Israel and the PLO had signed the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements on 13 September 1993 (A/48/486-S/26560, annex). On 9 September 1993, in connection with the Declaration of Principles, the Chairman of the PLO wrote the following to the Prime Minister of Israel: “The PLO considers that the signing of the Declaration of Principles constitutes a historic event, inaugurating a new epoch of peaceful coexistence, free from violence and all other acts which endanger peace and stability. Accordingly, the PLO renounces the use of terrorism and other acts of violence and will assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators”; (ii) Subsequent to the signing of the Declaration of Principles, Israel and the PLO signed the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and Gaza Strip in Washington, D.C., on 28 September 1995 (A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex); Article XV of that Agreement states: “Both sides shall take all measures necessary in order to prevent acts of terrorism, crime and hostilities directed against each other, against individuals falling under the other’s authority and against their property, and shall take legal measures against offenders.” Article II, annex I, of the same Agreement states: “1. The Palestinian security policy as defined by the Palestinian Authority on March 9, 1995, for the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area will also be implemented in the rest of the West Bank in areas which come under Palestinian security responsibility as follows: “A. The Palestinian police is the only Palestinian security authority. “B. The Palestinian police will act systematically against all expressions of violence and terror. “C. The Council will issue permits in order to legalize the possession and carrying of arms by civilians. Any illegal arms will be confiscated by the Palestinian police. “D. The Palestinian police will arrest and prosecute individuals who are suspected of perpetrating acts of violence and terror. “2. Both sides will, in accordance with this agreement, act to ensure the immediate, efficient and effective handling of any incident involving a threat or act of terrorism, violence or incitement, whether committed by Palestinians or Israelis. To this end, they will cooperate in the exchange of information and coordinate policies and activities. Each side shall immediately and effectively respond to the occurrence or anticipated occurrence of an act of terrorism, violence or incitement and shall take necessary measures to prevent such occurrence. “With a view to implementing the above, each side shall, in accordance with provisions of this agreement, carry out the following functions in the areas under its security responsibility: “a. Protect all residents of and all other persons present in these areas; “b. Actively prevent incitement to violence, including violence against the other side or persons under the authority of the other side. “c. Apprehend, investigate and prosecute perpetrators and all other persons directly or indirectly involved in acts of terrorism, violence and incitement; and “d. Prevent and deal with any attempt to cause damage or harm to infrastructure serving the other side, including, inter alia, roads, water, electricity, telecommunications and sewage infrastructure.” (b) As to the implementation of multilateral agreements, the conventions concerning security of air navigation and suppression of unlawful acts against civil aviation and airport security are implemented by Israel in its legal system in accordance with the Air Navigation (Offences and Jurisdiction) Law, 5731-1971 and the Air Navigation (Security in Civil Aviation) Law, 5737-1977;3 (c) Concerning other national laws and regulations as well as bilateral agreements regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism (i) Pursuant to legislation in force, the Israeli Defence Minister may declare any group of people an “unlawful association”. Such a declaration must be founded on facts showing that a certain organization is instigating or provoking violence against the Government, encouraging hatred of the Government or destruction of government property or encouraging the commission of acts of terror. A person is entitled to appeal to the High Court of Justice against such a declaration by the Minister of Defence; (ii) Israel has entered into agreements on cooperation in combating illicit trafficking and abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, terrorism and other serious crimes with Cyprus, Greece, Italy, Jordan, Turkey and Ukraine; negotiations are also being conducted with Argentina. Those agreements contain the following article: “In the fight against terrorism, the contracting parties shall cooperate in the exchange of information and experience regarding the security measures taken for the protection of the public. The cooperation in terrorism matters shall be conducted by the police authorities of the contracting parties through their relevant units.” 22. Mauritius provided information on national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of terrorism, in particular, the Civil Aviation (Hijacking and other Offences) Act 1985 (Act 33 of 1985) of 26 April 1985; the Explosives Act (RL 2/6/87) of 12 December 1959; sections 58, 59, 60, 61, 65, 66, 68, 102 and 102A of the Criminal Code (Supplementary Act); and the Firearms Act (RL 2/751) of 14 December 1940. 23. Norway indicated that its legal system did not contain specific rules and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism. Individual acts of terrorism were liable for prosecution and punishment in accordance with the Norwegian Civil Penal Code of 1902. 24. The Republic of Korea provided information on national legislation, namely, the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, the Safety of Aircraft Operation Act (Act No. 2742 of 26 December 1974) and the Atomic Energy Act (amended by Laws Nos. 3549 of 1 April 1982, 3850 of 12 May 1986, 4541 of 6 March 1993 and 4940 of 5 January 1995).3 25. San Marino reported that it had no laws or legal texts on the matter. 26. Tunisia stated that it would accede in the near future to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on the Continental Shelf. 27. Tunisia supported the adoption of a comprehensive international convention in the fight against terrorism. This view was shared by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which, in the final documents of the Conference of Heads of State or Government held at Cartagena, Colombia, in 1995, and of the Ministerial Conference held at New Delhi in 1997, had requested the urgent conclusion and effective implementation of a comprehensive international convention in the fight against terrorism. 28. Tunisia had worked at the regional level with the members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference for the adoption, in 1993, of a code of conduct concerning the fight against terrorism. It had introduced a draft code of conduct for inter-African relations, which had been adopted in Tunis in 1994 during the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and in which the African countries had condemned all terrorist acts, methods and practices and had pledged to increase their cooperation with a view to eliminating that scourge. In addition, a draft code of conduct in that area, with which Tunisia was associated, was being considered by the Council of Arab Ministers of the Interior. 29. At the bilateral level, Tunisia stated that it had concluded agreements with Greece, Kuwait and Spain on judicial cooperation and extradition in criminal matters. Those agreements included provisions that, for extradition purposes, excluded acts of terrorism from the exception made for political offences. 30. At the national level, Tunisia stated that it adopted Acts Nos. 93-112 and 93-113 of 22 November 1993 to incorporate the crime of terrorism into the national Penal Code.4 31. Tunisia further reported that, between 1980 and 1995, acts of terrorism had been committed in Tunisia by small groups on the pretext of religion, professed hatred, violence and extremism. Those acts had targeted public buildings and caused material damage and the loss of human lives. In addition, Tunisian government services had discovered weapons-trafficking operations at the national border that were linked to the activities of those groups. The perpetrators had been apprehended and tried in the Tunisian courts, in accordance with ordinary law. 32. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) noted that, while the number of incidents of unlawful interference with civil aviation fluctuated from year to year, one could discern a trend in that the number of incidents was declining in the 1990s as compared with the 1980s. The Council of ICAO, at the fourth meeting of its 150th session, on 28 February 1997, examined the subject of acts of unlawful interference that had occurred in 1996, as contained in the relevant report of the Committee on Unlawful Interference. The Council noted that 14 acts of unlawful interference that had occurred in 1996 had been officially reported or confirmed by concerned States. In addition, it was known to ICAO and other international organizations that during that reporting period seven other incidents had also occurred. In order to provide a realistic basis for the comprehensive analysis of acts of unlawful interference for 1996, all 21 acts had been taken into consideration. Following a request by the Council, the report was expanded to include recommendations arising from the analysis. The Council had decided that the information obtained from the occurrences for the year 1996 should be communicated to the security authorities of contracting States to the Convention on International Civil Aviation on a confidential basis. 33. On 12 November 1996, the Council adopted Amendment 9 to Annex 17 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation containing International Standards and Recommended Practices for Safeguarding International Civil Aviation against Acts of Unlawful Interference, which became effective on 31 March 1997 and applicable on 1 August 1997. The amendment introduced new provisions in relation to pre-employment checks and capabilities of persons engaged in implementing security controls, baggage accountability and authorization; measures to be applied to catering supplies and operators' stores and supplies, tests for programme effectiveness and need for notification to the State of known or presumed destination of aircraft under a seized condition. 34. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) reported that, within the framework of its transdisciplinary project “Towards a Culture of Peace”, it had organized a variety of activities and training programmes that had contributed to the progressive elimination of the causes of international terrorism. The Director-General had been invited to continue work on identifying the constitutional elements of the human right to peace and to prepare a draft declaration that could be approved by the General Conference on the eve of 1998, the year of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. One of the elements of the proposed declaration would be the rejection of violence in all its forms.5 35. The Organization of American States (OAS) reported that a meeting of government experts to examine ways to improve the exchange of information and other measures for cooperation among member States to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism had been held in Washington, D.C. on 5 and 6 May 1997.6 The following issues were discussed during the meeting: analysis of the means currently used to exchange information among OAS member States in order to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism; criteria and measures for improving and modernizing the methods currently used to exchange information; evaluation of cooperation with regard to police and intelligence matters; criteria used to improve cooperation regarding traffic in arms and equipment that could be used by terrorists; training of officials; cooperation for the prevention of terrorist acts and arrest of alleged perpetrators in border areas. 36. On 5 June 1997, the General Assembly of OAS adopted a resolution entitled “Hemispheric cooperation to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism”,7 the text of which read as follows: “The General Assembly, “Having seen the report of the Permanent Council on Hemispheric Cooperation to Prevent, Combat, and Eliminate Terrorism (AG/doc.3490/97/Corr.2), “Recalling resolution AG/RES.1399 (XXVI-0/96), requesting the Permanent Council to consider convening a meeting of government experts to examine ways to improve the exchange of information and other measures for cooperation among the member States to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism, “Taking account of the Declaration and the Plan of Action on Hemispheric Cooperation to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate Terrorism, adopted during the Specialized Inter-American Conference on Terrorism held at Lima in 1996, “Bearing in mind: “That through resolution CP/RES.700(1108/97) the Permanent Council convened that meeting of government experts and approved its agenda; and “That the meeting of Government experts was held in Washington, D.C., on 5 and 6 May 1997; and “Considering that among the measures recommended in the Plan of Action on Hemispheric Cooperation to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate Terrorism is the follow-up, within the framework of the Organization of American States, of progress made in implementing that Plan of Action, ‘promotion of the prompt signing, ratification of and/or accession to international agreements related to terrorism, in accordance with their respective national legislation,’ and commencement, ‘in the framework of the Organization of American States and in the light of an evaluation of existing international instruments, of a study on the need for and desirability of a new inter-American convention on terrorism’, “Resolves: “1. To reiterate the importance of the Declaration and the Plan of Action on Hemispheric Cooperation to Prevent, Combat, and Eliminate Terrorism, adopted during the Specialized Inter-American Conference on Terrorism, held at Lima in 1996; “2. To reiterate also that the rule of international law, full respect for human rights and basic freedoms, respect for the sovereignty of States, the principle of non-intervention and strict observance of the rights and duties of States enshrined in the Charter of the Organization of American States constitute the overall framework for preventing, combating and eliminating terrorism; “3. To reiterate further its strongest condemnation of all forms of terrorism, by whatever agent and in whatever form, and to repudiate the serious consequences of these acts, which, as pointed out at the Summit of the Americas, ‘constitute a systematic and deliberate violation of individual rights’; “4. To take note of the report of the Permanent Council on hemispheric cooperation to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism and, in particular, to express its satisfaction with the results of the Meeting of Government Experts to Examine Ways of Improving the Exchange of Information and Other Cooperation Measures among Member States in order to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate Terrorism, held in Washington, D.C., on 5 and 6 May 1997; “5. To instruct the Permanent Council to study the recommendations and proposals made at that Meeting of Government Experts and, in particular, the proposal on the establishment of a directory of competencies, aimed at improving cooperation among member States in order to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism; “6. To instruct the Permanent Council to continue to consider appropriate means and mechanisms for follow-up to the measures recommended in the Plan of Action on Hemispheric Cooperation to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate Terrorism, and to submit a report on progress and results achieved to the General Assembly at its next regular session; “7. To urge member States that have not yet done so to sign, ratify and/or accede to, in accordance with their domestic laws, the international conventions related to terrorism mentioned in resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 of the United Nations General Assembly; “8. To instruct the Inter-American Juridical Committee to continue its study of the topic ‘inter-American cooperation to confront terrorism’ in the light of the documents adopted at the Inter-American Specialized Conference on Terrorism held at Lima.” 37. The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) reported that, with regard to the implementation of the SAARC Regional Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, five Member States had completed the process of enactment of enabling legislation, while the remaining two member States were taking the necessary steps to complete the process. 38. It was also reported that the fourth annual meeting of liaison officers for exchange of information on the suppression of terrorism was expected to be held at Male during 1997. Moreover, the SAARC Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk established at Colombo had been doing very useful work in collecting data and dissemination of information among Member States. 39. Following the observations made by the Heads of State or Government at the Eighth SAARC Summit, a mechanism had been developed for all top officials of police departments to meet annually since 1996, exchange information and evolve ways and means to further strengthen regional cooperation in the area of suppression of terrorism. The First Conference on Cooperation in Police Matters was held at Colombo from 29 to 31 July 1996. The Conference made several recommendations, including (a) strengthening of two desks, namely, the Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk and the Drug Offences Monitoring Desk; (b) nominating a contact officer(s) for the purpose of communicating information with regard to organized crime and drug-related crimes; (c) sharing of expertise, especially with regard to the different areas of police investigation and investigation of organized crime and drug-related crimes; and (d) greater interaction in the areas of training, especially with reference to professional police management, conflict resolution and stress management, in order to share the latest techniques available in the field and experience gained by each SAARC member State. The review of progress on all the above recommendations would be undertaken at the Second Conference, which was expected to be held in Male in September 1997. 40. Currently, there are 13 global or regional treaties pertaining to the subject of international terrorism. (Each instrument listed below is represented by the letter shown on the left, which is featured in the tables that follow to reflect the status of that instrument.) A Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September 1963 (entered into force on 4 December 1969, in accordance with article 21, paragraph (1)): status as at 18 June 1997. B Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970 (entered into force on 14 October 1971): status as at 4 June 1997. C Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, concluded at Montreal on 23 September 1971 (entered into force on 26 January 1973): status as at 4 June 1997. D Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 14 December 1973 (entered into force on 20 February 1977, in accordance with article 17 (a)): status as at 30 July 1997. E International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 17 December 1979 (entered into force on 3 June 1983, in accordance with article 18 (I)): status as at 30 July 1997. F Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, signed at Vienna on 3 March 1980 (entered into force on 8 February 1987, in accordance with article 19, paragraph 1): status as at 4 July 1997. G Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 24 February 1988 (entered into force on 6 August 1989, in accordance with article VI, paragraph 1): status as at 13 May 1997. H Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, done at Rome on 10 March 1988 (entered into force on 1 March 1992): status as at 4 July 1997. I Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, done at Rome on 10 March 1988 (entered into force on 1 March 1992): status as at 4 July 1997. J Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection, done at Montreal on 1 March 1991): status as at 30 May 1997. K European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, concluded at Strasbourg on 27 January 1977 (to enter into force on 4 August 1978): status as at 3 July 1997. L Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and Related Extortion that are of International Significance, concluded at Washington, D.C., on 2 February 1971 (entered into force on 16 October 1973): status as at 18 August 1997. M SAARC Regional Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, signed at Kathmandu on 4 November 1987 (to enter into force on 22 August 1988): status as at 27 May 1997. Table 1 Total participation in international conventions pertaining to international terrorism Signature A B C D E F G H I J K L M 45a Ratification, accession or succession 57a a Includes EURATOM, which is not listed in table 2. Table 2 Status of participation in international conventions pertaining to international terrorism State Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo (Republic of the) Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Monaco Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Yemen Yugoslavia Zambia Zimbabwe 41. The General Assembly, by its resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996, decided to establish an ad hoc committee, open to all States Members of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies or of IAEA, to elaborate an international convention for the suppression of terrorist bombings and, subsequently, an international convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, to supplement related existing international instruments, and thereafter to address means of further developing a comprehensive legal framework of conventions dealing with international terrorism. The Ad Hoc Committee held its first session from 24 February to 7 March 1997 (see A/52/37). Work is expected to continue from 22 September to 3 October 1997, during the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, in the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee. 42. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) reported that, consistent with its policy of according aviation security the highest priority in its work programme, it was developing a training programme for aviation security, which comprised a series of standardized training packages designed for global application. The purpose of the initiative was to provide States with the necessary training tools that would in turn assist them in developing the components of their national aviation security training programme. 43. Furthermore, in order to meet States’ training requirements and to render assistance in the area of programme formulation, topic-focused seminars/workshops had been developed by ICAO and were being conducted in all ICAO regions under the mechanism for financial, technical and material assistance to States with regard to aviation security. In addition, ICAO had established several aviation security training facilities within existing civil aviation training centres in Dakar, Nairobi, Penang (Malaysia), Port-of-Spain and Quito. Approval was granted to establish a regional training institute in Brussels and regional/subregional facilities in Amman, Casablanca (Morocco), Kyiv and Moscow. 44. The Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division of the Secretariat reported that, pursuant to the Naples Political Declaration and Global Action Plan against Organized Transnational Crime (see A/49/748, annex, sect. I.A), which emphasized the need for global action against organized transnational crime and expressed the concern of States about the links between organized crime and terrorist crimes, it was studying the links between transnational organized crime and terrorist crimes, their effects and appropriate means for countering them. The Division indicated that among the practical measures taken to enhance international cooperation, it had assisted States and Governments in the organization of workshops and training courses on organized crime and terrorism. 45. As a follow-up to the Naples Political Declaration, the Division had organized the Ministerial Workshop on Organized Crime and Corruption, held at Dakar in July 1997. The Workshop had focused on organized crime, corruption and terrorism. On that occasion, many countries had expressed particular concern about the threat posed by terrorism to their security, stability and development. Countries had also expressed support for the proposal of the Secretary-General to concentrate the activities of the United Nations against crime, drugs and terrorism in Vienna under a new structure. 46. In the context of technical cooperation activities, the Division provided training courses and seminars in the field on themes relating to crime prevention and criminal justice. Seminars and training courses have been provided to prosecutors, law enforcement officers, investigating judges and corrections officers. The Division also provided interregional advisers free of charge to those countries which requested assistance in crime prevention and criminal justice matters. 47. The Division participated in numerous international meetings and conferences dealing with organized crime and terrorism. At the invitation of the Government of a country much affected by terrorism, the Division had participated in a conference on terrorism addressing the problem of high-technology terrorism and its implications for essential services. Issues such as the impact of terrorism on essential services, public opinion and government policies, terrorist dynamics and structures and international cooperation for more effective action to combat terrorism were dealt with. 48. The dissemination of information on new forms of terrorism has been a priority for the Division. As a consequence, terrorism has been one of the main topics of several publications; articles, expert reports and contributions produced by the Division on international terrorism and high-technology terrorism will be published by the Division and by other agencies of the United Nations system during 1997. 49. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) expressed its readiness to cooperate with the United Nations in organizing relevant workshops and training courses. 50. As at 5 August 1997, the Secretary-General had received national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism from the Governments of the following States: Armenia, Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador, Fiji, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Maldives, Mauritius, Norway, Republic of Korea, Tunisia, Turkey and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The texts thus transmitted are available for consultation in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 51. In order to prepare the compendium referred to in paragraph 10 (b) of the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, the Secretariat would like to renew its request to those States which have not yet done so to submit information on their national laws and regulations. Notes 1 Texts are available for consultation in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. See also sect. V. 2 See also sect. III. 3 Texts of the relevant articles of the instruments are available for consultation in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. See also sect. V. 4 Texts of the relevant articles of the Penal Code of Tunisia are available for consultation in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. See also sect. V. 5 See the report of the Director-General of UNESCO on educational activities under the project “Towards a Culture of Peace”, with elements for a draft provisional declaration and programme of action on a culture of peace (1 August 1997, sect. IV.B, para. 49). 6 The full text of the report of the meeting of government experts is available for consultation in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 7 AG/doc. 3586/97. 