%%%TRADE POLICY|ISLAMIC COUNTRIES|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS|TRADE AGREEMENTS|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|

TD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Distr. 5 February 2001 Original: ENGLISH RESOLUTION NO. 3/9-E(IS) ON STRENGTHENING THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM The Ninth Session of the Islamic Summit Conference, Session of Peace and Development "Al-Aqsa Intifada" held in Doha, State of Qatar, from 16 to 17 Shaban 1421H (12 - 13 November 2000), Recalling Resolution No. 6/8-E(IS) adopted by the Eighth Session of the Islamic Summit Conference; Recalling Resolution No. 3/27-E adopted by the Twenty-seventh Session of the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers; Reaffirming Member States' commitment to progressive trade liberalization and cooperation in strengthening the multilateral trading system; Recalling the related decisions of the COMCEC which has the subject on its agenda as a permanent item; Appreciating the efforts of IDB and ICDT in assisting and appraising the Member States on matters related to WTO; Recognising that the effective functioning of the multilateral trading system is pivotal in contributing towards enhancing growth and development; Taking note that the Third WTO Ministerial Conference held in Seattle from 30 November to 3 December 1999, and the fact that the WTO has thus failed to adopted such measures as to resolve problems of concern to the developing countries for implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreements; Desiring that the multilateral trading system provide equitable benefits for all members through trade liberalization and fair rules; 1. Calls on OIC Member States who have acceded to the WTO to support and facilitate negotiations for the accession of the other Member States which have not yet joined the WTO. 2. Urges the WTO and its Member States to: i. facilitate the accession of all States to membership to ensure its globalization in decision-making, emphasize the importance of clarity and transparency of membership procedure, and avoid requiring states wishing to adhere to meet unfair requirements or conditions beyond the commitments of member states with equal status on the development scale; ii. stress the need to ensure that political considerations should not impede the process of accession to WTO; iii. accord priority and urgency in addressing implementation problems; iv. ensure that the agenda for further negotiations remains focused, balanced and manageable, taking into account the limited resources and the level of development of many developing countries, in particular the LDCs; v. strengthen the development dimension in multilateral trade agreements, including operationalizing the special and differential treatment provisions such as extending the transitional period in implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreement; vi. reject the inclusion of non-trade issues, such as labour and environmental standards, into the work programme of the WTO, given its detrimental effects to the evolution of a just, free and fair trading environment as reiterated by most WTO members; vii. ensure the availability of sufficient resources for technical cooperation activities to assist developing countries implement WTO agreements and decisions; viii. review the structure of the decision making process of the WTO to ensure greater transparency of the WTO process and ensuring effective participation of members in this process; ix. ensure that technical assistance by WTO shall also contribute to capacity building in developing countries, in particular the LDCs. 3. Commends the IDB for its sincere efforts to raise awareness among OIC member states of the wide-ranging impact of the Uruguay Round agreements on economies. In this respect, it calls on the IDB to intensify its efforts to reinforce the building of the capabilities of member states including its negotiating capabilities and preparing them fully for the negotiations of the coming multilateral trade exchange system in the context of the WTO. 4. Urges UNCTAD to undertake studies on the necessary measures to bring about a balance in cost and benefits for the developing countries in adopting the new trade and economic regimes taking into account their different levels of development and ability to compete. 5. Calls on Member States to consolidate their efforts and coordinate their position in international organizations, in particular in WTO, World Bank and IMF. 6. Requests the ICDT as well as other competent organs of the OIC to further consider the matter and submit periodic reports to the COMCEC and the related OIC fora. 7. Requests the OIC General Secretariat to convey the resolution to the WTO Director General and the Director General of UNCTAD, and to report the developments arising therefrom to the Tenth Session of the Islamic Summit Conference. 