%%%AIRSPACE|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|

General Assembly Fifty-sixth session Agenda item 62 Question of Cyprus Security Council Fifty-seventh year Letter dated 17 July 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 17 July 2002 addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Aytuğ Plümer, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of the present letter and its annex would be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 62, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Ümit Pamir Ambassador Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 23 May 2002 (A/56/962-S/2002/577) addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative at the United Nations, which contains allegations of "violations of the airspace of the Republic" and "of the flight information region (FIR) of Nicosia". It will be recalled that similar allegations of so-called "airspace and FIR violations" were refuted in our previous communications addressed to you, most recently in my letter dated 16 May 2002 (A/56/954-S/2002/563). I wish to reiterate that flights within the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus take place with the full knowledge and consent of the appropriate authorities of the State, over which the Greek Cypriot administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or any right of say whatsoever. Furthermore, it should be underlined that the allegations of so-called violations of the flight information region or violations of air-traffic regulations are void and groundless under international law. Every precaution is being taken for the safety of navigation of civil air traffic during the activities of Turkish State aircraft within international airspace, within which the civil aviation authority of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is the only competent authority to provide air-traffic and aeronautical information services. As stated in my previous letters, such allegations are based on the false and illegitimate claim that the sovereignty of the Greek Cypriot administration extends over the whole island, including the territory of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This claim by the Greek Cypriot side is divorced from the existing realities in Cyprus, namely, the existence of two independent States, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction within their respective territories on the island. I would like to state that at a time when direct talks between the two sides are continuing in Cyprus, this kind of politically motivated propaganda and unfounded allegations do not enhance prospects of achieving progress through the current phase of the talks. At this sensitive phase, it is all the more crucial that the Greek Cypriot administration adopt a realistic and constructive stance which would put them on the path of reconciliation. We hope that the international community will, in the period ahead, encourage the Greek Cypriot side in this direction. I should be grateful if the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 62, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Aytuğ Plümer Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 