%%%ORGANIZED CRIME|TRANSNATIONAL CRIME|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|TREATIES|

Fifty-sixth session Agenda item 110 Crime prevention and criminal justice Letter dated 1 August 2002 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to recall the Ministerial Seminar on the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, organized by the United Nations Centre for International Crime Prevention in Vilnius on 4 and 5 June 2002. In this regard, I have the honour to submit herewith the text of Vilnius Declaration on the Ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols (see annex). I would be grateful if the text of the present letter and its annex were to be distributed as a document of the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 110, entitled, Crime prevention and criminal justice. (Signed) Andrius Namavičius Chargé d'affaires a.i. Permanent Mission of the Republic of Lithuania to the United Nations Vilnius Declaration on the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols 4-5 June 2002 We, the representatives of Central and Eastern European countries, namely Albania, Armenia, Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Ukraine, participating in the Ministerial Seminar on the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, Deeply concerned about the impact of transnational organized crime on the political, social and economic prosperity, stability and security of our countries, Noting that the global nature of transnational organized crime demands a global response, Convinced of the urgent need to work together to combat organized crime, in all its forms and manifestations, and also terrorism, Recalling United Nations General Assembly resolutions 55/25 of 15 November 2000 and 55/255 of 31 May 2001, which adopted the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the three protocols thereto, which constitute effective tools for international cooperation in combating transnational organized crime, 1. Express appreciation to the Government of Lithuania for hosting the Ministerial Seminar in Vilnius, organized by the United Nations Centre for International Crime Prevention (CICP); 2. Also express appreciation to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for its generous voluntary contribution, which made the seminar possible; 3. Commend those countries of the Central and Eastern European region that have signed and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols; 4. Recommend that those countries that have not yet signed the Protocols consider doing so as soon as possible; 5. Express our satisfaction that several countries that have signed the Convention and its Protocols are at an advanced stage in the process of ratification of these instruments; 6. Commend those countries of the region that have ratified the Convention and its Protocols, as appropriate, and urge those countries that have not done so to undertake all necessary efforts and complete all requirements, in accordance with domestic law, in order to ensure the submission to national parliaments of the necessary legislative proposals for their ratification; 7. Reaffirm the commitment to enhance multilateral cooperation and to take further initiatives in this direction, in coordination with CICP; 8. Recognize the importance of reviewing and improving national legislation against transnational organized crime, in accordance with the Convention and its Protocols, as appropriate; 9. Endeavour to review progress in the ratification and early implementation of these instruments in six months and to provide relevant information to the Centre for International Crime Prevention; 10. Call upon donor countries and relevant international and regional organizations to enhance financial and material assistance to support the efforts of countries of the region in ratifying and implementing the Convention and its Protocols, through regular voluntary contributions to the special account established under the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, in accordance with article 30 of the Convention; 11. Urge countries of the region to continue participating actively in the negotiations of the new United Nations Convention against Corruption, and invite donor countries to support such participation; 12. Invite the Chairman of the Seminar to bring the present Declaration to the attention of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twelfth session. 