%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|TERRORISM|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|TERRORISM FINANCING|TREATIES|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

General Assembly Fifty-sixth session Agenda item 166 Measures to eliminate international terrorism Security Council Fifty-seventh year Letter dated 27 March 2002 from the Permanent Representatives of Japan and the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General We have the honour to transmit herewith the text of the Joint Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan on Combating International Terrorism, adopted at the meeting held in Tokyo, on 2 February 2002 (see annex). We should be grateful if the text of this letter and its annex were distributed as an official document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 166, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Yukio Satoh Ambassador Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations (Signed) Sergey Lavrov Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations [Original: Russian] Joint Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan on Combating International Terrorism On 2 February 2002, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr. Igor Sergeevich Ivanov, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, Mr. Yoriko Kawaguchi, taking into account United Nations Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001), statement by the leaders of the G-8 countries in September 2001 and the APEC Economic Leaders' Statement on Counter-Terrorism in October 2001, discussed issues relating to the expansion of bilateral cooperation in combating international terrorism. Guided by the provisions of the Joint Statement on Cooperation between the Russian Federation and Japan in International Affairs, signed in September 2000, the sides confirmed their mutual readiness to strengthen that cooperation. The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Japan condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist acts committed in the United States of America on 11 September 2001 and express their deepest sympathy and condolences to the victims, who were the citizens of many countries, and to their families, as well as to the people and the Government of the United States of America. In this context, the sides declare: 1. International terrorism poses a threat to international peace and security. Any terrorist act, method or practice is a crime for which there is no justification, whencesoever and from whomever it emanates, and by whatever motives the perpetrators are guided. 2. The fight against international terrorism which has become one of the priority tasks of the world community, calls for joint efforts by all the world's States. The United Nations plays the main role in this. Global mechanisms, including the G-8, have an important place in the fight against international terrorism. Also of great significance is the strengthening of solidarity at all levels of the international community, in particular, through effective dialogue and coordination among the States of the Asia-Pacific region on a bilateral basis or within the framework of such organizations as the ASEAN Regional Forum, APEC and others. 3. Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and other international legal documents, the sides will exert maximum effort for the prevention and suppression of future terrorist acts in any form. The sides will continue to cooperate closely within the framework of the United Nations, the G-8 and other international forums with a view to the proper implementation of Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001). One of the most important steps in this direction would be the entry into force of all 12 counter-terrorism conventions. In this context, the sides will, in particular, promote the speedy entry into force of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, referred to in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), and support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to secure the accession to those 12 conventions of the widest possible range of States. The sides, on the basis of the tasks relating to the fight against international terrorism, favour the expeditious completion of the preparation and adoption of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and the draft international convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. 4. The sides, taking into account the fact that a serious blow has been dealt to the international terrorists and terrorist groups present in the territory of Afghanistan under the Taliban regime and the Interim Authority of Afghanistan has begun to function, support the actions of the International Security Assistance Force operating in the territory of Afghanistan on the basis of a United Nations mandate with a view to providing the necessary stability for and giving a constructive impetus to the process of nation-building in that country. In addition, the sides, on the basis of the concept of the indivisibility of the processes of reconstruction and establishing peace, for the purpose of supporting the Bonn Agreement of 5 December 2001 and taking into account the priorities for reconstruction indicated by the Interim Authority of Afghanistan in the course of the International Conference on Reconstruction Assistance to Afghanistan in Tokyo, call on the United Nations and the international community to provide assistance and, in turn, jointly confirm their own intention to render such support to the reconstruction of Afghanistan. 5. The sides confirm their common intention to take the following concrete steps, aimed at the swift and final eradication of terrorism: (1) To facilitate the prevention and suppression of the preparation and commission of terrorist acts in their respective territories; (2) To arrest and carry out the criminal prosecution of persons involved in the preparation and commission of terrorist acts, and to foster the development of bilateral cooperation for these purposes; (3) On the basis of the rules of international law and national legislation, to strive to ensure that terrorists do not use organizations, groups and associations, including charitable, public and cultural ones, to conceal their activities; (4) To take the necessary measures to counteract and prevent the financing of terrorists and terrorist organizations; (5) To take appropriate action in their respective countries to prevent materials and technologies related to weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, biological and chemical weapons) from falling into the hands of terrorists; (6) To continue active consultations under the auspices of the foreign affairs departments of the Russian Federation and Japan with a view to further strengthening bilateral and multilateral cooperation in combating the global terrorist threat; (7) To develop bilateral cooperation for the purpose of preventing acts of terrorism and responding to terrorist actions. I. Ivanov Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation Y. Kawaguchi Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan 2 February 2002 