%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|HAITI|CREDIT|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|REIMBURSEMENT|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|STAFF ASSESSMENT|REPORT PREPARATION|

Fifty-sixth session Agenda item 151 Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Santiago Wins (Uruguay) I. Introduction 1. At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2001, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-sixth session the item entitled "Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti" and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the item at its 54th, 55th and 60th meetings, on 13 and 15 May and 17 June 2002. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.5/56/SR.54, 55 and 60). 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the final performance of the United Nations Mission in Haiti (A/56/851) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/56/887). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/56/L.74 4. At the 60th meeting, on 17 June, the representative of Belgium and coordinator of the informal consultations on the item, introduce, on behalf of the Chairman, a draft resolution entitled "Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti" (A/C.5/56/L.74). 5. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/56/L.74 without a vote (see para. 6). 6. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, Recalling Security Council resolution 1048 (1996) of 29 February 1996, in which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period of four months, to 30 June 1996, as well as all previous resolutions of the Council on the Mission, Recalling also its decision 48/477 of 23 December 1993 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was decision 53/477 of 8 June 1999, Reaffirming that the costs of the Mission are expenses of the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations, Recalling its previous decisions regarding the fact that, in order to meet the expenditures caused by the Mission, a different procedure is required from that applied to meet expenditures of the regular budget of the United Nations, Taking into account the fact that the economically more developed countries are in a position to make relatively larger contributions and that the economically less developed countries have a relatively limited capacity to contribute towards such operations, Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the States permanent members of the Security Council, as indicated in General Assembly resolution 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, in the financing of such operations, Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission by certain Governments, Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to meet its outstanding liabilities, 1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Haiti as at 30 April 2002, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 1.9 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only one hundred forty-one Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions; 2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full; 3. Expresses concern about the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the reimbursement of troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments; 4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa; 5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements; 6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates; 7. Endorses the recommendations contained in paragraph 82 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;2 8. Decides to credit Member States the amount of 45,567,055 dollars, subject to the provisions of paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 56/____ on the strategic deployment stocks; 9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide an updated report in one year; 10. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping missions; 11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session the item entitled "Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti". 