%%%BALLISTIC MISSILES|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|

Fifty-seventh session Item 67 (g) of the provisional agenda* General and complete disarmament Missiles * A/57/150. ** This reply was received after the submission of the main report. Report of the Secretary-General** Addendum Contents Page Replies received from Member States Iraq [Original: Arabic] [10 September 2002] 1. The issue of missiles and their limitation is one of the fundamental pillars of the preservation of peace and security and the maintenance of strategic stability in the world, since missiles are regarded as vehicles for delivering weapons of mass destruction and their continued development is fuelling a global arms race and destabilizing international relations, with adverse consequences for international peace and security. 2. In order to contribute to the achievement of international peace and security, it is necessary to adopt a comprehensive, balanced and non-discriminatory approach to the issue of missiles, based on the principles of general disarmament and their application to all States, using the same set of objective criteria. It is also necessary to reject discriminatory mechanisms that do not apply to all States and which certain States seek to apply to only one particular group of States, thereby giving the monopoly over missile production technologies to those States that possess them for the purpose of threatening the security, sovereignty and independence of States that do not possess them, and denying States the legitimate right to use scientific and technological developments for peaceful ends and to meet their own self-defence requirements. 3. Given the importance of the missile issue, it should be examined fully and exhaustively in all its aspects, and the Secretariat of the United Nations should invite an ad hoc group of governmental experts to study the issue, taking into account the security concerns of Member States at the regional and international levels, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 29 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, which reads as follows: "The adoption of disarmament measures should take place in such an equitable and balanced manner as to ensure the right of each State to security and to ensure that no individual State or group of States may obtain advantages over others at any stage. At each stage the objective should be undiminished security at the lowest possible level of armaments and military forces." 4. States parties to agreements that limit anti-ballistic missile defence systems must respect their commitments and the provisions of such agreements and must neither evade their implementation nor violate their provisions, since failure to respect agreements vitiates related agreements and encourages similar conduct, thereby leading to a new arms race. 5. In order to deal with the missile issue, international legal mechanisms based on generally accepted criteria must be put in place with a view to the adoption of an international instrument having the force of law to ensure the security and integrity of all States and to promote international peace and security by avoiding selective criteria. 