%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|REGIONAL DISARMAMENT|AFRICA|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|CONFERENCES|FELLOWSHIPS|RESEARCH|COSTS|

Fifty-seventh session * A/57/50/Rev.1. Item 68 (f) of the preliminary list* Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa Report of the Secretary-General Summary During the reporting period, from July 2001 to June 2002, the Centre continued to implement activities in the African region in the four priority areas outlined in the programme of work that was endorsed in 1999 by the African Group of States at the United Nations: support for peace processes and peace initiatives in Africa; practical disarmament and arms control; information, research and publication; and advocacy and resource mobilization. Substantive activities in these areas have included provision of technical support to a number of Member States in the formulation and execution of weapons collection and destruction programmes and the organization of and participation in relevant seminars, conferences and workshops in the field of peace, disarmament and security, in Africa in particular. The Centre's research activities were enhanced by the conclusion of the first year of the Fellowship Programme on Peace, Security and Disarmament in Africa, which brought together for six weeks, in Lomé, three fellows from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya and South Africa. In addition, work was concluded on the one-year study on illicit routes and caches of small arms and light weapons in Africa. The Centre promoted cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, and they jointly launched the process of harmonizing civil-military relations in Africa as an element of peace, stability and security in Africa. Cooperation was also strengthened with other subregional organizations, including the Economic Community of West African States, the Southern African Development Community and the Economic Community of Central African States. Cooperation and partnership were also extended to relevant civil society organizations and research institutions. The Centre continued to experience considerable financial difficulties, as the voluntary contributions of Member States and other institutions over the past several years have not reached the level that would enable the Centre to reach full operational capacity. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Functioning of the Centre Objectives and activities of the Centre Staffing, financing and administration Conclusions and observations Annexes Status of the Trust Fund for the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa for the biennium 2000-2001 Planned activities of the Centre for which funding is sought I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 56/25 D of 29 November 2001, by which the Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to report to it at its fifty-seventh session on the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa. The report covers the period from July 2001 to June 2002. II. Functioning of the Centre 2. The Centre was established in 1986 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 40/151 G of 16 December 1985. Its headquarters are located in Lomé. The Centre functions within the framework of the Department for Disarmament Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, which ensures its supervision and acts as the focal point for coordinating the inputs of the pertinent organs, programmes and agencies of the United Nations system. 3. Since the appointment of the Director of the Centre by the Secretary-General on 1 December 1998, pursuant to the request of the General Assembly in resolution 52/220, the Centre has continued its vigorous efforts to implement a revitalization process. Notwithstanding these efforts, the Centre's capacity to deliver on its programme of work and to respond to the numerous and ever-increasing requests by Member States of the African region remains limited due to the acute insufficiency of human, material and financial resources. 4. The programme of work of the Centre, endorsed by the African Group of States at the United Nations on 1 February 1999, continued to be implemented in the following main areas: support for peace processes and peace initiatives in Africa; practical disarmament and arms control; information, research and publications; and advocacy and resource mobilization. The Director of the Centre kept the African Group apprised of the progress achieved and obstacles encountered in the execution of this programme. III. Objectives and activities of the Centre 5. The Centre continued to carry out its mandate, as contained in General Assembly resolution 40/151 G, according to which it will provide, upon request, substantive support for initiatives and other efforts of Member States in the African region aimed at the realization of measures of peace, arms limitation and disarmament in the region, in cooperation with the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and will coordinate the implementation of regional activities in Africa within the framework of the United Nations Disarmament Information Programme. 6. During the period under review, the Centre, despite financial constraints, continued to contribute to efforts to promote wider understanding and cooperation among African States in the areas of peace, disarmament and security. It expanded its contacts and cooperation with other relevant United Nations bodies, governmental and non-governmental organizations, foundations, and research and academic institutions. 7. Within the framework of the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa, the Centre held a workshop on 30 and 31 July 2001 to develop a curriculum for the control of small arms. The workshop was funded by the Government of Switzerland and organized in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Government of Kenya and the Nairobi Secretariat -- the structure set up by the 10 States parties to the Nairobi Declaration in the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa. The curriculum adopted aims to train trainers from security, customs, police, military and paramilitary forces in the control of small arms and light weapons, as several Member States of the subregion have requested the Centre to assist them in improving the management, control, collection and destruction of surplus, unwanted, unauthorized, forfeited, surrendered or seized small arms and light weapons. 8. After serving from March 1999 to April 2001 as the operational framework for the implementation of the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED) -- the secretariat structure set up by UNDP to coordinate the implementation of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa -- the Centre participated, at the request of UNDP, in the discussions to determine a continued role for the Centre in the substantive and political implementation of PCASED. In this regard, the Centre developed a programme of work that would enable it to share its experience in supporting the implementation of weapons collection and destruction programmes in West Africa, and in sustaining dialogue with arms manufacturers and suppliers in the successful implementation of the Moratorium. 9. The Director of the Centre participated in a conference organized by the Bonn International Centre for Conversion on the sidelines of the 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and presented a paper on the theme "Transforming the ECOWAS Moratorium on light weapons into a peace operation for human security". 10. At the request of the Government of Guinea-Bissau, and in collaboration with the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, the Centre conducted a fact-finding mission to Guinea-Bissau from 9 to 16 July 2001. The objective of the mission was to assess the proliferation of small arms in that country and to conceive a project document on the voluntary surrender of weapons illegally held by the civilian population. Funding was provided by the Government of the Netherlands through its Embassy in Senegal. If successful, the project will be expanded beyond the pilot zone to become a nationwide project aimed at collecting and destroying illegal weapons and facilitating the disarming of some 40,000 ex-combatants. 11. At the request of the Government of Kenya, from 28 July to 4 August 2001 the Centre, together with other United Nations agencies, provided substantive and technical support in the conduct of a fact-finding mission led by the United Nations Department for Disarmament Affairs. The objective of the mission was to determine the magnitude and scope of the small arms proliferation problem in Kenya. The mission collected information and data that could advance the understanding of the small arms problem in Kenya and resulted in suggestions on concrete measures to curb the proliferation of small arms and a proposal for the development of a pilot project on voluntary weapons surrender by the civilian population. The mission was carried out as the first in a series that could subsequently be undertaken in other interested countries of the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa. In the Nairobi Declaration, States had called on the United Nations to conduct an in-depth study of the plague of small arms in their subregions. 12. At the request of the Government of Togo, the Centre provided substantive and technical support in the elaboration of a national strategy for Togo that would ensure the effective and efficient implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted at the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The strategy was presented by the Togolese Government to members of the diplomatic corps, representatives of international organizations, researchers and journalists at a conference held at the Centre in Lomé on 28 August 2001. 13. The Centre also provided support to the Government of Togo in the establishment and launching in August 2001 of its National Commission for the Fight Against the Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons. The Commission was established pursuant to a call for ECOWAS member States set up such structures within the framework of the Plan of Action adopted in March 1999 in Bamako for the implementation of the ECOWAS Moratorium. 14. The Centre provided substantive support to and participated in the meeting of experts on preventive action and conflict avoidance in West Africa, organized by the African Centre for Strategic Studies (Washington, D.C.). The workshop was held in Accra from 20 to 24 August 2001, and its participants included senior civilian officials, military officers, parliamentarians and representatives of civil society from the 15 ECOWAS countries. 15. In early July 2001, together with the UNDP country office in Zambia, the Centre began discussions on the Dag Hammarskjöld Messenger of Peace initiative with a view to consecrating a site eight miles from Ndola, Zambia, where Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld died in a plane crash and turning it into an annual peace pilgrimage site. This project was undertaken within the framework of a programme to advance a culture of peace through the training of Messengers of Peace in Zambia and in other countries in the region, and was financed by the Government of Sweden and other donors. 16. During the period under review, the Centre joined other United Nations agencies and departments on a multidisciplinary mission to the Gambia, from 10 to 14 September 2001. The objective of the mission was to develop an implementation strategy and deadlines for an integrated preventive strategy that should help the Gambia to avoid violent conflict, while consolidating peace, security and stability. 17. At the request of the UNDP country office in Chad and the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the Centre formulated the terms of reference and strategies for assessing ways of improving the control and use of small arms and light weapons in Chad. 18. The Centre organized a high-level seminar on the theme "Promotion of civil-military relations: a factor for peace and security in Africa" in Lomé from 29 to 31 October 2001. With the financial support of France, Gabon, Germany, the United States of America, the African Centre for Strategic Studies and the National Democratic Institute of International Affairs, the seminar considered and adopted elements and a general framework for drafting a code of conduct for armed and security forces in Africa. 19. On 31 October 2001, the Centre provided technical and substantive support to the Government of Togo in the organization of the ceremonial destruction in the capital, Lomé, of several hundred surplus and unwanted weapons collected as part of the country's efforts to improve human security and stem gun-running, violent crime and small arms proliferation. The Flame of Peace ceremony also marked the official launching of the activities of Togo's newly established National Commission for the Fight Against the Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons. 20. The Centre participated in a follow-up meeting to the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, organized by the Government of Japan and held in Tokyo from 23 to 25 January 2002. At that meeting the Centre participated in the work of a committee that identified a strategy for the effective implementation, within the African region, of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. 21. At the request of the Government of Togo, in January 2002 the Centre started preparing a training curriculum for senior officials of the Togolese armed forces to promote disarmament, force reduction, improved weapons stockpile management, and small arms and light weapons control, collection and destruction. The training envisaged in Togo would be attended by 25 senior military officials based in Lomé and 21 student officers from military training facilities across the country. 22. The Centre provided substantive and technical support for the organization of an international conference on the armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on the theme "Building sustainable peace in the Great Lakes region". The Centre contributed a resource paper to the conference on the theme "Root causes, actors, impact and perspectives of conflicts: some proposals for peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region". The conference was held in Sun City, South Africa, from 21 to 23 February 2002 and was jointly organized by the African Institute of South Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo Women's Action for Peace. 23. The Centre participated in an international conference held in Pretoria from 18 to 21 March 2002 on the theme "Implementing the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects: partnerships and opportunities". The Centre presented a resource paper at the conference on the theme "Reducing availability and demand: arms collection and destruction". 24. At the request of the Government of the Niger, the Centre undertook a mission to that country from 3 to 16 March 2002, with the objective of supporting the United Nations Volunteers in advancing the effective implementation of the "Consolidation of peace" project in the Diffa region of the country. In accordance with the April 1995 peace accord, the Government of the Niger had planned the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the Tuareg ex-combatants. 25. From 24 March to 5 April 2002, the Director of the Centre led a joint mission of the United Nations and the Hague Appeal for Peace to the Niger to gather information and data so as to facilitate work on the formulation of a project entitled "Developing peace and disarmament -- education initiatives to disarm children and youth". Conceived as the "software" of disarmament through the minds of the people, this project is intended to accompany a Department for Disarmament Affairs/UNDP pilot project, in the N'Guigmi region of the Niger, in which arms are to be collected in exchange for small development projects. The former project is to be funded by the Turner Foundation and other donors and would be implemented in Lima, Peru; Gramsch, Albania; and Cambodia. 26. The Centre participated in a conference in Accra from 26 to 27 March 2002, aimed at finding ways and means of promoting African participation in the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the United Nations standardized instrument for reporting of military expenditures. The conference was attended by Government representatives and experts from the 15 ECOWAS member States. Participants in the conference commended the initiative and urged the Centre to play a greater role in soliciting the participation of Governments in the African region and to be more actively involved in the organization of future meetings on the subject in other subregions of the continent. 27. In cooperation with the Provisional Technical Secretariat of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the Centre held consultations, in Lomé from 25 to 29 March 2002, on developing possible areas of cooperation and collaboration between the two institutions. The Provisional Technical Secretariat suggested that the Centre should assume a leading role in sensitizing African Governments, beginning with those in the West African subregion, with a view to their signing and ratifying the Treaty. 28. As a follow-up to the October 2001 workshop on civil-military relations, the Centre convened an international workshop in Lomé from 27 to 29 May 2002. The workshop brought together government experts from some 20 African countries, as well as arms control and peace activists from academia, research institutes and civil society organizations, to validate a draft code of conduct for armed and security forces in Africa. It was organized in collaboration with the Government of Togo, with funding from the OAU/African Union, the African Centre for Strategic Studies and the Embassies of France and the United States of America in Togo. 29. From 15 to 30 November 2001, the Centre conducted in Nairobi a training course for trainers on the techniques of control and reduction of small arms and light weapons, in collaboration with UNDP and with funding from the Government of Switzerland. The course was attended by more than 30 senior officials from the police, customs, security, military, paramilitary and other law enforcement agencies of 8 of the 10 countries of the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa. The training course was the first in a series that the Centre is providing to States parties to the March 2000 Nairobi Declaration on illicit trafficking in small arms. 30. The Centre contributed to and participated in, from 29 April to 2 May 2002 in Dakar, a consultation of civil society organizations from West Africa seeking to develop a training manual on small arms. Coorganized by Saferworld, International Alert and Oxfam Great Britain, the consultation was a direct follow-up to the Africa-wide civil society consultation organized by the Centre in December 2000 in Lomé. As a follow-up, the Centre, with the support of Oxfam Great Britain, would finalize training modules for a pilot training course in this domain for members of the West Africa Action Network on Small Arms, which was created in Accra on 21 May 2002. 31. The Centre made presentations at the PCASED/ Department of Economic and Social Affairs subregional workshop in Conakry on 3 and 4 June 2002, on ways of strengthening the capacity of national commissions for the fight against the proliferation of small arms to assist their respective Governments in ensuring the effective implementation of the West African Moratorium. 32. At the request of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Centre undertook a fact-finding mission to the country, from 3 to 9 June 2002, to explore the possibility of conducting an extensive mine-awareness campaign. The mission was financed by the Government of Belgium. A. Seminars, conferences and consciousness-raising 33. In celebration of Disarmament Week (24-30 October 2001), the first day of which coincided with the fifteenth anniversary of the inauguration of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, the Centre organized a series of activities. These included a mega music concert, broadcast live on local television, on the theme "Combating small arms and light weapons proliferation in Africa". Nineteen Togolese songwriters, singers and artistic groups participated in support of peace, security and disarmament in Africa. Following the concert, the Centre launched work on the production of a compact disk and video clip on the theme "Peace, security and disarmament in Africa", featuring the song "Disarm Africa", written by the Centre and by Togolese artist Dama Damawuzan. 34. As part of its advocacy and outreach programme, the Centre continued to hold its monthly briefing on disarmament, peace and security issues in Africa, within the framework of the Disarmament Forum, which it inaugurated in January 2001 and has held ever since on the last Tuesday of every month. The Forum is open to the diplomatic corps, civil society organizations active in disarmament issues, research institutions and universities, and provides an opportunity for various actors to suggest practical solutions to the numerous security-related problems with which the continent is confronted. 35. Among the 10 topics discussed at the Forum during the period under review were the following: "Identity conflicts in Africa: from specific cases to the generalization of the phenomenon" (July 2001); "The Togolese strategy for implementing the programme of action adopted by the 2001 United Nations Conference on Small Arms" (August 2001); "The role of the military in democratic transitions in Africa" (September 2001); "African conflicts: in search of a better understanding of the failure of traditional solutions" (October 2001); "The ability of African States to ensure security and defence: the emergence of non-State actors" (December 2001); "The intangibility of borders inherited from colonization: an obstacle to peace? The case of the Sudan and Somalia" (January 2002); "Terrorism and the proliferation of small arms" (February 2002); and "Regional integration: a means for promoting peace in Africa" (March 2002). B. Joint projects, cooperation and partnerships 36. The Centre continued to build partnerships with other organizations working on similar issues in Africa, including the OAU/African Union, the African Centre for Strategic Studies (Washington, D.C.), the National Democratic Institute (United States of America), the Institute of Strategic Studies (South Africa) and the African Leadership Forum (Nigeria). Potential areas of collaboration explored in the period under review or being considered by the Centre include exchange of staff, joint publications and joint fund mobilization, particularly for joint research programmes. 37. The Centre consolidated three partnership agreements during the reporting period: with the Government of Belgium on the Associate Expert Programme, with the Youth International Internship Programme of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade of the Canadian Government, and with the Government of Germany on a fellowship programme. All costs related to the three programmes were covered by the partners. 38. The Centre continued to provide substantive and technical support for the work of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa. In particular, the Centre provided logistic support for the Standing Advisory Committee's meeting, from 2 to 5 July 2001 in Libreville, to review the statute of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa. The Centre also participated, from 14 to 16 November 2001 in Kinshasa, in a conference on the protection of women and children in armed conflict, organized by the Standing Advisory Committee, where it presented a resource paper on the theme "Analysis of recent armed conflicts in the Central African region and their impact on women and children". 39. During the period under review, the Centre continued to develop and consolidate collaboration and cooperation on research projects with several institutions based in Africa, Europe and the Americas. The institutions contacted include the Institut français des relations internationales (Paris); the Centre d'étude d'Afrique noire (Bordeaux); the Group for Security Information Research (Belgium); the Centre for Democratic Empowerment (Liberia); the Campaign for Good Governance (Sierra Leone); International Alert (United Kingdom); BASIC (United Kingdom); the Centre for Democracy and Development (United Kingdom); the African Leadership Forum (Nigeria); and the African Strategic Peace Research Group (Nigeria). 40. The Centre also held discussions with the Geneva Centre for the Democratization of Armed Forces on practical ways of cooperating in strengthening civil-military relations in the promotion of durable peace and security in Africa. C. Research, information and publications 41. The Centre completed the first year of its Fellowship Programme on Peace, Security and Disarmament in Africa, which it had inaugurated in May 2001, with the financial support of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. The research papers of the fellows were published. Work on the second year of the Fellowship Programme had begun at the time of preparing the present report. 42. Each year, the Fellowship Programme permits three research fellows to conduct research at the Centre for a period of three months on topics of their choice in the field of peace, security and disarmament in the African region. Fellows, who should be predominantly post-graduate students, are selected by an international committee set up for that purpose and involving the following organizations and institutions: OAU, the Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, the International Relations Institute of Cameroon, the Southern African Political and Economic Monthly, the Centre d'étude d'Afrique noire, the Bonn International Centre for Conversion, the University of Benin, the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in Togo and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa. 43. Together with UNDP, the Centre finalized a bilingual (English and French) version of a manual and curriculum for training trainers in the control of small arms and light weapons. The manual has been developed within the framework of the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa. 44. During the period under review, the Centre renovated its reference library and updated its collection on issues related to peace, security and disarmament. The library is now open to researchers and other users. A compendium of the books available in the library has been published. This compendium, to be updated periodically, is available via the Centre's Internet web site to readers and researchers using the reference library. A second, updated edition of the compendium was made available in May 2002. 45. In the period under review, the Centre published a number of occasional papers and/or publications, including the following: "Promoting civil-military relations in Africa: a bilingual (English and French) seminar report" (February 2002); "Final report on the 2001 edition of the Fellowship Programme on Peace, Disarmament and Security in Africa" (March 2002); "Final bilingual report (English and French) on the project on routes and caches of weapons in Africa" (April 2002); "Report on children caught in armed conflict in Africa" (February 2002); "Report on conflict trends in Africa" (February 2002); "Arms collection and destruction" (March 2002); and "Security and environmental, or green, conflicts" (May 2002). 46. Due to financial constraints and other technical problems, the Centre published only one of the four editions of its quarterly bilingual newsletter, African Peace Bulletin, which focuses on relevant developments in the field of peace, security and disarmament and related issues, mainly on the African continent. The Centre's advocacy and outreach programme concentrated on the organization of several outdoor events, including a mega music concert, the monthly Disarmament Forum and radio and television programmes. The Centre also maintained contact and visibility via its Internet web site (www.unrec.org) which is being regularly updated. 47. The Centre undertook a research study on arms embargoes and sanctions in Africa from 1960 to date, with the financial support of the Government of France. The objective of the study is to review the effectiveness of arms embargoes and sanctions by underlining areas of weakness and strength that may have promoted or negatively affected the prospects for a durable peace and security on the continent. The study will be published for wide distribution within and outside Africa. D. Working with civil society to advance peace and disarmament initiatives 48. The Centre provided assistance and technical support for the launching of a civil society network campaigning for arms control and reduction in the West African subregion, known as the West Africa Action Network on Small Arms. 49. The Centre provided substantive support for the organization of a consultation of West African civil society organizations, 2 held in Dakar from 29 April to 1 May 2002. Other organizers included Oxfam Great Britain and International Alert (United Kingdom). The key objective of the consultation was to formulate a training curriculum for West African civil society organizations. E. Planned activities of the Centre 50. Appearing in annex II is a list of the Centre's planned activities for which interested donor countries and organizations are invited to provide funding. IV. Staffing, financing and administration 51. During the reporting period, persistent financial problems prevented the Centre from operating at full scale to implement its work programme. Its functioning continued to be hampered by a lack of resources to cover operational costs. The Centre therefore continued to operate with a skeleton local staff at the General Service level at a time when requests for assistance from Member States have been increasing. 52. The Centre benefited from the 2001-2002 Youth International Internship Programme of the Government of Canada, which provided the Centre with two interns for a period of six months, from September 2001 to February 2002. Selected by Project Ploughshares, a Canadian non-governmental organization specializing in the promotion of disarmament, demilitarization and the peaceful resolution of political conflict, the interns assisted the Centre in its Protecting Children Caught in Armed Conflicts in Africa programme and Practical Disarmament Measures in Africa programme. 53. During the period under review the Centre also continued to benefit for the second year, from the services and expertise of an associate expert funded by the Government of Belgium to work on the Centre's peace programmes. 54. The Director has continued to pursue intensive fund-raising activities, undertaking a series of visits and maintaining contacts with a number of Member States, including Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, France, Japan, Nigeria, Norway, South Africa and Switzerland, and institutions. During the period under review, voluntary contributions in the amount of $127,097 were received. 55. The Secretary-General wishes to express his gratitude to the Governments of Belgium, France and Norway and OAU for their generous support, and to the Government of Togo, the host country, for its overall support of the Centre. The status of the Trust Fund for the Centre for the biennium 2000-2001 appears in annex I to the present report. V. Conclusions and observations 56. During the reporting period, the Centre has continued to assume a leading role in the promotion of peace, security and disarmament in Africa. It has received an increasing number of requests from Member States, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations for assistance and support. In the discharge of its mandate, the Centre has built solid working relations with OAU and initiated partnership programmes with a number of institutions and civil society organizations within and outside Africa. 57. Despite its intensive fund-raising efforts, the Centre has continued to experience serious financial difficulties, which have impaired its ability to realize its full potential and to fulfil its mandate. The Secretary-General therefore counts on the continued and increasing support and cooperation of Member States and organizations to ensure the Centre's effective functioning. Annex I United States dollars Fund balance, 31 December 1999 Income, 1 January 2000-31 December 2001 Voluntary contributions* Interest income Miscellaneous income Subtotal Expenditures 1 January 2000-31 December 2001 Prior period adjustments Fund balance, 31 December 2001 Note: This information is based on the financial statement for the period 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2001. During the period from 1 January to 30 June 2002, additional contributions totalling $88,173 were received from Belgium ($10,667), France ($67,506) and the Organization of African Unity ($10,000). * In 2000, from Algeria ($5,000), Canada ($6,755), France ($66,325), Germany ($21,749), Mauritius ($5,000), Switzerland ($56,500) and the Norwegian Red Cross ($79,978); in 2001, from China ($10,000), France ($68,337) and Norway ($38,924). Project I Title of project Promotion of civil-military relations in Africa: a factor for peace and security. Purpose Consolidation of the role of the military in the democratic process; Adoption of a continent-wide code of conduct for armed forces and security forces in Africa; Promotion of durable peace and security through harmonious civilian-military relationships. Location Project conceptualization and design: United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, Lomé Project implementation: several African States. Duration 2 years Number of participants Two participants from each of the 50 African countries members of the Organization of African Unity/African Union. Cost estimates (United States dollars) Project staff (three staff, two years) Travel and conference costs (5 days, 100 participants) National project implementation in 10 pilot countries Project operating costs Publication and distribution of the code of conduct Total Project II Title of project Capacity-building in small arms control for security and other law enforcement officials in the southern African subregion, member States of the southern African Development Community. Purpose To strengthen the capacities of law enforcement and other security officials in the southern African subregion by providing them with modern techniques and tools for small arms control. Location The first phase will be a curriculum formulation meeting in Lomé, headquarters of the Regional Centre; The second phase will be a training-of-trainers workshop in Windhoek. Duration Six months Number of participants 55 from the subregion; 12 resource persons; 1 Project Coordinator Curriculum formulation workshop (three days, 12 experts), bringing together 12 experts from the subregion to reflect on and adopt elements compiled by the Regional Centre for a training curriculum Project Coordinator for the training-of-trainers programme (five months) Training-of-trainers workshop (two weeks, 50 participants, 12 trainers) Project III Title of Project Capacity-building of focal points in the framework of the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa. Partnership The Nairobi Secretariat and relevant non-governmental organizations active in the field. Purpose Strengthening, and helping to establish, where they do not yet exist, the focal point institutions charged with the responsibility of implementing the Nairobi Declaration at the national level in the signatory States. Location Project conceptualization and design: Lomé; Project implementation: the 10 countries signatories to the Nairobi Declaration (Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda). Duration Ten weeks. Number of participants Ten participants from the 10 States signatory to the Nairobi Declaration Project design and operation (includes one Project Coordinator, four months) Publication of teaching manuals National workshops (includes travel of two resource persons, Project Coordinator and two staff members, and conference and operating costs) 