%%%SLAVERY|FUND-RAISING|PROJECT FINANCE|TRUST FUNDS|TRAVEL COSTS|SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANCE|

Fifty-seventh session Item 111 (a) of the provisional agenda* Human rights questions: implementation of human rights instruments Status of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Report of the Secretary-General** Summary The present report on the financial status and activities of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery contains the recommendations adopted by its Board of Trustees at its seventh session, held at Geneva from 21 to 25 January 2002, which were approved by the High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General on 4 February 2002. The present report updates the report by the Secretary-General to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-eighth session (E/CN.4/2002/93 and Corr.1) as well as the report of the Secretary-General to the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly (A/56/205). * A/57/150. ** This report was submitted after 2 July 2002 so as to include as much updated information as possible. 1. In its resolution 46/122 of 17 December 1991, the General Assembly established the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, which receives voluntary contributions from Governments, non-governmental organizations, other private or public entities and individuals. The purpose of the Fund is to provide financial assistance to representatives of non-governmental organizations from different regions that deal with issues of contemporary forms of slavery so they may participate in the deliberations of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, and extend humanitarian, legal and financial aid, through established channels of assistance, to individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. II. Administration and Board of Trustees 2. Pursuant to resolution 46/122, the Fund is administered in accordance with the relevant Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations on general trust funds for humanitarian assistance, by the Secretary-General, through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with the advice of a Board of Trustees. 3. The Board is composed of five United Nations experts with relevant experience in the field of human rights and, in particular, with issues of contemporary forms of slavery, serving in their personal capacities. The current members of the Board, appointed by the Secretary-General for a three-year renewable term, in consultation with the Chairman of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, with due regard to equitable geographical distribution are: Swami Agnivesh (Chairman), Theo van Boven, Cheikh Saad-Bouh Kamara, Tatiana Matveeva and José de Souza Martins. III. Beneficiaries 4. In accordance with the selection criteria adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 46/122 (see also annex I to the present report, which contains criteria and other requirements for the selection of beneficiaries), the beneficiaries of assistance from the Fund shall be (a) representatives of non-governmental organizations dealing with issues of contemporary forms of slavery who would not, in the opinion of the Board, be able to attend the session of the Working Group without the assistance provided by the Fund and who would be able to contribute to a deeper knowledge on the part of the Working Group of the problems relating to contemporary forms of slavery; and (b) individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. IV. Grant cycle 5. Applications for travel or for project grants for 2003 must be submitted by 15 September 2002 for analysis by the secretariat of the Fund and Board. Admissible applications will be examined by the Board at its next session, scheduled to be held in January 2003. At that session, the Board will adopt recommendations for grants, which will then be submitted for approval to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General. The grants approved should be paid in February/March 2003. Beneficiaries of project grants have then to provide satisfactory narrative and financial reports on the use of their grants before 1 November 2003. Until satisfactory reports on the use of previous grants are received, no new project grant can be paid. 6. Admissibility of new applications. During the period between the receipt of the application and the next session of the Board, the secretariat of the Fund decides on the admissibility of applications on the basis of the mandate of the Fund. 7. Selection process. Admissible application forms are verified as to their conformity with approved selection criteria and additional information is requested from the organization if necessary. Reference organizations and specialized networks are consulted as well if needed. The complete application form is then summarized and analysed by the secretariat in accordance with the selection criteria to facilitate the work of the Board of Trustees. At its annual session, the Board reviews all applications declared admissible, including the original application form, the summary analysis prepared by the secretariat and any other relevant information. The Board then makes recommendations to the Secretary-General in accordance with the guidelines of the Fund and Board (annex I). After the session the secretariat reviews all the Board's recommendations for consistency with relevant United Nations Administrative and Financial Rules and Regulations. The High Commissioner for Human Rights approves, on behalf of the Secretary-General, the recommendations which are acceptable as well as new best practices identified during its annual session. (Those recommendations are reflected in the revised guidelines attached to the annual report on the Fund by the Secretary-General (see annex V)). 8. Payment of grants. The beneficiary organizations are requested to approve all conditions attached to the grant such as providing narrative and financial reports on the use of grants within a given deadline. Upon receipt of this confirmation the secretariat of the Fund requests the United Nations Office at Geneva financial services to pay the project grant promptly. In the case of travel grants the beneficiary receives a plane ticket in his or her local travel agency and then a daily subsistence allowance (DSA) in the form of a cheque upon arrival at the session of the Working Group. 9. Monitoring. The secretariat reviews all narrative and financial reports received from beneficiary organizations on the use of project grants and asks for additional information if needed. Office of the High Commissioner field presence and other United Nations field offices such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) may be requested to provide to the secretariat of the Fund additional information on the organization or project. Travel grants are closely monitored before and during the session of the Working Group. Beneficiaries are requested to provide a copy of any statement delivered as part of their reporting obligations. 10. Evaluation by the Board and secretariat. In performing their evaluation, the Board and the secretariat carry out the following activities: (a) At its annual session the Board reviews the situation of all travel and project grants allocated in previous years. When the Board is satisfied with the reporting from a given organization, it recommends closing the file. If the report is not complete the Board makes a recommendation requesting specific additional information. No new grants will be allocated to that organization until the Board is satisfied with its report. (b) Board members may visit projects financed by the Fund within their geographic region; the secretariat of the Fund may also visit projects. (c) Board members who are respected United Nations experts in the field of contemporary forms of slavery, if needed, establish direct contacts with project leaders: in the field, during sessions of the Board, or at the sessions of the Working Group, the Commission on Human Rights and the Subcommission on the Promotion and the Protection of Human Rights, in order to better evaluate the use of the grants. The secretariat also meets with project leaders. (d) Reference organizations and specialized networks may be invited for a hearing at the session of the Board in order to, inter alia, provide additional information on specific organizations or projects, answer any questions put by the Board and explain their activities to the Board. (e) Concerning travel grants, the Chairman, or another Board member if possible, attends the Working Group session in order to meet with all beneficiaries present and assess the impact of their participation in the deliberations of the Working Group. V. Payment of contributions 11. In order to meet the requirements of the grant cycle and meet new requests for funding during a current year, new voluntary contributions should be paid to the Fund by the end of November, so that they may be duly recorded by the United Nations Treasurer well in advance of the annual session of the Board. Contributions that cannot be recorded before the session of the Board will be considered at its next annual session. VI. Seventh session of the Board of Trustees 12. During the 10 meetings of its seventh session, the Board of Trustees examined information prepared by its secretariat concerning previous grants paid in 1999, 2000 and 2001, applications for new travel and project grants, the financial situation of the Fund including new contributions (see annex II, sect. A, for a list of contributions available for the seventh session of the Board of Trustees) and the implementation of the recommendations approved in 2001. The Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights addressed the Board at its opening meeting. The Board met with representatives of donor and other interested Governments and the International Organization for Migration, as well as with staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights working on relevant activities. Organization of the Board's next session 13. The Board recommended that at the first meeting of its annual session in 2003 the secretariat of the Fund should continue to provide the Board with the figures available at the Office of the High Commissioner on contributions received and pledges made, the amount of money available for grants, information received on the use of previous grants disbursed and the number of applications for new grants received. 14. The Board recommended that meetings with representatives of relevant non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations, as well as with representatives of the International Labour Office, should be organized at its eighth session. 15. The Board also recommended that the secretariat of the Commission on Human Rights should inform the Bureau of the Commission of the Board's recommendation that the Chairperson or a member of the Board should continue to be invited to deliver a brief speech to the Commission under the relevant agenda item. The Chairperson or Board member would introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund, provide the Commission with updated information on the work and financial situation of the Fund, and invite donors to contribute to the Fund. Review of previous project grants 16. The Board reviewed the narrative and financial reports on the use of travel and project grants paid in 1999, 2000 and 2001 and adopted relevant recommendations. Recommendations for grants 17. The Board examined 39 applications for travel grants amounting to about 80,000 United States dollars (US$) and 39 applications for project grants amounting to approximately US$ 545,000 (see charts 1-3 in annex III). 18. The project and travel grants recommended, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/122 and other approved selection criteria (see annex I), will assist non-governmental organizations in 16 countries in Africa, America, Asia and Europe. In accordance with the mandate of the Fund, the Board's recommendations focus on assisting representatives of non-governmental organizations from different regions, dealing with issues of contemporary forms of slavery, to participate in the deliberations of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, as well as on extending, through established channels of assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. 19. The Board recommended that US$ 14,046 be allocated to seven new travel grants (see annex IV, sect. A, table 1) and that three travel grants already approved in 2001, which were kept pending because of visa problems, be paid in 2002 (see annex IV, sect. A, table 2). All travel grants were released prior to the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, held from 27 to 31 May 2002, provided that the conditions attached to the grants had been met and that the beneficiary was able to obtain a visa on time. 20. The Board also recommended the payment of US$ 122,000 for 21 project grants (see annex IV, sect. B). 21. In accordance with United Nations rules governing general trust funds for humanitarian assistance, 13 per cent of estimated annual expenditures in 2002 were set aside for programme support costs related to the servicing of the Fund and 15 per cent of estimated annual expenditures were set aside as a reserve for 2003. New guidelines 22. The Board adopted new guidelines concerning, inter alia, training, seminars and emergency assistance (see annex V). Cooperation with the Working Group 23. In 2001 the Chairman of the Board of Trustees was not able to attend the session of the Working Group at his own expense, nor was any other member of the Board; the Board had therefore recommended that payment of travel costs be authorized to enable the Chairperson or another member of the Board to participate in the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery. The Chairman or member of the Board could then introduce the report on the Fund under the relevant agenda item and provide additional information on project grants and the financial situation of the Fund, as well as introduce the beneficiaries of travel grants attending the session. The Chairman of the Board attended the whole session of the Working Group. 24. The Board recommended that the secretariat of the Working Group should continue to inform the Board about priority areas that the Working Group would identify, so that the Board could take them into consideration in its selection of applications for travel grants. Recommendations of the Board for the intersessional period 25. The Board members welcomed the initiatives, taken at their own cost, of Swami Agnivesh to visit several projects in India financed by the Fund in 2001 and of José de Souza Martins to visit a project in Chile that received grants in 2000 and 2001. 26. The Board recommended that provisions be made in the cost plan for 2002, within proper limits, to enable members of the Board in their geographical region or its secretariat to visit projects subsidized by the Fund in order to better evaluate the work carried out and planned. A report on any such visit should be drafted by the Board member and circulated to the other members of the Board. For that purpose an amount of US$ 16,000 was recommended. 27. The Board members and the secretariat should find ways and means to raise the level of awareness in the international community of slavery and slavery-like practices. The Board strongly recommended that a fact sheet on the activities of the Fund should be prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights for information and fund-raising purposes, in a sufficient number of copies for wide dissemination to interested non-governmental organizations and donors. The Board also recommended that the Office's Fact Sheet No. 14 on contemporary forms of slavery should be revised to include, inter alia, references to the activities of the Fund and Board. 28. The Board considered issues of contemporary forms of slavery, taking into consideration the Declaration and Programme of Action (A/CONF.189/12, chap. I) adopted at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001. The Board stressed that when adopting recommendations for grants it had always taken into consideration, among other violations of human rights, the fact that victims of contemporary forms of slavery were often victims of racial discrimination. 29. In view of the additional workload caused by the increase in the number of applications received, the Board recommended that additional Professional and General Service staff and facilities should be provided, if necessary from programme support costs, in order for the Fund and Board to be adequately serviced. VII. Approval and implementation of recommendations 30. All the recommendations made by the Board of Trustees at its seventh session were approved on 4 February 2002 by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General. At the time of the drafting of the present report on 17 June 2002, almost all project and travel grants had been paid. A few were kept pending until receipt of additional information requested from the applicants by the Board. 31. The Board noted with satisfaction that, thanks to new contributions from regular and new donors, appeals by the High Commissioner, the Board and the Fund secretariat, and recommendations by the Subcommission and the Working Group, it has been able to recommend 28 new grants in 2002. The following table shows relevant statistics by year since the Board started allocating grants in 1997, including the number of travel and project applications received and the amount of money requested, as well as the number of grants received and the amount of money allocated by the Fund. Year Admissible applications received Amount requested (United States dollars) Grants approved Amount allocated Travel Project 1998a 1999b 2000b 2001b 2002b a The total amount available for grants from the Fund was paid in 1997 (US$ 23,850) and no new contributions were paid. b Every year, about 50 applications are received which are not admissible as they do not fall within the mandate of the Fund, arrive after the established deadline or are not complete. VIII. Twenty-seventh session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery 32. At its twenty-seventh session, the Working Group had before it for its consideration a note prepared by the secretariat and the Report of the Secretary-General to the Commission on Human Rights (E/CN.4/2002/93 and Corr.1), concerning the situation of the Fund. 33. In his opening statement, the United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights paid tribute to the non-governmental organizations for their dedication in supporting the activities of the Working Group and their fight to protect and promote human rights. Their presence each year at the sessions of the Working Group was an important contribution to the meetings. He noted the close cooperation existing between the Board and the Working Group. By identifying in advance priority issues to be discussed at its session, the Working Group helped the Board to make recommendations on the applications received in an informed and effective way. The Deputy High Commissioner was pleased with the presence and participation of community-based organizations and former victims, who gave to the Working Group a dynamism in its work, reliable information and a profound and important human dimension. 34. The Chairperson of the Board of Trustees was able to attend the session and introduce under the relevant agenda item on the Fund the documentation available, the beneficiaries of travel grants attending the session and the financial situation of the Fund. 35. Eight out of the 10 beneficiaries of the Fund were able to attend the Working Group, including a victim of child domestic servitude and a victim of trafficking. 36. In a statement made at the twenty-sixth session, Bob Willey, a teacher at the Archway School in Stroud and coordinator of Schools Together Action for Children Campaign (STACC), an organization in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland seeking to unite schools and their students in activities that focus on development and human rights issues, said that students from the school and project had attended sessions of the Working Group since 1998. According to him, the students, when made aware of injustice, wished to bring about change and improvement as quickly as possible and it was the United Nations Fund that gave them the best opportunity to channel that energy. The teacher and students gave a cheque of 2,000 pounds sterling (Pound) to the Chairperson of the Fund. 37. The Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery expressed its appreciation for the participation at its twenty-seventh session of eight representatives of non-governmental organizations working in six different countries in Africa, Asia and Europe, which were financed by the Fund upon the recommendation of its Board of Trustees, including victims of contemporary forms of slavery, and for their valuable contribution to the work of the Working Group. It also invited the Board of Trustees of the Voluntary Fund to continue to promote the participation at the annual session of the Working Group of individuals and organizations from as large a number of countries as possible, in accordance with the priorities established in the agenda of the Working Group. 38. The Working Group also noted with satisfaction that 21 project grants were paid by the Fund upon the recommendation of the Board to local non-governmental organizations that work on issues of contemporary forms of slavery, and that three project leaders attended the session of the Working Group and reported orally on the implementation of their project. The Working Group welcomed the participation in its session of the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, encouraged the Chairman or another member of the Board to attend its next session and expressed its support for the work of the members of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, in particular their fund-raising activities. The Working Group expressed its gratitude to Governments, organizations, trade unions and individuals, including young students, who had contributed to the Fund and encouraged them to continue to do so. In this respect, the Working Group also recalled the appeal made by the General Assembly in its resolution 46/122 to all Governments to respond favourably to requests for contributions to the Fund, urged them and non-governmental organizations, other private or public entities and individuals to contribute to the Fund, and encouraged them to do so in order to enable the Fund to fulfil its mandate effectively in the year 2003. Finally, the Working Group decided to continue to examine the situation and the activities of the Trust Fund at its twenty-eighth session. IX. Needs assessment 39. Applications for grants received in 2002 amounted to approximately US$ 680,000. In the Board's view, in order to be able to satisfy all new applications envisaged for 2003 and fulfil its mandate satisfactorily, the Fund would need at least US$ 300,000 more before the eighth session of the Board, scheduled to be held at the end of January 2003. 40. New contributions and pledges have already been made for the eighth session of the Board (see annex II, sect. C). X. Fund-raising for the eighth session of the Board of Trustees 41. The Board held its annual meeting with donors to the Fund. The Board also very much appreciated the fact that non-governmental organizations, school students and other individuals were becoming regular donors to the Fund. 42. At its seventh session, the members of the Board of Trustees thanked the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for having sent a letter appealing for new contributions to assist them in their fund-raising efforts. The Board recommended that the High Commissioner send a new letter of appeal to donors not later than September 2002 for additional contributions to be paid, if possible, by the end of November 2002 in order to allow the Board to be able to recommend a sufficient number of grants at its eighth session in January 2003. The High Commissioner approved that recommendation. 43. In accordance with their mandate, the Board members continued to develop initiatives to make the activities of the Fund and Board better known and obtain new contributions by, inter alia, widening the donor base and obtaining the support of young persons, the non-governmental organizations concerned and the public at large. 44. The Board encouraged interested donors not to make pledges, which cannot be taken into consideration by the Board when allocating grants, but to pay their voluntary contributions directly to the Fund, well in advance of the session and preferably before the end of November 2002. XI. How to contribute to the Fund 45. Voluntary contributions to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery may be made: (a) By bank transfer to the United Nations Geneva General Fund: (i) In United States dollars: UBS AG P.O. Box 2770 CH-1211 Geneva 2 Switzerland Account number: 240-C-590-160.1 Swift address: UBSWCHZH12A (ii) In other currencies: Account number: 240-C-590-160.0 (b) By cheque to the order of the United Nations: The Treasurer United Nations Office at Geneva Palais de Nations CH-1211 Geneva 10 Donors should indicate "For the Slavery Fund, account SH" on any payment order. 46. To enable the Secretariat to follow up and inform the Board of Trustees, the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights, the Subcommission and Working Group, donors wishing to make a voluntary contribution are invited to inform the Fund's secretariat of their payment at: Trust Funds Unit Support Service Branch Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights United Nations Telephone: + (41) (22) 917 91 64 Facsimile: + (41) (22) 917 90 17 XII. Recommendations 47. As recommended by the Board of Trustees of the Fund at its seventh session and approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General, donors are invited to contribute to the Fund by the end of November in order to be duly recorded by the United Nations Treasurer in advance of the annual session of the Board. Contributions that cannot be recorded before the session of the Board will be considered at its next annual session. 48. At its twenty-seventh session, the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery expressed its gratitude to Governments, organizations, trade unions and individuals, including young students, who had contributed to the Fund and encouraged them to continue to do so. In this respect, the Working Group also recalled the appeal made by the General Assembly in its resolution 46/122 to all Governments to respond favourably to requests for contributions to the Fund, urged them and non-governmental organizations, other private or public entities and individuals to contribute to the Fund, and encouraged them to do so in order to enable the Fund to fulfil its mandate effectively in the year 2003. At its fifty-fourth session, the Subcommission on the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights adopted a resolution on the basis of the recommendations adopted at the Working Group. 49. In the Board's view, in order to be able to satisfy all new applications envisaged for 2003 and to fulfil its mandate satisfactorily, the Fund would need at least US$ 300,000 more before the eighth session of the Board, scheduled to be held at the end of January 2003. Criteria and other requirements for the selection of beneficiaries A. Travel grants 1. According to the criteria established by the General Assembly in its resolution 46/122, grants from the Fund shall be given to: (a) Representatives from non-governmental organizations from different regions dealing with issues of contemporary forms of slavery to assist them to participate in the deliberations of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery: (i) Who are so considered by the Board of Trustees; (ii) Who would not, in the opinion of Board, be able to attend the sessions of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery without the assistance provided by the Fund; (iii) Who would be able to contribute to a deeper knowledge on the part of the Working Group of the problems relating to contemporary forms of slavery; (b) Individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. 2. In addition, the Board has developed other practices and guidelines: (a) Application forms for travel grants should include a letter of nomination and recommendation signed by an executive official of the applicant's organization, other than the applicant him or herself; (b) The Board will take into consideration the main theme of the Working Group's session when making recommendations for travel grants; (c) A non-governmental organization may apply for grants for a maximum of two representatives; (d) In proposing candidates, the applicant non-governmental organization should take gender balance into consideration; (e) The applicant must submit by airmail the original of the application duly signed and dated; (f) Representatives should be selected from all the geographical regions in order to provide the widest possible view of contemporary forms of slavery in the world (resolution 2000/12 of the Subcommission on the Protection and the Promotion of Human Rights); (g) The organization should provide information on its legal status, year of foundation, annual budget, other sources of funding in relation to aspects of contemporary forms of slavery with which the organization deals, and specific experience and/or expertise in the relevant issues to be discussed at the Working Group; (h) The organization should provide information on the responsibilities of the applicant in the organization and on the theme of the applicant's presentation to the Working Group; (i) Beneficiaries of a travel grant should deliver their statements on behalf of the organization that applied for the approved grant; (j) The Board will not consider an application for which the secretariat has not received, at its request, additional satisfactory information after a second reminder. B. Project grants 3. According to General Assembly resolution 46/122, grants from the Fund shall be given to extend, through established channels of assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. 4. The Board has developed the following practices and guidelines: (a) An organization can request a maximum amount of 15,000 United States dollars per grant from the Fund; (b) Projects should be selected from all the geographical regions in order to provide the widest possible view of contemporary forms of slavery in the world (Subcommission resolution 2000/12); (c) The project should take gender balance into consideration; (d) The original application, duly signed and dated by an executive officer of the applying organization, should be sent by airmail; (e) The organization should provide information on its present activities and the aspects of contemporary forms of slavery that it deals with; (f) If satisfactory narrative and financial reports on the use of a previous grant have not been received, a new grant cannot be released and should be kept pending; (g) Project grants should be allocated for direct assistance to victims and to local non-governmental organizations. As the case may be, grants can be channelled via an international non-governmental organization, provided that it does not keep any part of the grant for its activities; (h) The Board will not consider an application for which the secretariat has not received, at its request, additional satisfactory information after a second reminder; (i) If no satisfactory narrative and financial reports are received, the organization may be requested to refund the grant concerned. A. Contributions available for the seventh session of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slaverya Table 1 State Amount Paid at Date paid Brazil Geneva 5 April 2001 (for 2001) 14 January 2002 Burkina Faso 8 December 2000 France 11 April 2001 Holy See 15 January 2001 Japan New York 31 December 2001 Luxembourg 9 January 2002 Subtotal Table 2 Non-governmental organization Association of Human Rights Lawyers Karen Parker 26 December 2000 Kansai Electric Power Dispute Committee and Japanese Workers Committee for Human Rights 24 August 2001 Students and teachers of the Archway School Gloucestershire, United Kingdom 23 July 2001 Students of the Istituto Tecnico Commerciale Oscar Romero Albino, Italy 17 April 2001 27 December 2001 Students of the Scuola elementare G. Zanga Yorio Shiokawa Aichi-Ken, Japan Roberto Zanotto and Rita Cattelan Italy 27 September 2001 Total, tables 1 and 2 a Based on information available at OHCHR as at 21 January 2002. Table 3 State or non-governmental organization and individuals Pledged at Date pledged Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 14 March 2000 19 December 2001 Total C. Contributions available for the eighth session of the Board of Trustees as at 14 June 2002 Table 4 6 February 2002 Qatar 10 April 2002 Table 5 Aichi International Connecting Conference for Human Rights 7 May 2002 Association for Humanitarian Lawyers 15 February 2002 Students at Istituto Tecnico Commerciale Oscar Romero 10 May 2002 Hirohisa Kitano and Japan Lawyers International Solidarity Association Japanese Workers Committee for Human Rights Total, tables 4 and 5 Note: Based on information available at the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights at Geneva. Table 6 Years Cyprus Netherlands 3 May 2002 2003 and 2004 Chart 1 Requests for travel grants to attend the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, 27-31 May 2002 Note: Total applications for travel grants: 39 (16 female and 23 male); total amount requested: approximately US$ 79,831. Requests for travel grants:a aspects of contemporary forms of slavery that the applicants wished to present at the Working Groupb a According to information received in the application forms. b Themes according to the provisional agenda of the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery. Chart 3 Requests for project grants Note: Total number of requests for project grants: 39; total amount of money requested: approximately US$ 544,524. Annex IV A. Travel grants recommended by the Board of Trustees for attendance at the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Grants approved at the seventh session of the Board of Trusteesa Application No. Organization Name of representative Theme to be discussed at the Working Group (27-31 May 2002) Africa Groupe de travail des ONGs pour les droits de l'enfant Democratic Republic of the Congo Nkadi Mvioki (w) Exploitation of children Development Organization and Empowerment of the Rural Poor (DOERP) Uganda Leo Musinguzi (m) Exploitation of children in the context of prostitution and domestic servitude Asia Social and Economic Assistance for Rural and City Habitants (SEARCH), India Subhash Chandorikar (m) Stop Trafficking, Oppression and Prostitution of children and women (STOP), under the umbrella of the Ramola Bhar Charitable Trust, India Roma Debabrata (w) Trafficking of children and other forms of child labour and prostitution Child Workers in Nepal Concerned Centre (CWIN), Nepal Gauri Pradhan (m) Trafficking of children for sexual exploitation Europe Associazione Iroko, Italy "Gladys" (w) The applicant will relate her personal experience as a trafficked child from Nigeria to Italy Women of the 90s, Russian Federation "Helen" (w)b The applicant will relate her personal experience as a trafficked child from Chelyabinsk to Cyprus Total No. of travel grants a Each travel grant covers the cost of travel and five days of daily subsistence allowance (DSA) (US$ 90 per day for three working days and two travel days). b The beneficiary was not able to attend the session of the Working Group. Pending grants recommended at the sixth session of the Board of Trustees and confirmed at the seventh sessiona 3 (a) Consulting Centre for Constitutional Rights and Justice (C3RJ), Nigeria (a) Churchill Ibeneche (m) (a) Experience in programmes in contemporary forms of slavery; participation in several training workshops; and work on a monograph on child slavery and health implications 1 (b) (b) "Gwen" (w) (b) The beneficiary will provide testimony as a former victim of child slavery and forced labour College of Social Work India Gracy Bibiana Fernandes (w)b Rescue raids and rehabilitation of minor girls from brothels of Mumbai a At its sixth session in 2001, the Board recommended these travel grants for attendance at the twenty-sixth session of the Working Group in 2001, but the beneficiaries could not attend. Therefore, the grants were kept pending and were confirmed by the Board at its seventh session for the beneficiaries' participation in the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group in 2002. b The beneficiary was not able to attend the twenty-seventh session of the Working Group. Title of project or aspect covered Grant Association pour la prévention de la délinquance juvénile Democratic Republic of the Congo Project to prevent the sexual exploitation of children and to enable their reintegration into the social life of the community in Kinshasa Association pour la défense de l'enfant et de la femme Centre d'écoute et d'assistance des enfants exploités (assistance centre for exploited children) BICE Deutschland (International Catholic Child Bureau [BICE], Germany) Côte d'Ivoire Project to support "invisible" domestic girls Centre for Care of Torture and Trauma Victims (CCTV) Nigeria Comprehensive humanitarian, legal and financial intervention for victims of contemporary forms of slavery in the south-eastern, northern and mid-western parts of Nigeria Direct humanitarian, legal and financial assistance to victims of contemporary forms of slavery and their families, and advocacy campaign to end child slavery in Nigeria WAO Afrique Togo Project to combat the transborder trafficking of girls for commercial purposes Promotion of higher status for girls and women in rural areas of Togo The Americas La Vicaría de Pastoral Social (The Archdiocese of Santiago) Chile Protection of children from labour exploitation and the risk of their abandoning school Hotline Bangladesh Bangladesh Child rights and education: project to provide legal assistance to and enhance education facilities for children who have been sexually exploited Cambodian Social Science Study Group (CSSSG) Cambodia Relief of child labour in the fish distribution stations of Battambang province Development and Education for Workers (DEW), India Release and rehabilitation of bonded labourers Gram Niyojan Kendra Education for control and prevention of sexual slavery in the form of caste/family-based prostitution Bandhwa Mukti Samiti Survey, identification and release of bonded labourers and organization of scattered labourers into pressure groups to protect their rights Initiative for Social Change and Action Elaboration of a research study entitled "Rescued child sex exploitation workers: situational analysis and rehabilitation strategy -- a case study of the cities of Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata in India" Third World Movement against the Exploitation of Women (TW-MAE-W) Philippines Direct services for sexually exploited women and sexually abused children International Forum of Solidarity Bosnia and Herzegovina Emergency response programme for women and girl victims of trafficking Comité contre l'esclavage moderne (CCEM), France Assistance to victims of domestic servitude Médecins du monde, délégation hellenique, Greece Project to shelter victims of trafficking in women and children for forced prostitution Associazione Iroko Project for the rehabilitation of victims of trafficking, and for social and financial assistance to them Women of the 90s Russian Federation "Safe house" (trafficking in women for sexual exploitation) Perm Centre Against Violence and Human Trafficking Prevention of trafficking in human beings: transmission of experience to Siberian and far east regions of Russia 21 Projects New guidelines adopted at the seventh session A. Mandate of the Fund The mandate of the Fund is primarily to provide humanitarian, legal or financial assistance to victims of contemporary forms of slavery through established channels of assistance. B. New guidelines regarding proposals for seminars or training 1. Applications for other assistance, such as training, seminars and awareness campaigns, which should be victim-related, are admissible subject to the availability of funds; these projects form a second category of priority to be reviewed by the Board after its recommendations on projects that fall under the primary mandate of the Fund. 2. Applications for training and seminars that do not include provisional lists of participants and speakers, the themes to be covered or the draft programme are inadmissible. The final lists and programme should be sent to the secretariat after the meeting, as well as the report on the training or seminar organized, any documentation relating to assistance to victims and any outcome (book, manual, video, etc.). 3. Applications for training and seminars should be sent well in advance of the meeting scheduled since the Board does not subsidize a meeting that has already taken place. 4. Applications for assistance of a general academic nature are inadmissible. 5. The secretariat will include a new section in the application forms, as well as in the framework for reporting, reflecting the above guidelines. The application forms for new project grants concerning seminars and training should ask the applicants to provide the following: (a) Information on the objectives of the training and seminars; (b) The expected results; (c) Indicators of success; (d) Follow-up envisaged; (e) The participants' evaluation, after completion of the project. C. Emergency assistance On an exceptional basis, organizations and other established channels of assistance can submit an application for emergency assistance during the intersessional period for projects currently subsidized by the Fund that provide direct humanitarian, legal and financial assistance to victims of contemporary forms of slavery. Such assistance may be available in the event of unforeseen financial difficulties, such as a considerable influx of victims, but not because other sources of funding for the projects have not been found. The maximum amount for emergency assistance grants is US$ 5,000. During the intersessional period, the application will be submitted to the Chairperson of the Board and the member from the relevant region for their recommendation. The secretariat will report to the Board at its following session. This procedure can be implemented provided that sufficient funding is available at a given session and that a "special emergency grant" budgetary line amounting to up to US$ 10,000 is recommended to the Secretary-General for approval. D. Applications that primarily fall within the mandate of other United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes If an application does not fall primarily within the mandate of the Fund, such as an application for an income-generating project, but rather within the mandate of other United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes, the secretariat should inform the applicants that they may seek funding from the appropriate United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes in the country concerned, which would be better suited to provide assistance to the project. Examples of such United Nations organizations include the United Nations Development Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the United Nations Population Fund. If needed, the secretariat will provide the applying organization with the relevant contact details. E. Guideline for the Board The Board recommended that should a member belong to an executive or advisory body of an organization that has submitted an application, said Board member should inform the other members and the secretariat and should not participate in the deliberations on the application. F. Full participation in the deliberations of the Working Group International non-governmental organizations should be informed that the Board insists that beneficiaries of travel grants should attend all the meetings of the Working Group and should not be encouraged by those international non-governmental organizations to attend other meetings instead, including the International Labour Conference. G. Linguistic assistance to beneficiaries of travel grants Applicants for travel grants should be informed by the secretariat that the four working languages of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery are English, French, Russian and Spanish. If a selected beneficiary speaks Chinese or Arabic, which are official languages of the United Nations, the secretariat should try to ask for interpretation services at the Working Group. If the beneficiary of the grant is a victim who does not speak any of the official languages of the secretariat, an interpreter should be found. 