%%%OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|REGIONAL COOPERATION|EMERGENCY RELIEF|INFORMATICS|SANCTIONS|ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE|HAITI|GENDER MAINSTREAMING|TOBACCO|HEALTH|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|DEVELOPMENT POLICY|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY|STATISTICS|HUMAN SETTLEMENTS|ENVIRONMENT|POPULATION|PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION|TAXATION|WOMEN'S ADVANCEMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|NARCOTIC DRUGS|REFUGEE ASSISTANCE|RACIAL DISCRIMINATION|OBSERVER STATUS|ELECTION OF MEMBERS|APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|HUMAN RIGHTS|SPECIALIZED AGENCIES|DEVELOPMENT FINANCE|BRETTON WOODS INSTITUTIONS|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|

Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 12 Report of the Economic and Social Council * The present report is a preliminary version of those sections of the report of the Economic and Social Council relating to the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002 and the substantive session of 2002. The section relating to the resumed substantive session will be issued as an addendum to the present report. The entire report will be issued in final form as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/57/3/Rev.1). ** Part one of this preliminary version of the report of the Council, containing chaps. I-III, has been issued separately in document A/57/3 (Part I). The resolutions and decisions adopted by the Council at the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002 and the substantive session of 2002 are being issued initially in documents E/2002/INF.2 and Add.1 and 2. Those adopted at the resumed substantive session will be issued in document E/2002/INF/2/Add.3. The resolutions and decisions will be issued in final form as Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 1 (E/2002/99). Report of the Economic and Social Council for 2002* Contents Chapter Page Part two** IV. Operational activities segment Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation A. Progress report on the implementation of the triennial comprehensive policy review B. Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme V. Coordination segment Strengthening further the Economic and Social Council, building on its recent achievements, to help it fulfil the role ascribed to it in the Charter of the United Nations as contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration Agreed conclusions 2002/1 Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries Emerging from Conflict VI. Humanitarian affairs segment Special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance VII. General segment A. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits B. Coordination, programme and other questions Reports of coordination bodies Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 International cooperation in the field of informatics Long-term programme of support for Haiti Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system Tobacco or health Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations Regional cooperation Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan Non-governmental organizations Economic and environmental questions Sustainable development Science and technology for development Statistics Human settlements Environment Population and development Public administration International cooperation in tax matters United Nations Forum on Forests Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions Social and human rights questions Advancement of women Social development Crime prevention and criminal justice Narcotic drugs United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination Human rights Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, and intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system Consideration of the request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, and intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system VIII. Elections, appointments, nominations and confirmations IX. Organizational matters A. Organizational session B. Resumed organizational session C. Substantive session Annexes I. Agendas of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002 and the substantive session of 2002 II. Composition of the Council and its subsidiary and related bodies* III. Intergovernmental organizations designated by the Council under rule 79 of the rules of procedure for participation in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of their activities * To be issued in an addendum to the present document. Chapter IV Operational activities segment 1. The Council considered the question of the operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation (agenda item 3) at its 12th to 17th and 40th meetings, on 5, 8, 9 and 25 July 2002. A high-level meeting on operational activities was held at the 12th and 13th meetings, on 5 July. At its 16th and 17th meetings, on 9 July, the Council held an informal dialogue with the United Nations system country teams from Eritrea and India. At its 13th meeting, on 5 July, the Council held an informal dialogue with the head of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). At the same meeting, the Council heard presentations from the members of the panel on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201: the Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the Deputy Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP) and the Associate Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), as well as the Executive Director of UNICEF. At the same meeting, the Council considered the reports of the Executive Boards of UNDP/ UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP. 2. The Council considered the question of the progress report on the implementation of the triennial comprehensive policy review (agenda item 3 (a)) at its 14th and 15th meetings, on 8 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 (E/2002/47); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: comprehensive statistical data on operational activities for development for the year 2000 (E/2002/47/Add.1); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on the operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: management process for the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 (E/2002/47/Add.2); (d) Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations support for capacity-building (E/2002/58); (e) Report of the Secretary-General on the simplification and harmonization of rules and procedures for operational activities for development (E/2002/59); (f) Report of the Secretary-General on assessing the effectiveness of the operational activities for development of the United Nations system (E/2002/60); (g) Consolidated list of issues related to the coordination of operational activities for development, 2002 (E/2002/CRP.1). Action taken by the Council 3. Under agenda item 3 (a), the Council adopted resolution 2002/29. Progress on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 on the triennial policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations 4. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled "Progress on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 on the triennial policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations" (E/2002/L.18), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo (South Africa), on the basis of informal consultations. 5. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/29. B. Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme 6. The Council considered the reports of the Executive Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP (agenda item 3 (b)) at its 15th meeting, on 8 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Annual reports of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/11); (b) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on the work of its first regular session of 2002 (E/2002/34 (Part I)-E/ICEF/2002/8 (Part I));1 (c) Reports of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund on its work during 2001 (E/2001/35);2 (d) Report of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme on its 2001 sessions (E/2002/36);3 (e) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the annual report of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme for 2001 (E/2002/54); (f) Annual report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/69); (g) Extract from the report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on its 2002 annual session (E/2002/L.10); (h) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund on its first regular session of 2002 (DP/2002/10); (i) Decisions adopted by the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund at its annual session, 2002 (DP/2002/23). 7. Under agenda item 3 (b), the Council adopted decision 2002/290. Documents considered by the Council in connection with item 3 (b) 8. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), the Council took note of the documents submitted under item 3 (b). See Council decision 2002/290. Notes 1 To be issued as Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 14 (E/2002/34/Rev.1-E/ICEF/2002/8/Rev.1). 2 Ibid., 2001, Supplement No. 15 (E/2001/35). 3 Ibid., 2002, Supplement No. 16 (E/2002/36). Coordination segment 1. The Council held a discussion on strengthening further the Council, building on its recent achievements, to help it fulfil the role ascribed to it in the Charter of the United Nations as contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration (agenda item 4) at its 18th to 23rd and 41st meetings, from 10 to 12 and on 15 and 26 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the establishment of an ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict (E/2002/12 and Corr.1); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the long-term programme of support for Haiti (E/2002/56); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening further the Economic and Social Council, building on its recent achievements, to help it fulfil the role ascribed to it in the Charter of the United Nations as contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration (E/2002/62); (d) Consolidated report of the Secretary-General on the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council in 2002 (E/2002/73); (e) Consolidated report on the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council in 2002 (E/2002/CRP.3). 2. At the 18th meeting, on 10 July, the President of the Council opened the segment and made introductory remarks. The Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), then assumed the chair and made an opening statement. 3. At the same meeting, the Deputy Secretary-General addressed the segment. 4. Also at the 18th meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat made an introductory statement. 5. At the 19th meeting, on 10 July, the Council held a panel discussion on improving the role of the Council in the follow-up to the United Nations Millennium Declaration and other major conferences and summits. The panel discussion was chaired by Ms. Rasi. The following panellists made presentations, whereupon an interactive debate ensued: Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations; Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo, Vice-President of the Council and Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations; Hanns Heinrich Schumacher, Vice-Chairman of the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly on Children and Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations; and Anwarul Chowdhury, Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States. 6. At the 20th meeting, on 11 July, the Council held a panel discussion on reform of the Council: making the work of the Council have a greater impact. The panel discussion was chaired by Ms. Rasi. The following panellists made presentations, whereupon an interactive debate ensued: Makarim Wibisono (Indonesia), former President of the Council; Ahmad Kamal (Pakistan), former President of the Council; the Special Representative of the World Bank to the United Nations; and the Director of the Bureau for Resources and Strategic Partnerships, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 7. Under agenda item 4, the Council adopted agreed conclusions 2002/1, resolution 2002/1 and decision 2002/291. A. Agreed conclusions 2002/1 8. At the 41st meeting, on 26 July, the representative of Finland, on behalf of the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), introduced draft agreed conclusions (E/2002/L.35) on strengthening further the Council, building on its recent achievements, to help it fulfil the role ascribed to it in the Charter of the United Nations as contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration. 9. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft agreed conclusions. The text read as follows: "Agreed conclusions 2002/1 "1. The Economic and Social Council notes with satisfaction the progress made, as a result of the reforms of recent years, to strengthen its capacity to serve as a central high-level forum for the consideration of major economic, social and related issues, in providing overall guidance and coordination of the United Nations system and overview of its subsidiary bodies. "2. The Council recognizes that, in order to meet the challenges and opportunities of globalization and sustainable development and to promote the effective implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration1 and the outcomes of all other major United Nations conferences and summits, it will need to build on those achievements to further strengthen its role and impact. "3. The Council recognizes that a strengthened Council will be able to carry out its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations more effectively and contribute to the overall United Nations review of major United Nations conferences and summits. "4. The Council reiterates that, while each United Nations conference has its thematic unity, major United Nations conferences and summits should be viewed as interlinked and contributing to an integrated framework for the implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and a global partnership for development, with the key objectives of poverty eradication, sustained economic growth, sustainable development and improving the living conditions of people everywhere. "5. The Council stresses the importance of a more effective use of the existing structure, that is to say, the General Assembly, the Council and its subsidiary machinery, for a coordinated and integrated follow-up to and implementation of the commitments agreed at the Millennium Summit and other major United Nations conferences and summits, so as to avoid overlap and redundancy and enhance effectiveness of actions at all levels. "6. The Council shall continue to carry out, each year, at its coordination segment, a review of cross-cutting themes common to major international conferences and summits. The theme could be related to the theme of the high-level segment, respecting decisions already made by the Council, thus enabling the Council to address both the policy and system-wide coordination aspects of the theme. In making decisions for the related themes for the coordination segment of the following year, the Council should seek to identify themes, inter alia, on new and evolving issues, that will add value to international efforts to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration and the outcomes of all other major United Nations conferences and summits. "7. The Council reaffirms the need for "staying engaged" and, as stated in paragraph 69 (b) of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,2 encourages the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization to address issues of coherence, coordination and cooperation, as a follow-up to the Conference, at the spring meeting between the Council and the Bretton Woods institutions. The meeting should include an intergovernmental segment to address an agenda agreed to by the participating organizations, as well as a dialogue with civil society and the private sector. "8. The Council looks forward to the outcome of the forthcoming World Summit on Sustainable Development, to be held in Johannesburg, South Africa, and will examine the implications of its outcome in its future discussions on the integrated and coordinated follow-up to and implementation of major United Nations conferences and summits. "9. The Council will work with the organizations of the United Nations system, including financial and trade institutions, to increase collaboration for implementing the goals of major United Nations conferences and summits, using fully its high-level, operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation, coordination, humanitarian affairs, and general segments. "10. The Council underscores that the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits should be fully taken into account, as relevant, for the operational work and country frameworks of United Nations system organizations, in accordance with national development objectives and priorities. The boards of the funds and programmes should ensure that the policy guidance from the General Assembly and the Council, inter alia, on the follow-up to conferences, is translated, as appropriate, into operational guidelines and programmes, which should be kept under review by the Council. "11. The Council looks forward to regular consultations and coordination among the principal organs of the United Nations in pursuit of their functions. "12. The Council notes that the General Assembly has called upon all relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to consider, in accordance with their mandates, the recommendations addressed to them in the report of the Secretary-General on the prevention of armed conflict.3 The Council also notes that the Security Council looked forward to further consideration of that report by the Economic and Social Council. The Council further notes that, at its current session, it has adopted a resolution on the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries Emerging from Conflict.4 The Council reiterates its belief that economic growth supportive of poverty eradication and development should be at the core of conflict-prevention strategies. In that context, the Council's policy guidance role for the work of funds and programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations system is important. "13. In the follow-up to United Nations conferences and summits, the Council shall continue to ensure the harmonization, coordination and coherence of the agendas and work programmes of the functional commissions by promoting a clearer division of labour among them and providing clear policy guidance to them. Such guidance will enable the Council and its subsidiary machinery to serve as a coherent system within which to review progress. The functional commissions should further enhance their role as the main forums for expert follow-up and review of United Nations conferences and summits. The Council invites its functional commissions to provide inputs to the overall theme of the Council's coordination and high-level segments as they relate to their area of work. "14. The Council recalls General Assembly resolutions 45/264, 48/162, 50/227 and 52/12 B, which provided for, inter alia, better division of labour between its segments, shorter and more focused sessions, and clearer and action-oriented guidelines for the United Nations system and funds and programmes. "15. The Council recalls the resolve expressed in the Millennium Declaration, inter alia, to give greater opportunities to the private sector, non-governmental organizations and civil society in general so as to contribute to the realization of United Nations goals and programmes, and in that regard welcomes their increased contribution in recent years to its activities and encourages them to continue contributing to the realization of United Nations goals and programmes, in accordance with the rules of procedure and relevant Council resolutions, as well as General Assembly resolution 50/227. "16. The Council recognizes that negotiated outcomes in the form of agreed conclusions or resolutions are normally the preferred outcomes for the coordination, humanitarian affairs and operational activities segments. The Council will consider ways and means to enhance the effectiveness of its agreed outcomes as provided for in General Assembly resolution 50/227. When negotiated outcomes are not sought, the Council will consider inviting its Bureau to prepare a factual summary on the basis of consultations with Council members. Timely submission of reports to the Council will allow negotiated outcomes to be negotiated and finalized by the end of June and in any case no later than the last day of each respective segment. The Council further recognizes the need for more effective meetings during and in preparation for its substantive sessions. It invites the Bureau to submit practical proposals to that effect to the Council before the end of 2002. "17. The Council invites all the concerned specialized agencies, organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to participate actively in the coordination segment. "18. Every year, the Council will hold a two-day interactive meeting, including at a high level, when agreed, on operational activities, as an integral part of the operational activities segment of the substantive session. The interactive meeting will provide an opportunity for policy makers to address issues related to development cooperation. The Council should also hold an interactive dialogue with the heads of funds and programmes on thematic and coordination issues related to operational activities on options and measures aimed at promoting coordination and improving the performance of funds and programmes in the implementation of the outcomes of relevant major United Nations conferences and summits. "19. The outcomes of the functional commissions should be considered in the general segment on the basis of their reports and the consolidated report on their work, which should identify cross-cutting policy issues, gaps/overlaps, and areas of complementarity and cooperation, focus on substantive issues and highlight coordination issues requiring the Council's attention within its coordination segment. "20. The Council agrees that the items considered in its general segment should be streamlined, in particular by transmitting to the General Assembly items more appropriately considered by the Assembly and avoiding addressing the same issues in more than one segment, unless that is specifically decided. "21. The Council calls for further efforts by its members, its subsidiary machinery and the Secretariat to ensure greater overall coherence among the reports requested and those presented to the Council, and to streamline its documentation. The Secretariat is invited to submit consolidated reports in response to related mandates. The reports of the functional commissions should focus on substantive issues and highlight coordination, coherence and harmonization issues requiring the Council's attention. The Bureau and the Secretariat should ensure the dissemination of the outcomes of the Council to a broader audience. "22. The Council will continue to consider ways to strengthen further the Council, building on its recent achievements, to help fulfil the role ascribed to it in the Charter of the United Nations. At the coordination segment of its substantive session of 2003, the Council will benefit from the General Assembly's discussion on strengthening the organization. "23. The Council forwards these agreed conclusions to the General Assembly for its appropriate consideration." B. Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries Emerging from Conflict 10. At its 23rd meeting, on 15 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled "Ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict" (E/2002/L.12), submitted by the President of the Council. 11. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/1. 12. After the draft resolution was adopted, statements were made by the observers for Denmark (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Venezuela (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77). Documents considered by the Council in connection with item 4 13. At the 41st meeting, on 26 July, on the proposal of the President, the Council took note of documents submitted under item 4. See Council decision 2002/291. 1 See General Assembly resolution 55/2. 2 Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex. 3 A/55/985-S/2001/574 and Corr.1. 4 Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/1. Chapter VI Humanitarian affairs segment Special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance 1. The Council considered the question of special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance (agenda item 5) at its 23rd to 28th and 41st meetings, from 15 to 17 and on 26 July 2002. It had before it the following reports: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations (A/57/77-E/2002/63); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on assistance to Mozambique (A/57/97-E/2002/76). 2. At its 25th meeting, on 16 July, the Council held a panel discussion on reaching the vulnerable in the context of complex humanitarian emergencies and natural disasters in which the following panellists participated: the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, the Deputy Executive Director of the World Food Programme, Jacques Forster, Vice-President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Assistant Emergency Relief Coordinator (Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat), and the United Nations humanitarian coordinator and resident coordinator in Burundi. 3. At its 26th meeting, on 16 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the transition from relief to development in the context of complex humanitarian emergencies and natural disasters in which the following panellists participated: the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, and Didier Cherpitel, Secretary-General of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 4. Under item 5, the Council adopted resolution 2002/32. Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations 5. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled "Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations" (E/2002/L.34), which was submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jassim Mohammed Buallay (Bahrain), on the basis of informal consultations. 6. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/32. 7. Before the adoption of the resolution, the representative of Mexico made a statement. After the adoption of the resolution, the representative of Japan made a statement. Document considered by the Council in connection with item 5 8. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, on the proposal of the President, the Council took note of the document submitted under item 5. See Council decision 2002/292. 1. At the 29th meeting, on 10 July 2002, the President of the Council opened the general segment and made introductory remarks. The Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), then assumed the chair and made an opening statement. 2. At the same meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat made an introductory statement. A. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits 3. The Council held a discussion on integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits (agenda item 6): (a) Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits; (b) Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 at its 29th, 39th and 41st meetings, on 18, 25 and 26 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits (agenda item 6 (a)) (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda (E/2002/48); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on basic indicators for the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits at all levels (E/2002/53); (d) Report of the Secretary-General on the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcome of the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the Millennium Summit (A/57/75-E/2002/57); (e) Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of agreed conclusions 2001/1 of the Economic and Social Council on the role of the United Nations in promoting development, particularly with respect to access to and transfer of knowledge and technology, especially information and communication technologies, inter alia, through partnerships with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector (E/2002/64). 4. At the 29th meeting, on 18 July, the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States presented an oral report under sub-item 6 (b). 5. At the same meeting, the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) made an introductory statement under sub-item 6 (a). 6. Under item 6, the Council adopted resolution 2002/33 and decisions 2002/293 and 2002/294. 7. At its 23rd meeting, on 15 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled "Ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict" (E/2002/L.12), submitted by the President of the Council. For action on the draft resolution, see chapter V, paragraphs 10-12 above. Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 8. At the 39th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of Benin introduced a draft resolution entitled "Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010" (E/2002/L.31). Subsequently, Andorra, Austria, Belgium,1 Cameroon, Croatia, Denmark,1 El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,1 Ireland,1 Italy, Luxembourg,1 the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain,1 Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 9. At the 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Secretary of the Council responded to a question raised by the representative of the United States of America. 10. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/33. 11. After the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of Benin made a statement on behalf of the least developed countries. Implementation of agreed conclusions 2001/1 of the Economic and Social Council on the role of the United Nations in promoting development, particularly with respect to access to and transfer of knowledge and technology, especially information and communication technologies, inter alia, through partnerships with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector 12. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it a draft decision entitled "Implementation of agreed conclusions 2001/1 of the Economic and Social Council on the role of the United Nations in promoting development, particularly with respect to access to and transfer of knowledge and technology, especially information and communication technologies, inter alia, through partnerships with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector" (E/2002/L.28), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), on the basis of informal consultations. 13. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2002/293. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits 14. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, following a statement by the representative of Chile, the Council decided to defer further consideration of the question of integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits until its resumed substantive session. See Council decision 2002/294. 15. The Council held a discussion on coordination, programme and other questions (agenda item 7): (a) Reports of coordination bodies; (b) Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005; (c) International cooperation in the field of informatics; (d) Long-term programme of support for Haiti; (e) Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system; (f) Tobacco or health at its 30th, 35th, 37th and 41st meetings, on 18, 23, 24 and 26 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development (A/CONF.198/11);2 Reports of coordination bodies (agenda item 7 (a)) (a) Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on its forty-second session (A/57/16);3 (b) Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2001 (E/2002/55); Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (agenda item 7 (b)) (c) Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on its forty-second session (A/57/16);3 (d) Relevant fascicles of the proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (A/57/6 (Prog. 6-22 and 26)); International cooperation in the field of informatics (agenda item 7 (c)) (e) Note by the Secretary-General entitled "Preparations for the World Summit on the Information Society", transmitting the report of the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the ongoing preparatory process for the World Summit on the Information Society (A/57/71-E/2002/52); (f) Report of the Secretary-General on international cooperation in the field of informatics (E/2002/78); Long-term programme of support for Haiti (agenda item 7 (d)) (g) Report of the Secretary-General on the long-term programme of support for Haiti (E/2002/56); Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system (agenda item 7 (e)) (h) Report of the Secretary-General on follow-up to, and progress in, the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (E/2002/66); Tobacco or health (agenda item 7 (f)) (i) Report of the Secretary-General on the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Task Force on Tobacco Control (E/2002/44). 16. At the 30th meeting, on 18 July, introductory statements were made by the Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women (under sub-item 7 (e)), the Chairman of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (under sub-items 7 (a) and (b)), the Chief of the Systems Management Section of the Information Technology Services Division, Office of Central Support Services (under sub-item 7 (c)) and the Project Manager, Tobacco Free Initiative, World Health Organization (under sub-item 7 (f)). 17. Under agenda item 7, the Council adopted resolutions 2002/22, 2002/23, 2002/34 and 2002/35 and decisions 2002/242, 2002/295 and 2002/296. International Conference on Financing for Development 18. At the 41st meeting, on 26 July, the representative of Guatemala introduced a draft resolution entitled "International Conference on Financing for Development" (E/2002/L.36), on behalf of the Vice-Present of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), who had submitted the draft resolution on the basis of informal consultations. 19. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/34. 20. After the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of Mexico made a statement. 1. Reports of coordination bodies Document considered by the Council in connection with sub-item 7 (a) 21. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, on the proposal of the President, the Council took note of a document submitted under sub-item 7 (a). See Council decision 2002/295. 2. Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 22. No proposals were submitted under sub-item 7 (b). 3. International cooperation in the field of informatics The need to harmonize and improve United Nations informatics systems for optimal utilization and accessibility by all States 23. At the 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled "The need to harmonize and improve United Nations informatics systems for optimal utilization and accessibility by all States" (E/2002/L.29), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), on the basis of informal consultations. 24. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/35. Document considered by the Council in connection with sub-item 7 (c) 25. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, on the proposal of the President, the Council took note of the document submitted under sub-item 7 (c). See Council decision 2002/296. 4. Long-term programme of support for Haiti 26. At the 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), introduced a draft resolution entitled "Long-term programme of support for Haiti" (E/2002/L.17), submitted on the basis of informal consultations. 27. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/22. 28. After the draft resolution was adopted, the observer for Haiti made a statement. 5. Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system 29. At the 35th meeting, on 23 July, the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, on behalf of Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,1 Belgium,1 Brazil, Canada,1 Chile, Croatia, the Czech Republic,1 Denmark,1 Ecuador,1 Finland, France, the Gambia,1 Germany, Greece,1 Grenada,1 Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,1 Ireland,1 Italy, Jamaica,1 Japan, Kenya,1 Liberia,1 Liechtenstein,1 Luxembourg,1 Malta, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,1 Norway,1 Peru, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, South Africa, Spain,1 Suriname, Sweden, Thailand,1 Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system" (E/2002/L.14). Subsequently, Benin, Ethiopia, Guyana,1 Malaysia,1 the Philippines1 and the United Republic of Tanzania1 joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 30. At the 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/23. 6. Tobacco or health 31. At the 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), introduced a draft decision entitled "Tobacco or health" (E/2002/L.26), submitted on the basis of informal consultations. 32. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2002/242. C. Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B 33. The Council held a discussion on the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B (agenda item 8) at its 33rd meeting, on 22 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) President's summary of the special high-level meeting of the Economic and Social Council with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization (New York, 22 April 2002) (E/2002/67); (b) Consolidated report of the Secretary-General on the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council in 2002 (E/2002/73). 34. At the 33rd meeting, the Director of the Division for ECOSOC Support and Coordination of the United Nations Secretariat made an introductory statement. 35. No proposals were submitted under item 8. D. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations 36. The Council held a discussion on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (agenda item 9) at its 34th and 40th meetings, on 22 and 25 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (A/57/73); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people (A/57/130-E/2002/79). 37. Under item 9, the Council adopted resolution 2002/30. Implementation of the Declaration 38. At the 34th meeting, on 22 July, the observer for Saint Lucia,1 on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda,1 Bolivia,1 Chile, China, Fiji, Côte d'Ivoire,1 Cuba, Grenada,1 Papua New Guinea,1 Saint Lucia,1 South Africa, the Sudan and Suriname, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations" (E/2002/L.15). 39. At the 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote with 33 to none, with 21 abstentions. See Council resolution 2002/30. The voting was as follows: In favour: Angola, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Against: None. Abstaining: Andorra, Austria, Cameroon, Croatia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 40. Before the resolution was adopted, statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of the United States of America and the Russian Federation and the observer for Denmark (on behalf of the States members of the European Union and the associated countries that are members of the Council). After the resolution was adopted, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the representative of Japan. A statement was also made by the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. E. Regional cooperation 41. The Council held a discussion on regional cooperation (agenda item 10) at its 31st and 32nd meetings, on 19 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields (E/2002/15); (b) Addendum: regional follow-up to world conferences and other global meetings (E/2002/15/Add.1); (c) Addendum: cooperation with other regional bodies (E/2002/15/Add.2); (d) Addendum: matters calling for action by the Economic and Social Council or brought to its attention (E/2002/15/Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1); (e) Summary of the economic survey of Europe, 2001: the Economic Commission for Europe economies in spring 2002 (E/2002/16); (f) Summary of the economic and social situation in Africa, 2001: recent economic trends in Africa and prospects for 2002 (E/2002/17); (g) Summary of the economic and social survey of Asia and the Pacific, 2002 (E/2002/18); (h) Summary of the economic survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 (E/2002/19); (i) Summary of the survey of economic and social developments in the region of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, 2001-2002 (E/2002/20). 42. Under item 10, the Council adopted resolutions 2002/2 and 2002/3 and decision 2002/221. Recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation Restructuring the conference structure of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 43. At its 32nd meeting, on 19 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution entitled "Restructuring the conference structure of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific". See Council resolution 2002/2. Place and date of the thirtieth session of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 44. At its 32nd meeting, on 19 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution entitled "Place and date of the thirtieth session of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean". See Council resolution 2002/3. Documents considered by the Council in connection with item 10 45. At its 32nd meeting, on 19 July, the Council took note of the documents submitted under item 10. See Council decision 2002/221. 46. The representative of India made a statement. F. Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan 47. The Council held a discussion on the economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan (agenda item 11) at its 34th, 37th and 40th meetings, on 22, 24 and 25 July 2002. It had before it a note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on the implementation of Council resolution 2001/19 entitled "Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan" (A/57/63-E/2002/21). 48. Under item 11, the Council adopted resolution 2002/31. 49. At the 37th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Egypt, on behalf of Algeria,1 Cuba, Egypt, Malaysia,1 Morocco,1 Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,1 the Sudan, Tunisia,1 Qatar and Yemen, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan" (E/2002/L.22). Subsequently, Bahrain joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 50. At the 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 47 to 1, with 3 abstentions. See Council resolution 2002/31. The voting was as follows: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe. United States of America. Australia, Fiji, Guatemala. 51. Before the adoption of the resolution, statements were made by the representative of the United States of America (in explanation of vote) and the observer for Denmark (on behalf of the States members of the European Union and the associated countries that are members of the Council). After the adoption of the resolution, statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of Japan, Australia and the Russian Federation. 52. Statements were also made by the observer for Israel and the observer for Palestine. G. Non-governmental organizations 53. At its resumed organization session, the Council held a discussion on non-governmental organizations under item 2, "Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters", at its 5th meeting, on 30 April 2002. It had before it the report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its resumed 2001 session (E/2002/10). 54. At its substantive session, the Council held a discussion on non-governmental organizations (agenda item 12) at its 34th meeting, on 22 July. It had before it the report of the Committee on its 2002 regular session (E/2002/71 (Part I)). 55. Under item 2, the Council adopted decisions 2002/217 and 2002/218. 56. Under item 12, the Council adopted decisions 2002/222, 2002/223, 2002/224, 2002/225 and 2002/226. Recommendations contained in the report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its resumed 2001 session Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification 57. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council had before it draft decision I, recommended by the Committee,4 entitled "Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations". 58. At the same meeting, under rule 64 of the rules of procedure of the Council, the representative of France proposed that paragraph (d) be separated from the draft decision. 59. Also at the 5th meeting, under rule 50 of the rules of procedure of the Council, the representative of Egypt requested a no-action motion on the proposal. 60. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council made a statement concerning rule 50 of the rules of procedure of the Council. 61. Also at the 5th meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Egypt, Mexico, Nigeria, the Netherlands, Australia, Germany, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chile, France and Guatemala. 62. At the same meeting, the representative of the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat made several explanatory statements on the rules of procedure of the Council. 63. Also at the 5th meeting, the representative of the Sudan spoke on a point of order. Voting process on the motion of no action 64. At the same meeting, the President of the Council ruled to proceed on the basis of rule 50 of the rules of procedure of the Council, but only on an exceptional basis and without setting a precedent. 65. Also at the 5th meeting, the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Nigeria made statements in favour of the motion of no action. 66. At the same meeting, the representatives of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Germany made statements against the no-action motion. 67. Also at the 5th meeting, the Council proceeded to a roll-call vote on the no-action motion which was defeated by a vote of 27 to 22, with 5 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Angola, Bahrain, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Peru, Republic of Korea, Romania, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Bhutan, Cameroon, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Ukraine. Voting process on draft decision I, paragraph (d) 68. At the same meeting, the President made a ruling in accordance with rule 64 of the rules of procedure of the Council. The Council then proceeded to vote on draft decision I, paragraph (d). 69. Also at the 5th meeting, statements in explanation of vote before the vote were made by the representatives of France, Egypt, the Sudan, Pakistan, Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Nigeria and the Netherlands. 70. The President then suspended the meeting. Upon resumption of the meeting, statements were made by the representatives of France, Egypt, Chile, Guatemala and Nigeria on procedural issues. 71. The representative of the Office of Legal Affairs made several explanatory statements on the rules of procedure of the Council. 72. At the same meeting, the representatives of France, Benin, Mexico, Pakistan and Egypt spoke on a point of order. 73. Also at the 5th meeting, the Council proceeded to a roll-call vote. Paragraph (d) of draft decision I was adopted by a roll-call vote of 29 to 17, with 7 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Australia, Austria, Croatia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Romania, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Brazil, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Republic of Korea, South Africa, Ukraine. 74. After the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of Chile, India, Peru and South Africa. 75. The observer of Senegal made a statement. Voting process on draft decision I as a whole 76. At the same meeting, the Council proceeded to a roll-call vote on draft decision I as a whole. The Council adopted the draft decision as a whole by a roll-call vote of 52 to none, with 1 abstention. See Council decision 2002/217. The voting was as follows: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe. Ukraine. Report of the Committee on its 2001 resumed session 77. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council adopted draft decision II, recommended by the Committee,4 entitled "Report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its 2001 resumed session". See Council decision 2002/218. Recommendations contained in the report of the Committee on its 2002 session 78. At its 34th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Committee,5 entitled "Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations". See Council decision 2002/222. 79. Before the decision was adopted, a statement was made by the observer for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Quadrennial reports, special reports and complaints 80. At its 34th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Committee,5 entitled "Quadrennial reports, special reports and complaints". See Council decision 2002/223. Resumed 2002 session of the Committee 81. At its 34th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it draft decision III recommended by the Committee,5 entitled "Resumed 2002 session of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations". 82. At the same meeting, the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), orally amended the draft decision by inserting the phrase "on the understanding that the conference services will be provided on an `as available' basis" before the words "in order to complete the work of its 2002 session". 83. Also at the 34th meeting, the Council was informed that the programme budget implications of the draft decision, contained in annex I of the report of the Committee on its 2002 regular session,6 would not apply. 84. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision as orally amended. See Council decision 2002/224. Establishment of the general voluntary trust fund in support of the United Nations NGO Informal Regional Network 85. At its 34th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision IV recommended by the Committee,5 entitled "Establishment of the general voluntary trust fund in support of the United Nations NGO Informal Regional Network". See Council decision 2002/225. Report of the Committee on its 2002 regular session 86. At its 34th meeting, on 22 July, following statements by the representatives of the Sudan, Egypt, Cuba, France, Pakistan, China and the United States of America, the Council decided to defer action on the report of the Committee on its 2002 regular session until part two of the report had become available in all languages. See Council decision 2002/226. H. Economic and environmental questions 87. The Council held a discussion on economic and environmental questions (under agenda item 13) at its 35th, 36th, 40th and 41st meetings, on 23, 25 and 26 July 2002. 1. Sustainable development 88. The Council held a discussion on sustainable development (sub-item 13 (a)) at its 35th, 36th, 40th and 41st meetings, on 23, 25 and 26 July. It had before it the report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fourth session (E/2002/33).7 89. Under sub-item 13 (a), the Council adopted resolution 2002/36. Report of the Committee for Development Policy 90. At the 40th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of Maldives introduced a draft resolution entitled "Report of the Committee for Development Policy" (E/2002/L.27), which read as follows: "The Economic and Social Council, "Recalling its resolution 1998/46 of 31 July 1998, in which it decided that the Council should decide on an appropriate work programme for the Committee for Development Policy, "Recalling also its resolutions 2000/34 of 28 July 2000 on the report of the Committee for Development Policy on its second session and 2001/43 of 24 October 2001 on the report of the Committee on its third session, "Recalling further General Assembly resolution 46/206 of 20 December 1991 on the report of the Committee for Development Planning and criteria for identifying the least developed countries, "Taking note with appreciation of the presentation by the Chairman and other members of the Bureau of the Committee for Development Policy and of the report of the Committee on its fourth session,7 "Having considered the memorandum submitted by the Government of Maldives,8 "1. Welcomes the report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fourth session,1 the views contained therein regarding the criteria for the identification of the least developed countries and the recognition of the importance of ensuring smooth transition for graduating countries; "2. Requests the Committee to continue its work on the re-examination of its recommendation to graduate Maldives from the list of least developed countries at its fifth session and to submit its recommendations to the Council at its substantive session of 2003 in the context of the triennial review of the list of least developed countries, taking into account the information referred to above and further information to be provided by relevant development partners and multilateral organizations; "3. Reiterates the importance of ensuring a smooth transition from least developed country status for graduating countries, and in this regard urges international organizations and bilateral donors to continue to provide the information requested by the United Nations Secretariat and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on their likely response to a country's graduation from the list of least developed countries and to continue the debate concerning the treatment of graduating countries with a view to ensuring that the graduation of a country from the list of the least developed countries should not result in disruption of its development plans, programmes and projects; "4. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that country vulnerability profiles be prepared for each country close to the graduation thresholds, including Maldives, and that such profiles be completed before the end of 2002, so that they will be available for the preparation of the next triennial review in 2003; "5. Reiterates the importance of consulting with relevant Member States in the preparation and use of country vulnerability profiles as well as the continuing need for transparency, objectivity and accuracy in these processes; "6. Requests the Committee to continue its work on the methodology to be used for the identification of the least developed countries, where appropriate in association with other international organizations working on environmental and economic vulnerability issues; "7. Also requests the Committee, at its fifth session, to examine and make recommendations regarding the theme chosen for the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2003 of the Council; "8. Welcomes the proposals made by the Committee regarding its future programme of work; "9. Invites the Chairman and, as necessary, other members of the Committee to continue the practice of reporting orally to the Council on the work of the Committee." 91. At the same meeting, the representative of Maldives orally revised the draft resolution, which was subsequently issued in document E/2002/L.27/Rev.1. 92. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it the revised draft resolution entitled "Report of the Committee for Development Policy" (E/2002/L.27/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsor of draft resolution E/2002/L.27. 93. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the revised draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/36. 2. Science and technology for development 94. The Council held a discussion on science and technology for development (sub-item 13 (b)) at its 35th, 36th and 41st meetings, on 23 and 26 July. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the coordinating role of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development in support of efforts by developing countries to benefit from science and technology (A/56/96-E/2001/87); (b) Note by the Secretary-General of the United Nations transmitting the report of the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the ongoing preparatory process for the World Summit on the Information Society (A/57/71-E/2002/52); (c) Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its fifth session (E/2001/31).9 Action by the Council 95. Under sub-item 13 (b), the Council adopted resolution 2002/37 and decision 2002/227. Recommendation contained in the report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its fifth session Strengthening the work of the Commission 96. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it draft resolution III, recommended by the Commission,10 entitled "Strengthening the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development". 97. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution. 98. Also at the 41st meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 34 to 15, with 5 abstentions. See Council resolution 2002/37. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Australia, Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Netherlands, Romania, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Croatia, Georgia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Ukraine. 99. Before the adoption of the resolution, statements were made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Venezuela (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), the United States of America, China and the Russian Federation; after the adoption of the resolution, statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of Australia, the Republic of Korea and France. Document considered by the Council in connection with sub-item 13 (b) Report of the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the preparations for the World Summit on the Information Society 100. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), the Council took note of the note by the Secretary-General of the United Nations transmitting the report of the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the preparations for the World Summit on the Information Society (A/57/71-E/2002/52). See Council decision 2002/227. 3. Statistics 101. The Council held a discussion on statistics (sub-item 13 (c)) at its 36th and 41st meetings, on 23 and 26 July. It had before it: (a) Report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-third session (E/2002/24);11 (b) Letter dated 5 July 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General on the offer by the Government of Japan to host the Sixteenth United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference for Asia and the Pacific in the year 2003 (E/2002/80). 102. Under sub-item 13 (c), the Council adopted decisions 2002/229, 2002/297 and 2002/298. Sixteenth United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference for Asia and the Pacific in the year 2003 103. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, the Council decided to accept the offer of the Government of Japan to host the Sixteenth United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference for Asia and the Pacific in the year 2003. See Council decision 2002/229. Recommendation contained in the report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-third session Report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-third session 104. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council decided to defer taking note of the report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-third session. See Council decision 2002/297. Date, venue and provisional agenda and documentation of the thirty-fourth session of Statistical Commission 105. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council decided on the date and venue of the thirty-fourth session of the Commission and approved the provisional agenda and documentation for the session. See Council decision 2002/298. 106. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Denmark (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Venezuela (on behalf of States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). 4. Human settlements 107. The Council held a discussion on human settlements (sub-item 13 (d)) at its 40th and 41st meetings, on 25 and 26 July. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda (E/2002/48). 108. Under sub-item 13 (d), the Council adopted resolution 2002/38. Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda 109. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of Venezuela (on behalf of States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) introduced a draft resolution entitled "Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda" (E/2002/L.30), which read as follows: "Recalling the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,12 which was adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth special session, "Stressing the importance of General Assembly resolutions 56/206 and 56/205 of 21 December 2001, "Recalling relevant resolutions on human settlements, in particular General Assembly resolutions 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 and 32/162 of 19 December 1977, "Recalling also the goal contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration13 of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least one hundred million slum-dwellers by the year 2020, "Recognizing that urgent steps should be taken to ensure better mobilization of financial resources at all levels to enhance the implementation of the Habitat Agenda,14 the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium and the relevant goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration, particularly in developing countries, "Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda,15 "1. Calls upon Governments, in particular developed countries, and international financial institutions to increase their financial contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation to assist developing countries in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda,14 the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium12 and the United Nations millennium development goal of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least one hundred million slum-dwellers, with due consideration of marginalized groups, by the year 2020;16 "2. Encourages the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) to continue to implement the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium, inter alia, through promoting partnerships with the Habitat Agenda partners, to achieve the goals of adequate shelter for all and sustainable human settlements; "3. Invites the Executive Director of UN-Habitat to establish, within the framework of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and in accordance with paragraph 66 of the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium, the Habitat Agenda Task Manager System to allow better monitoring and mutual reinforcement of actions taken by international agencies in support of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda; "4. Encourages UN-Habitat to strengthen its collaboration with the United Nations Development Group and other relevant bodies in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda; "5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its substantive session of 2003 under the item entitled "Economic and environmental questions" a sub-item entitled "Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda", and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Council at its 2003 session a report on the implementation of the present resolution." 110. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it a revised draft resolution entitled "Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda" (E/2002/30/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution E/2002/L.30. 111. Also at the 41st meeting, the Council adopted the revised draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/38. 5. Environment 112. The Council held a discussion on environment (sub-item 13 (e)) at its 35th and 36th meetings, on 23 July. It had before it the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its seventh special session (A/57/25).17 113. Under sub-item 13 (e), the Council adopted decision 2002/228. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme 114. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), the Council took note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme (A/57/25). See Council decision 2002/228. 6. Population and development 115. The Council held a discussion on population and development (sub-item 13 (f)) at its 36th and 41st meetings, on 23 and 26 July. It had before it the report of the Commission on Population and Development on its thirty-fifth session (E/2002/25).18 116. Under sub-item 13 (f), the Council adopted decision 2002/299. Recommendation contained in the report of the Commission on Population and Development at its thirty-fifth session Report of the Commission on its thirty-fifth session and provisional agenda for its thirty-sixth session 117. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council adopted a draft decision recommended by the Commission,19 entitled "Report of the Commission on Population and Development on its thirty-fifth session and provisional agenda for the thirty-sixth session of the Commission". See Council decision 2002/299. 7. Public administration 118. The Council held a discussion on public administration (sub-item 13 (g)) at its 36th meeting, on 23 July. 119. Under sub-item 13 (g), the Council adopted decision 2002/230. 120. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), the Council decided to defer until its resumed session the consideration of the sub-item. See Council decision 2002/230. 8. International cooperation in tax matters 121. The Council held a discussion on international cooperation in tax matters (sub-item 13 (h)) at its 36th meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the 10th meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (E/2002/6). 122. Under sub-item 13 (h), the Council adopted decision 2002/231. Document considered by the Council in connection with sub-item 13 (h) Report of the Secretary-General on the 10th meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters 123. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the 10th meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (E/2002/6). See Council decision 2002/231. In that connection, the Council agreed to the holding of the eleventh meeting in 2003 and approved the provisional agenda as contained in paragraph 48 of the report. 9. United Nations Forum on Forests 124. The Council held a discussion on the United Nations Forum on Forests (sub-item 13 (i)) at its 35th, 36th and 41st meetings, on 23 and 26 July. It had before it the report of the United Nations Forum on Forests on its second session (E/2002/42).20 125. Under sub-item 13 (i), the Council adopted decisions 2002/300 and 2002/301. Recommendations contained in the report of the United Nations Forum on Forests on its second session Date and venue of the third session of the Forum 126. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it draft decision I recommended by the Forum,21 entitled "Date and venue of the third session of the United Nations Forum on Forests". 127. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2002/300. Report of the Forum on its second session and provisional agenda for its third session 128. At its 41st meeting, on 26 July, the Council had before it draft decision II recommended by the Forum,21 entitled "Report of the United Nations Forum on Forests on its second session and provisional agenda for its third session". 129. At the same meeting, as a result of informal consultations that had been held on the draft decision, the representative of Venezuela amended it as follows: (a) In the provisional agenda for the third session of the Forum, sub-item 3 (a) became sub-item 3 (b) and sub-item 3 (b) became sub-item 3 (a), and at the end of the new sub-item 3 (b), the following words were added: "as a cross-cutting issue, considered in the context of items 3 (a) (i) (ii) and (iii)"; (b) In sub-item 4 (e) of the provisional agenda for the third session of the Forum, the words "review of the reports of the ad hoc expert groups" were replaced by the words "further discussion on the ad hoc expert groups" 130. Also at the 41st meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision as amended. See Council decision 2002/301. 10. Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions 131. The Council held a discussion on assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (sub-item 13 (j)) at its 36th meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Charter of the United Nations related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (A/56/303); (b) Note by the Secretary-General on assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (E/2002/65). 132. Under sub-item 13 (j), the Council adopted decision 2002/232. Documents considered by the Council in connection with sub-item13 (j) 133. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), the Council took note of the documents submitted under sub-item 13 (j). See Council decision 2002/232. I. Social and human rights questions 134. The Council held a discussion on social and human rights questions at its organizational session (agenda item 2) and at its substantive session (agenda items 14 (a) to (h)) at its 2nd and 37th to 40th meetings, on 13 February and 24 and 25 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: Advancement of women (agenda item 14 (a)) (a) Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the work of its twenty-sixth session (A/57/38 (Part I));22 (b) Note by the Secretary-General on the situation of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (A/57/129-E/2002/77); (c) Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its forty-sixth session (E/2002/27);23 (d) Report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to, and progress in the implementation of, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (E/2002/66); (e) Report of the Board of Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2002/70); Social development (agenda item 14 (b)) (f) Note by the Secretary-General on the follow-up to the International Year of the Family in 2004 (A/57/67-E/2002/45); (g) Report of the Commission for Social Development on its fortieth session (E/2002/26);24 (h) Letter dated 17 July 2002 from the representative of the International Labour Organization to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/81); Crime prevention and criminal justice (agenda item 14 (c)) (i) Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its eleventh session (E/2002/30 and Corr.1);25 Narcotic drugs (agenda item 14 (d)) (j) Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-fifth session (E/2002/28 and Corr.1 and 2);26 (k) Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2001 (E/INCB/2001/1);27 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (agenda item 14 (e)) (l) Note verbale dated 19 October 2001 from the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2002/7); (m) Note verbale dated 3 October 2001 from the Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2002/8); (n) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (E/2002/14 and Corr.1);28 (o) Letter dated 12 June 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2002/75); Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination (agenda item 14 (f)) (p) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 56/265 and 55/84 on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance (A/57/83-E/2002/72); Human rights (agenda item 14 (g)) (q) Report of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh sessions (E/2002/22);29 (r) Report of the Commission on Human Rights on its fifty-eighth session (E/2002/23 (Parts I and II))30 and the programme budget implications of resolutions and decisions contained therein (E/2002/L.24);30 (s) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/68 and Add.1); (t) Statement submitted by Amnesty International, Association for the Prevention of Torture, Human Rights Watch, International Commission of Jurists, International Federation of ACAT, International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights, International League for Human Rights, International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims, International Service for Human Rights and World Organization against Torture, non-governmental organizations in special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/NGO/1); Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (agenda item 14 (h)) (u) Report of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues on its first session (E/2002/43-E/CN.19/2002/3 (Parts I and II) and E/2002/CRP.4) and the programme budget implications of the recommendations contained therein (E/2002/43 (Part I)/Add.1-E/CN.19/2002/3 (Part I)/Add.1)). Documents considered by the Council under item 14 135. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the President, the Council took note of a number of documents submitted under item 14. See Council decision 2002/289. 1. Advancement of women 136. Under sub-item 14 (a), the Council adopted resolutions 2002/4, 2002/5 and 2002/25 and decisions 2002/234 to 2002/236. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its forty-sixth session Situation of and assistance to Palestinian women 137. At the 37th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of the United States of America requested a vote on draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,31 entitled "The situation of and assistance to Palestinian women". 138. At its 38th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 46 to 1, with 1 abstention. See Council resolution 2002/25. The voting was as follows:32 Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe. Australia. 139. After the draft resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States of American and Australia. 140. At the 40th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic made a statement. Situation of women and girls in Afghanistan 141. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,31 entitled "Situation of women and girls in Afghanistan". See Council resolution 2002/4. Agreed conclusions of the Commission on thematic issues 142. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,31 entitled "Agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women on thematic issues". See Council resolution 2002/5. Election of the Bureau of the Commission 143. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,33 entitled "Election of the Bureau of the Commission on the Status of Women". See Council decision 2002/234. Communications concerning the status of women: communications procedure 144. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,33 entitled "Communications concerning the status of women: communications procedure". See Council decision 2002/235. Report of the Commission on its forty-sixth session and provisional agenda for its forty-seventh session 145. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision III recommended by the Commission,33 entitled "Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its forty-sixth session and the provisional agenda for the forty-seventh session of the Commission". See Council decision 2002/236. 146. After the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of China and the Sudan. 2. Social development 147. Under item 2 of the agenda of the organizational session for 2002, the Council adopted decision 2002/210. Under sub-item 14 (b), the Council adopted resolutions 2002/6, 2002/7 and 2002/26 and decisions 2002/210 and 2002/237. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission for Social Development on its fortieth session Preparation for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family 148. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council approved a draft resolution recommended by the Commission,34 entitled "Preparation for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family", for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2002/6. Further promotion of equalization of opportunities by, for and with persons with disabilities and protection of their human rights 149. At the 37th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of the United States of America made a statement regarding draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,35 entitled "Further promotion of equalization of opportunities by, for and with persons with disabilities and protection of their human rights". 150. At its 38th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/26. 151. Before the resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Qatar and the United States of America. Comprehensive and integral international convention to promote and protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities 152. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,35 entitled "Comprehensive and integral international convention to promote and protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities". See Council resolution 2002/7. Organizational matters Improvement of the work of the Commission 153. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,36 entitled "Organizational matters". See Council decision 2002/210, entitled "Improvement of the work of the Commission for Social Development" (for the discussion, see chap. IX, para. 13). Report of the Commission on its fortieth session and provisional agenda and documentation for its forty-first session 154. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,36 entitled "Report of the Commission for Social Development on its fortieth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-first session of the Commission". See Council decision 2002/237. 3. Crime prevention and criminal justice 155. Under sub-item 14 (c), the Council adopted resolutions 2002/8 to 2002/19 and decisions 2002/238 and 2002/239. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its eleventh session International cooperation in the fight against transnational organized crime: assistance to States in capacity-building with a view to facilitating the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto 156. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council approved draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,37 entitled "International cooperation in the fight against transnational organized crime: assistance to States in capacity-building with a view to facilitating the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto", for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2002/8. High-level political conference for the purpose of signing the United Nations convention against corruption 157. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council approved draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,37 entitled "High-level political conference for the purpose of signing the United Nations convention against corruption", for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2002/9. Follow-up to the plans of action for the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century 158. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council approved draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,37 entitled "Follow-up to the plans of action for the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century", for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2002/10. Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 159. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council approved draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission,37 entitled "Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice", for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2002/11. Basic principles on the use of restorative justice programmes in criminal matters 160. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "Basic principles on the use of restorative justice programmes in criminal matters". See Council resolution 2002/12. Action to promote effective crime prevention 161. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "Action to promote effective crime prevention". See Council resolution 2002/13. Promoting effective measures to deal with the issues of missing children and sexual abuse or exploitation of children 162. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "Promoting effective measures to deal with the issues of missing children and sexual abuse or exploitation of children". See Council resolution 2002/14. United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice 163. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice". See Council resolution 2002/15. International cooperation in the prevention, combating and elimination of kidnapping and in providing assistance for the victims 164. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution V recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "International cooperation in the prevention, combating and elimination of kidnapping and in providing assistance for the victims". See Council resolution 2002/16. International cooperation, technical assistance and advisory services in crime prevention and criminal justice 165. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VI recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "International cooperation, technical assistance and advisory services in crime prevention and criminal justice". See Council resolution 2002/17. Illicit trafficking in protected species of wild flora and fauna 166. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VII recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "Illicit trafficking in protected species of wild flora and fauna". See Council resolution 2002/18. Strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance within the framework of the activities of the Centre for International Crime Prevention in preventing and combating terrorism 167. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VIII recommended by the Commission,38 entitled "Strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance within the framework of the activities of the Centre for International Crime Prevention in preventing and combating terrorism". See Council resolution 2002/19. Report of the Commission on its eleventh session, provisional agenda and documentation for the twelfth session, and organization of work and themes for its future sessions 168. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,39 entitled "Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its eleventh session, provisional agenda and documentation for its twelfth session, and organization of work and themes for its future sessions". See Council decision 2002/238. Appointment of members of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute 169. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,39 entitled "Appointment of members of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute". See Council decision 2002/239. 4. Narcotic drugs 170. Under sub-item 14 (d), the Council adopted resolutions 2002/20 and 2002/21 and decisions 2002/240 and 2002/241. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-fifth session Demand for and supply of opiates for medical and scientific needs 171. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,40 entitled "Demand for and supply of opiates for medical and scientific needs". See Council resolution 2002/20. International assistance to the States most affected by the transit of drugs 172. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,41 entitled "International assistance to the States most affected by the transit of drugs". See Council resolution 2002/21. Report of the Commission on its forty-fifth session and provisional agenda and documentation for its forty-sixth session 173. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,41 entitled "Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-fifth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-sixth session of the Commission". See Council decision 2002/240. Report of the International Narcotics Control Board 174. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,41 entitled "Report of the International Narcotics Control Board". See Council decision 2002/241. 5. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 175. Under sub-item 14 (e), the Council adopted decision 2002/288. Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 176. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the observer for Cyprus,1 also on behalf of Kenya1 and Yemen,1 introduced a draft decision entitled "Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" (E/2002/L.11). 177. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the draft decision and recommended it to the General Assembly for action. See Council decision 2002/288. 6. Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination 178. No proposals were submitted under sub-item 14 (f). 7. Human rights 179. Under sub-item 14 (g), the Council adopted resolution 2002/27 and decisions 2002/243 to 2002/284. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Human Rights on its fifty-eighth session Draft optional protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and amendment thereto 180. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of the United States of America introduced an amendment (E/2002/L.23) to the draft resolution recommended by the Commission,42 entitled "Draft optional protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment". The amendment read as follows: "Replace operative paragraphs 1 to 3 with the following text: "Recommends that the General Assembly convene an open-ended, intrasessional working group during its fifty-seventh session, the costs to be met within existing resources, with the mandate to continue considering the draft optional protocol, taking into account concerns expressed about the current text and the process connected with it, and to report to the Assembly when the working group has completed its further consideration of the draft optional protocol." 181. In introducing the amendment, the representative of the United States of America orally revised it by inserting the word "regular" before the words "fifty-seventh session" and inserting the words "on an as-available basis" after the words "fifty-seventh session". 182. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement on the conference servicing implications related to the amendment. 183. Also at the 38th meeting, following procedural statements by the representatives of Cuba and Costa Rica, the Council voted on the amendment contained in document E/2002/L.23. The amendment was rejected by a recorded vote of 29 to 15, with 8 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Australia, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sudan, Uganda, United States of America. Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Benin, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Peru, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Bahrain, Bhutan, Georgia, Nepal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Ukraine. 184. Before the vote on the amendment, statements were made by the representatives of Japan, China, South Africa, India, Cyprus, Mexico, Nigeria and Cuba and the observer for Denmark (on behalf of the European Union). 185. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 35 to 8, with 10 abstentions. See Council resolution 2002/27. The voting was as follows: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Peru, Republic of Korea, Romania, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Australia, China, Cuba, Egypt, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria, Sudan. Bhutan, Cameroon, Ethiopia, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, United States of America, Zimbabwe. 186. Before the resolution was adopted, the representative of the United States of America made a statement; after the resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Australia, the Republic of Korea, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Egypt and the Sudan. Question of the violation of human rights in the occupied Arab territories, including Palestine 187. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council considered draft decision 1 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Question of the violation of human rights in the occupied Arab territories, including Palestine". 188. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision by a recorded vote of 27 to 2, with 17 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/243. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Pakistan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Ukraine, Zimbabwe. Australia, United States of America. Andorra, Austria, Croatia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Peru, Romania, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 189. Before the decision was adopted, the representative of the United States of America made a statement; after the decision was adopted, the representative of Peru made a statement. Human rights situation of Lebanese detainees in Israel 190. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council considered draft decision 2 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Human rights situation of Lebanese detainees in Israel". 191. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision by a recorded vote of 25 to 1, with 22 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/244. The voting was as follows: Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Ukraine, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria, Croatia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Peru, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 192. Before the decision was adopted, the representative of the United States of America made a statement; after the decision was adopted, the representative of Australia made a statement. Assistance to Equatorial Guinea in the field of human rights 193. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 3 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Assistance to Equatorial Guinea in the field of human rights". See Council decision 2002/245. Situation of human rights in Burundi 194. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 4 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in Burundi". See Council decision 2002/246. Situation of human rights in parts of south-eastern Europe 195. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 5 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in parts of south-eastern Europe". See Council decision 2002/247. Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 196. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 6 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo". See Council decision 2002/248. Situation of human rights in Iraq 197. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 7 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in Iraq". See Council decision 2002/249. 198. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Cuba and the observer for Iraq. Situation of human rights in the Sudan 199. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 8 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in the Sudan". See Council decision 2002/250. 200. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the Sudan, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Cuba, China, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Nigeria. Situation of human rights in Cuba 201. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 9 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in Cuba". See Council decision 2002/251. 202. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Cuba, the Sudan, Zimbabwe, Pakistan, Nigeria, South Africa, Burundi, the Russian Federation, Angola, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Islamic Republic of Iran, China and Suriname. Situation of human rights in Afghanistan 203. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 10 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in Afghanistan". See Council decision 2002/252. Situation of human rights in Sierra Leone 204. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 11 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in Sierra Leone". See Council decision 2002/253. Question of the realization in all countries of the economic, social and cultural rights contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and study of special problems which the developing countries face in their efforts to achieve these human rights 205. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 12 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Question of the realization in all countries of the economic, social and cultural rights contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and study of special problems which the developing countries face in their efforts to achieve these human rights", by a recorded vote of 46 to 1, with 4 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/254. The voting was as follows: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe. Australia, India, Japan, Pakistan. 206. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Cuba; after the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Australia and Suriname. The right to food 207. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 13 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "The right to food", by a recorded vote of 49 to 1, with 1 abstention. See Council decision 2002/255. The voting was as follows: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe. 208. Before the decision was adopted, the representative of the United States of America made a statement. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of human rights 209. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 14 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of human rights", by a recorded vote of 31 to 20. See Council decision 2002/256. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Australia, Austria, Croatia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Effects of structural adjustment policies and foreign debt on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights 210. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 15 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Effects of structural adjustment policies and foreign debt on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights", by a recorded vote of 24 to 20, with 7 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/257. The voting was as follows: Angola, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Argentina, Bahrain, Chile, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru. 211. Before the vote on the decision, the representative of the United States of America made a statement. Human rights and extreme poverty 212. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 16 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Human rights and extreme poverty". See Council decision 2002/258. 213. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the Sudan, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Cuba, China, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Nigeria. The right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health 214. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 17 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "The right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health", by a recorded vote of 49 to 2. See Council decision 2002/259. The voting was as follows: 215. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America and Brazil; after the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Japan and Australia. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment 216. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 18 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment". See Council decision 2002/260. Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance 217. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 19 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance". See Council decision 2002/261. The right to freedom of opinion and expression 218. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 20 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "The right to freedom of opinion and expression". See Council decision 2002/262. Integrating the human rights of women throughout the United Nations system 219. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 21 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Integrating the human rights of women throughout the United Nations system". See Council decision 2002/263. International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 220. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 22 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families". See Council decision 2002/264. Human rights of persons with disabilities 221. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 23 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Human rights of persons with disabilities". See Council decision 2002/265. Human rights of migrants 222. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 24 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Human rights of migrants". See Council decision 2002/266. Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People 223. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 25 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People", by a recorded vote of 50 to none, with 1 abstention. See Council decision 2002/267. The voting was as follows: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe. 224. Before the decision was adopted, the representative of the United States of America made a statement. Working group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994 225. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 26 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Working group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994". See Council decision 2002/268. Situation of human rights in Myanmar 226. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 27 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in Myanmar". See Council decision 2002/269. Racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the amendment to the draft decision thereon 227. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of South Africa introduced an amendment (E/2002/L.21) to draft decision 28 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance". 228. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the amendment contained in E/2002/L.21. 229. At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft decision 28, as amended, by a recorded vote of 30 to 17, with 4 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/270. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Australia, Austria, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Netherlands, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Burundi,44 Croatia, Japan, Republic of Korea. 230. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America, Cuba and South Africa and the observers for Denmark (on behalf of the European Union) and Israel; after the decision was adopted, the representative of Australia made a statement. The right to development 231. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 29 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "The right to development". See Council decision 2002/271. Composition of the staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 232. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 30 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Composition of the staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights", by a recorded vote of 31 to 18, with 2 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/272. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Ukraine, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Australia, Austria, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Croatia, Mexico. Assistance to Somalia in the field of human rights 233. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 31 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Assistance to Somalia in the field of human rights". See Council decision 2002/273. Enhancement of the effectiveness of the working methods of the Commission 234. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 32 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Enhancement of the effectiveness of the working methods of the Commission". See Council decision 2002/274. Rights of the child 235. At its 39th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 33 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Rights of the child". See Council decision 2002/275. Interaction between the secretariat of the procedure established pursuant to resolution 1503 (XLVIII) of the Council and the Division for the Advancement of Women 236. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council considered draft decision 34 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Interaction between the secretariat of the procedure established pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1503 (XLVIII) and the Division for the Advancement of Women". 237. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba moved, under rule 50 of the rules of procedure of the Council, to defer action on the draft decision. 238. Also at the 40th meeting, the representatives of Pakistan and China spoke in favour of the motion and the representatives of Italy and Argentina spoke in opposition to the motion. 239. At the same meeting, the Council rejected the motion to defer action on the draft decision by a recorded vote of 33 to 18, with 2 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Bahrain, Bhutan, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Benin, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, El Salvador, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Peru, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Burundi, Qatar. 240. Also at the 40th meeting, the Council rejected the draft decision by a recorded vote of 30 to 21, with 2 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Bahrain, Bhutan, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Benin, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, El Salvador, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Peru, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Angola, Suriname. 241. Before the vote on the draft decision, statements were made by the representatives of Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran, China, Pakistan, the Sudan, South Africa, Benin and Egypt, and the observers for Denmark (on behalf of the European Union) and Saudi Arabia. The Social Forum 242. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 35 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "The Social Forum", by a recorded vote of 33 to 3, with 17 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/271. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Australia, Japan, United States of America. Andorra, Austria, Cameroon, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Netherlands, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 243. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America and Cuba and the observer for Denmark (on behalf of the European Union) as well as by the Director of the New York Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who responded to questions raised; after the decision was adopted, the representative of Japan made a statement. Human rights and human responsibilities 244. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 36 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Human rights and human responsibilities", by a recorded vote of 29 to 19, with 5 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/277. The voting was as follows: Angola, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Uganda, Zimbabwe. Andorra, Australia, Austria, Croatia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Argentina, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Peru, Republic of Korea. Dates of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission 245. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 37 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Dates of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on Human Rights". See Council decision 2002/278. Expiration of office-holders' terms of appointment under special procedures 246. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 38 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Expiration of office-holders' terms of appointment under special procedures". See Council decision 2002/279. Intersessional activities of the Bureau 247. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 39 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Intersessional activities of the Bureau". See Council decision 2002/280. Organization of the work of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission 248. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 40 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Organization of the work of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on Human Rights", by a recorded vote of 50 to 2. See Council decision 2002/281. The voting was as follows:45 Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe. 249. Before the decision was adopted, the representative of the United States of America made a statement; after the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Japan and Australia. Electronic voting system 250. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 41 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Electronic voting system". See Council decision 2002/282. Situation of human rights in East Timor 251. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 42 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Situation of human rights in East Timor". See Council decision 2002/283. Technical cooperation and the situation of human rights in Haiti 252. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision 43 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled "Technical cooperation and the situation of human rights in Haiti". See Council decision 2002/284. 253. After the Council's consideration of the recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Human Rights, statements were made by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Egypt, Pakistan, the Sudan and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 8. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 254. Under sub-item 14 (h), the Council adopted resolution 2002/28 and decisions 2002/285 to 2002/287. 255. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Sweden, on behalf of Brazil, Canada,1 Denmark,1 Fiji, Finland, Germany, Greece,1 Guatemala, Iceland,1 Luxembourg,1 Mexico, New Zealand,1 Norway,1 the Philippines,1 the Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain1 and Sweden, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues" (E/2002/L.16). Subsequently, Australia and Ecuador1 joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 256. In introducing the draft resolution, the representative of Sweden orally revised it by replacing the text of operative paragraph 2, which had read: "Recommends the Secretary-General, when recruiting the staff of the secretariat unit, in conformity with article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, to give due consideration to all applications, including those from indigenous persons" with the following text: "Encourages applications of indigenous persons to the Secretariat, and invites the Secretary-General to give broad publicity to vacancies, when available." 257. At the 40th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of Suriname made a statement with regard to the draft resolution. 258. At the same meeting, the representative of Sweden orally corrected the draft resolution by inserting, in operative paragraph 2, the words "in New York" after the words "the Secretariat". 259. Also at the 40th meeting, the Council approved the draft resolution, as revised and corrected, for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2002/28. 260. After the resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Japan and India. Second session of the Forum 261. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Sweden introduced a draft decision entitled "Second session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues" (E/2002/L.19). 262. At the 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a statement of the programme budget implications of the draft decision (E/2002/L.33), submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 31 of the rules of procedure of the Council. 263. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision by a recorded vote of 44 to none, with 9 abstentions. See Council decision 2002/285. The voting was as follows: Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, Zimbabwe. Andorra, France, Georgia, Germany, India, Japan, Netherlands, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 264. Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America, Australia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Netherlands and China as well as by the Secretary of the Council, who responded to points raised; after the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Japan and Germany. 265. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Sweden introduced a draft decision entitled "Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues" (E/2002/L.20). 266. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2002/286. Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 267. At the 38th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Sweden orally proposed a draft decision entitled "Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues", which was subsequently issued in document E/2002/L.32. 268. At its 40th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2002/287. Recommendations contained in the report of the Forum on its first session 269. In the light of the adoption of resolution 2002/28 and decisions 2002/285 to 2002/287, the Council took no action with regard to draft decisions I, II, III and IV contained in part one of the report of the Forum on its first session.46 J. Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system 270. The Council held a discussion on the consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system (agenda item 15) at its 36th meeting, on 23 July 2002. It had before it a letter dated 19 July 2001 from the Secretary-General of the International Civil Defence Organization to the President of the Council (E/2002/4). 271. Under item 16, the Council adopted decision 2002/233. Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system 272. At its 36th meeting, on 23 July, the Council agreed to defer action on this item until a later date. See Council decision 2002/233. K. Consideration of the request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system 273. The Council held a discussion on the consideration of the request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system (agenda item 16) at its 36th and 37th meetings, on 23 and 24 July 2002. It had before it a letter dated 21 December 2001 from the Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization to the Secretary-General of the United Nations (E/2002/5). 274. Under item 16, the Council adopted resolution 2002/24. Arrangements for the negotiation of an agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization 275. At its 37th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), entitled "Arrangements for the negotiation of an agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization " (E/2002/L.25). 276. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of the conference servicing implications of the draft resolution. 277. Also at the 37th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2002/24. 278. After the adoption of the resolution, a statement was made by the representative of Argentina. 1 In accordance with rule 72 of the rules of procedure of the Economic and Social Council. 18-22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7). 3 To be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/57/16). 4 See E/2002/10, sect. I. 5 See E/2002/71 (Part I), sect. I. 6 E/2002/71 (Part I). 7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 13 (E/2002/33). 8 See E/2000/104. 9 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 11 (E/2001/31). 10 Ibid., chap. I, sect. A. 11 Ibid., 2002, Supplement No. 4 (E/2002/24). 12 General Assembly resolution S-25/2, annex. 13 See General Assembly resolution 55/2. 14 Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II. 15 E/2002/48. 16 See A/56/36, sect. III. 17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/57/25). 18 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 5 (E/2002/25). 19 Ibid., chap. I, sect. A. 20 Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (E/2002/42). 21 Ibid., chap. II, sect. A. 22 To be issued in Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/57/38). 23 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 7 (E/2002/27). 24 Ibid., Supplement No. 6 (E/2002/26). 25 Ibid., Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2002/30 and Corr.1). 26 Ibid., Supplement No. 8 and corrigenda (E/2002/28 and Corr.1 and 2). 27 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XI.1. 28 Issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/57/12). 29 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 2 (E/2002/22). 30 Ibid., Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23). 31 Ibid., Supplement No. 7 (E/2002/27), chap. I, sect. A. 32 The delegation of Nepal stated that, had it been present during the voting, it would have voted in favour of the draft resolution. 33 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 7 (E/2002/27), chap. I, sect. B. 34 Ibid., Supplement No. 6 (E/2002/26), chap. I, sect. A. 35 Ibid., sect. B. 36 Ibid., sect. C. 37 Ibid., Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2002/30 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A. 38 Ibid., sect. B. 39 Ibid., sect. C. 40 Ibid., Supplement No. 8 and corrigenda (E/2002/28 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. I, sect. A. 41 Ibid., sect. B. 42 See E/2002/23 (Part I) (to be issued in Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23)), chap. I, sect. A. 43 Ibid., sect. B. 44 The delegation of Burundi stated that it had intended to vote in favour of the draft decision, as amended, and not to abstain. 45 The delegation of Cuba stated that it had intended to vote in favour of the draft decision. 46 See E/2002/43 (Part I) -- E/CN.19/2002/3 (Part I), chap. I, sect. A. Chapter VIII Elections, appointments, nominations and confirmations 1. At its organizational and resumed organizational sessions (agenda item 4) and substantive session (agenda item 1), the Council considered the question of elections, appointments, nominations and confirmations at its 2nd, 4th and 41st meetings, on 13 February, 29 April and 26 July 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Annotated provisional agenda for the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002 (E/2002/2 and Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1); (b) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of a member of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (E/2002/L.1); (c) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of members of the functional commissions of the Council (E/2002/L.1/Add.1); (d) Note by the Secretary-General on the nomination of 20 members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (E/2002/L.1/Add.2); (e) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 20 members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) (E/2002/L.1/Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1); (f) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of the 19 members of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations (E/2002/L.1/Add.4); (g) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 21 members of the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (E/2002/L.1/Add.5); (h) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 24 experts to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for Development (E/2002/L.1/Add.6, L.1/Add.13, L.1/Add.16, L.1/Add.17, L.1/Add.20, L.1/Add.24 and L.1/Add.26); (i) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 11 members of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund (E/2002/L.1/Add.7); (j) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 11 members of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund (E/2002/L.1/Add.8); (k) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of five members of the Programme Coordination Board of the Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS) (E/2002/L.1/Add.9); (l) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of nine members of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (E/2002/L.1/Add.10, L.1/Add.14 and L.1/Add.23); (m) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of six members of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme (E/2002/L.1/Add.11); (n) Note by the Secretary-General on the appointment of three members of the Board of Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2002/L.1/Add.12 and L.1/Add.15); (o) Note by the Secretary-General on the appointment of 24 experts to the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (E/2002/L.1/Add.18, L.1/Add.19, L.1/Add.21 and L.1/Add.22); (p) Note by the Secretary-General on the membership of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, the Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS Subcommittee) and the Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (TDG Subcommittee) (E/2002/L.1/Add.25). 2. Under item 4 of the agenda of its organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002, the Council adopted decisions 2002/201 A and B. Under item 1 of the agenda of its substantive session of 2002, the Council adopted decision 2002/201 C. 1. The Council held its organizational session for 2002 at United Nations Headquarters on 14 January and 13 February 2002 (1st and 2nd meetings), a resumed organizational session on 29 and 30 April 2002 (4th and 5th meetings), a special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization on 22 April 2002 (3rd meeting), its substantive session at United Nations Headquarters from 1 to 26 July 2002 (6th to 41st meetings) and a resumed substantive session at United Nations Headquarters on_ (_to____ meetings). Opening of the Council 2. The 1st meeting, on 14 January 2002, was opened by the President of the Council for 2001, Martin Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon). Upon election, the President of the Council for 2002, Ivan Šimonović (Croatia), made a statement. Election of the Bureau 3. At its 1st meeting, on 14 January, pursuant to paragraph 2 (k) of its resolution 1988/77, the Council elected by acclamation the following persons as Vice-Presidents of the Council for 2002: Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), Marjatta Rasi (Finland), Jassim Mohammed Buallay (Bahrain) and Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo (South Africa). Agenda 4. At its 1st meeting, on 14 January, the Council considered the agenda of its organizational session. It had before it the annotated provisional agenda (E/2002/2). 5. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the agenda of the organizational session (see annex I). 6. At its organizational session for 2002, the Council adopted nine decisions concerning organizational matters. See Council decisions 2002/202 to 2002/210. Basic programme of work of the Council 7. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council considered its basic programme of work for 2002 and 2003. It had before it a note by the Secretary-General containing the proposed basic programme of work for the Council for 2002 and 2003 (E/2002/1) and the draft proposals thereon submitted by the President of the Council and members of the Bureau on the basis of informal consultations held pursuant to paragraph 2 (1) of Council decision 1988/77 (E/2002/L.2). First session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration and its provisional agenda 9. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council approved the holding of the first session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration in New York from 22 to 26 July 2002, as well as the provisional agenda and documentation for the first session. See Council decision 2002/206. Participation of an intergovernmental organization in the work of the Council 10. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council decided to include in the agenda of its substantive session of 2002 the application of the Intergovernmental Institution for the Use of Micro-alga Spirulina against Malnutrition. See Council decision 2002/207. Request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system 11. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council decided to defer to its resumed organizational session its consideration of the draft proposal contained in document E/2002/L.2 to include in the agenda of its substantive session of 2002, the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system. See Council decision 2002/208. Request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system 12. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council decided to defer to its resumed organizational session its consideration of the draft proposal contained in document E/2002/L.2 to include in the agenda of its substantive session of 2002, the request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system. See Council decision 2002/209. Improvement of the work of the Commission for Social Development 13. At its 2nd meeting, on 13 February, the Council decided: (a) that the terms of office of the members of the Commission for Social Development would be for four regular sessions of the Commission, to begin immediately after the conclusion of work of the Commission's regular session held after 1 January following their election by the Council, and to end at the conclusion of the regular session held after the 1 January following the election of the States that were to succeed them as members of the Commission, unless they were re-elected; (b) to extend the terms of office of those members of the Commission whose terms were to expire on 31 December 2002 until the conclusion of the forty-first session of the Commission, of those members whose terms were to expire on 31 December 2003 until the conclusion of the forty-second session of the Commission, and of those members whose terms were to expire on 31 December 2004 until the conclusion of the forty-third session of the Commission; (c) that the Commission, immediately following the closure of a regular session, would hold the first meeting of its subsequent regular session for the sole purpose of electing the new Chairman and other members of the Bureau, in accordance with rule 15 of the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of the Council; and (d) that, in that context, the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1798 (XVII) of 11 December 1962 would apply only to the substantive part of the Commission's sessions. See Council decision 2002/210. 14. At its 4th meeting, on 29 April 2002, the Council had before it the annotated agenda of its resumed organizational session (E/2002/2 and Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1). 15. At its resumed organizational session for 2002, the Council adopted decisions concerning organizational matters, and one decision concerning its basic programme of work for 2003. See Council decisions 2002/212 to 2002/219, and Council decision 2002/211. Basic programme of work of the Council for 2003 16. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council, having considered its proposed programme of work for 2003, took note of various questions for inclusion in its programme of work for 2003 and the list of documents for each agenda item. See Council decision 2002/211. Theme for the humanitarian affairs segment of the substantive session of 2002 of the Council 17. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council had before it draft proposals submitted by the President of the Council and members of its Bureau on the basis of informal consultations held pursuant to paragraph 2 (l) of Council decision 1988/77 (E/2002/L.4). 18. At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft decision III, entitled "Theme for the humanitarian affairs segment of the substantive session of 2002 of the Economic and Social Council". See Council decision 2002/212. 19. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council had before it draft proposals submitted by the President of the Council and members of its Bureau on the basis of informal consultations held pursuant to paragraph 2 (l) of Council decision 1988/77 (E/2002/L.4). 20. At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft decision IV, entitled "Request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, into a specialized agency of the United Nations system". See Council decision 2002/213, and decision 2002/233 adopted thereafter at the substantive session. Request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, into a specialized agency of the United Nations system 21. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council had before it draft proposals submitted by the President of the Council and members of its Bureau on the basis of informal consultations held pursuant to paragraph 2 (l) of Council decision 1988/77 (E/2002/L.4). 22. At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft decision V, entitled "Request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, into a specialized agency of the United Nations system". See Council decision 2002/214, and resolution 2002/24 adopted thereafter at the substantive session. Provisional agenda and documentation for the third session of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for Development 23. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council decided to defer further its consideration of the draft decision entitled "Report of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for Development on its second session and provisional agenda for the third session of the Committee", recommended by the Committee for adoption by the Council, until after the World Summit on Sustainable Development, which would be held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002. See Council decision 2002/215. Strengthening the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development 24. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council decided to further defer until its substantive session of 2002 its consideration of draft resolution III, entitled "Strengthening the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development", contained in the report of the Commission on its fifth session. See Council decision 2002/216 and resolution 2002/37 adopted thereafter at the substantive session (for the discussion thereon, see chap. VII, paras. 96-99). Consultations of the President of the Council with concerned United Nations agencies, funds and programmes 25. At its 5th meeting, on 30 April, the Council had before it a draft decision entitled "Consultations of the President of the Economic and Social Council with concerned United Nations agencies, funds and programmes" (E/2002/L.5), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), on the basis of informal consultations. 26. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2002/219. 27. At its 6th meeting, on 1 July 2002, the Council considered the agenda and organization of work of its substantive session of 2002. It had before it the following documents: (a) Annotated provisional agenda (E/2002/100 and Add.1); (b) Proposed programme of work (E/2002/L.7); (c) Status of documentation for the session (E/2002/L.8). 28. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the agenda for its substantive session of 2002 (see annex I) and approved the programme of work of the session. See Council decision 2002/220. 29. At its substantive session of 2002, the Council adopted two decisions concerning organizational matters. See Council decisions 2002/201 C and 2002/220. Annex I Agendas of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002 and the substantive session of 2002 Agenda of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2002 Adopted by the Council at its lst meeting, on 14 January 2002 1. Election of the Bureau. 2. Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters. 3. Basic programme of work of the Council. 4. Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments. Agenda of the substantive session of 2002 Adopted by the Council at its 6th meeting, on 1 July 2002 1. Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters. High-level segment 2. The contribution of human resources development, including in the areas of health and education, to the process of development. Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation segment 3. Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: (a) Progress report on the implementation of the triennial comprehensive policy review; (b) Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme. 4. Strengthening further the Economic and Social Council, building on its recent achievements, to help it fulfil the role ascribed to it in the Charter of the United Nations as contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration. 5. Special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance. General segment 6. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits: (b) Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010. 7. Coordination, programme and other questions: (f) Tobacco or health. 8. Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B. 9. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations. 10. Regional cooperation. 11. Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan. 12. Non-governmental organizations. 13. Economic and environmental questions: (a) Sustainable development; (b) Science and technology for development; (c) Statistics; (d) Human settlements; (e) Environment; (f) Population and development; (g) Public administration; (h) International cooperation in tax matters; (i) United Nations Forum on Forests; (j) Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions. 14. Social and human rights questions: (a) Advancement of women; (b) Social development; (c) Crime prevention and criminal justice; (d) Narcotic drugs; (e) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; (f) Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination; (g) Human rights; (h) Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. 15. Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system. 16. Consideration of the request for conversion of the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system. Annex III a The text of rule 79, entitled "Participation of other intergovernmental organizations" reads: "Representatives of intergovernmental organizations accorded permanent observer status by the General Assembly and of other intergovernmental organizations designated on an ad hoc or a continuing basis by the Council on the recommendation of the Bureau may participate, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of the activities of the organizations". b Superseding the Organization of African Unity. Intergovernmental organizations designated by the Council under rule 79 of the rules of procedurea for participation in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of their activities Organizations accorded permanent observer status by the General Assembly African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (General Assembly resolution 36/4) African Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 42/10) African Union (General Assembly resolution 2011 (XX) and Assembly decision 56/475)b Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (General Assembly resolution 43/6) Andean Community (General Assembly resolution 52/6) Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization (General Assembly resolution 35/2) Association of Caribbean States (General Assembly resolution 53/5) Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 54/5) Caribbean Community (General Assembly resolution 46/8) Central American Integration System (General Assembly resolution 50/2) Commonwealth of Independent States (General Assembly resolution 48/237) Commonwealth Secretariat (General Assembly resolution 31/3) Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (General Assembly resolution 54/10) Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (General Assembly resolution 56/92) Council of Europe (General Assembly resolution 44/6) Customs Cooperation Council (General Assembly resolution 53/216) Economic Community of Central African States (General Assembly resolution 55/161) Economic Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 48/2) European Community (General Assembly resolution 3208 (XXIX)) Inter-American Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 55/160) International Committee of the Red Cross (General Assembly resolution 45/6) International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) (General Assembly resolution 51/1) International Development Law Institute (General Assembly resolution 56/90) International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (General Assembly resolution 49/2) International Hydrographic Organization (General Assembly resolution 56/91) International Organization of la Francophonie (General Assembly resolution 33/18) International Organization for Migration (General Assembly resolution 47/4) International Seabed Authority (General Assembly resolution 51/6) International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (General Assembly resolution 51/204) International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (General Assembly resolution 54/195) Latin American Economic System (SELA) (General Assembly resolution 35/3) Latin American Parliament (General Assembly resolution 48/4) League of Arab States (General Assembly resolution 477 (V)) Organization of American States (General Assembly resolution 253 (III)) Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (General Assembly resolution 53/6) Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (General Assembly resolution 48/5) Organization of the Islamic Conference (General Assembly resolution 3369 (XXX)) Pacific Islands Forum (General Assembly resolution 49/1) Permanent Court of Arbitration (General Assembly resolution 48/3) Sovereign Military Order of Malta (General Assembly resolution 48/265) Organizations designated by the Economic and Social Council Participation on a continuing basis African Regional Centre for Technology (Council decision 1980/151) Asian and Pacific Development Centre (Council decision 2000/213) Asian Productivity Organization (APO) (Council decision 1980/114) Council of Arab Economic Unity (Council decision 109 (LIX)) International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions (IAESCSI) (Council decision 2001/318) International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (Council decision 1997/215) International Centre for Public Enterprises in Developing Countries (ICPE) (Council decision 1980/114) Latin American Energy Organization (OLADE) (Council decision 1980/114) Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture (Council decision 1986/156) Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Council decision 109 (LIX)) Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment (Council decision 1992/265) Union of Economic and Social Councils of Africa (Council decision 1996/225) World Tourism Organization (Council decision 109 (LIX)) Participation on an ad hoc basis African Accounting Council (Council decision 1987/161) African Cultural Institute (Council decision 1987/161) Arab Security Studies and Training Centre (Council decision 1989/165) Council of Arab Ministers of the Interior (Council decision 1987/161) International Bauxite Association (Council decision 1987/161) International Civil Defence Organization (Council decision 109 (LIX)) Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences (Council decision 239 (LXII)) 