%%%REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|ARMED FORCES|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1997/803 16 October 1997 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: FRENCH LETTER DATED 16 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a communiqué issued by the Office of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo concerning the situation in the Congo (Brazzaville). I should be grateful if you would have this communication circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) André Mwamba KAPANGA Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page Annex Communiqué issued on 15 October 1997 by the Office of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo concerning the crisis in the Congo (Brazzaville) According to information published this morning in the press, the President of the United Nations Security Council has specifically asked the Democratic Republic of the Congo to withdraw its troops from the Congo (Brazzaville). The Office of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to inform national and international public opinion that it formally denies any reports alluding to the presence of Congolese in the territory of the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville). Such reports are completely unfounded and thus the product of mere speculation. No soldiers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been present in the territory of the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) since the return of a number of observers who had been dispatched, by joint agreement, to the two warring factions. It must be noted in this connection that it was at the request of both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville), who invited the Security Council to assume its responsibilities in the Congolese crisis in order to prevent the conflict from spreading, perhaps even igniting the entire region, that the Council met. National and international public opinion must know that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has absolutely no intention of becoming involved in this conflict, much less allowing itself to be dragged into it under any pretext. Having made this clarification, the Democratic Republic of the Congo nevertheless cannot refrain from noting that it does not intend to stand passively by when shells are fired deliberately and blindly from the Congo (Brazzaville) on the population of Kinshasa. Accordingly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo does not rule out any future intervention in response to any further shelling and the consequences thereof, particularly in terms of human lives, but reserves the right in such case to defend, by all available means, its territorial integrity and the security of its inhabitants. The foregoing constitutes a solemn warning to the belligerent parties. For the President of the Republic (Signed) She OKITUNDU Spokesperson 