%%%ECONOMIC INTEGRATION|ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION|ECONOMIC ANALYSIS|ECONOMIC POLICY|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|BRETTON WOODS INSTITUTIONS|REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|MARKET ECONOMY|ECONOMIC REFORM|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|REPORT PREPARATION|

Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 86 (b) Sustainable development and international economic cooperation: integration of the economies in transition into the world economy * The report of the Committee on this item will be issued in six parts, under the symbols A/57/531 and Add.1-5. Report of the Second Committee* Rapporteur: Mr. Walid A. Al-Hadid (Jordan) I. Introduction 1. The Second Committee held a substantive debate on agenda item 86 (see A/57/531, para. 2). Action on sub-item (b) was taken at the 17th and 39th meetings, on 24 October and 27 November 2002. An account of the Committee's consideration of the sub-item is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.2/57/SR.17 and 39). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.14 2. At the 17th meeting, on 24 October, the representative of Belarus, on behalf of Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Yugoslavia, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Integration of the economies in transition into the world economy" (A/C.2/57/L.14). Subsequently, Argentina, Cyprus, Japan, Malta, Mongolia, the Republic of Moldova and the United States of America joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 3. At the 39th meeting, on 27 November, the Vice-Chairman of the Committee, Jan Kára (Czech Republic), as a result of informal consultations, orally revised operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution by replacing the words "in accordance with the outcomes of the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development" with the words "taking into account, inter alia, the relevant provisions of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development". 4. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.14, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 5). III. Recommendation of the Second Committee 5. The Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Integration of the economies in transition into the world economy The General Assembly, Reaffirming its resolutions 47/187 of 22 December 1992, 48/181 of 21 December 1993, 49/106 of 19 December 1994, 51/175 of 6 December 1996, 53/179 of 15 December 1998 and 55/191 of 20 December 2000, Reaffirming also the importance of the outcomes of the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Reaffirming further the need for the full integration of the countries with economies in transition into the world economy, Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, Noting the progress made in those countries towards achieving macroeconomic and financial stability and economic growth in the course of structural reforms and the need to sustain those positive trends in the future, Noting also that in some economies in transition progress has been more difficult and that international assistance is still needed to support their efforts in further building solid social and economic institutions, and to ensure that they are fully integrated into the world economy, Recognizing the difficulties faced by the countries with economies in transition in responding adequately to the challenges of globalization, including in the field of information and communication technologies, and the need to enhance their capacity to utilize effectively the benefits and mitigate the negative implications of globalization, Recognizing also the continuing need to ensure favourable conditions for market access of exports from countries with economies in transition, in accordance with multilateral trade agreements, Recognizing further the important role foreign direct investment should play in those countries, and stressing the need to create an enabling environment, both domestically and internationally, to attract more foreign direct investment to those countries, Noting the aspiration of the countries with economies in transition towards the further development of regional and interregional cooperation, 1. Welcomes the measures taken by the organizations of the United Nations system to implement General Assembly resolutions on the integration of the economies in transition into the world economy; 2. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations system, including the Bretton Woods institutions, in collaboration with relevant non-United Nations multilateral and regional institutions, to continue to conduct analytical activities and provide policy advice and technical assistance to the Governments of the countries with economies in transition aimed at strengthening the social, legal and political framework for completing market-oriented reforms with a view to sustaining the positive trends and reversing any declines in the economic and social development of those countries, and, in this regard, emphasizes the importance of their further integration into the world economy, taking into account, inter alia, the relevant provisions of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development; 3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, with particular focus on an analysis that would determine the progress achieved in the integration of countries with economies in transition into the world economy. 