%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TIMOR-LESTE|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|COSTS|EAST TIMOR SITUATION|

Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 129 Financing of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor Performance report on the budget of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor for the period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Paragraphs Page Mandate performance Resource performance Financial resources Other income and adjustments Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Analysis of variances Actions to be taken by the General Assembly I. Mandate performance 1. The mandate of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1272 (1999). The mandate for the performance period was extended by the Council in its resolutions 1338 (2001) and 1392 (2002) until, respectively, 31 January 2002 and 20 May 2002. The successor mission to UNTAET, the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), was established by the Council in its resolution 1410 (2002). For the period from 20 May to 30 June 2002, UNMISET was financed from the unencumbered balances of UNTAET at 20 May 2002. 2. The Transitional Administration was mandated to help the Security Council achieve an overall objective, namely, to ensure the long-term stability and security of East Timor. 3. Within this overall objective, the Transitional Administration, during the performance report period, has contributed to a number of accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, as shown in the frameworks below. 4. The frameworks represent an improvement in objective-setting. The 2001/02 budget did not include standard frameworks for planned results, which would have been the baseline against which performance would have been measured and reported. Therefore, the Mission performance data for 2001/02 are presented in a transitional format showing the actual accomplishments and outputs for which information was available against generic indicators and output types rather than against a baseline. Component 1: Political Expected accomplishments 1.1. Formation of an independent, self-governing State Indicators of achievement Actual accomplishments Constituent Assembly elected Constituent Assembly elected in peaceful election on 30 August 2001 Executive functions of Government delegated to a fully East Timorese Cabinet East Timorese Council of Ministers sworn in on 20 September 2001 Constitution developed Constituent Assembly developed a national Constitution, which was adopted on 22 March 2002 Core political institutions provided for in the Constitution in place President elected in peaceful election on 14 April 2002, Constituent Assembly transformed into first Parliament at independence and Prime Minister elected by Parliament on 20 May 2002 Transfer of authority to the Government of East Timor Transfer of authority in East Timor by the Secretary-General at midnight on 19 May 2002 Output type Actual outputs Civic education programmes Nationwide civic education programme implemented from July to September 2001 Elections planned and supervised Logistics support for 1,000 polling stations-Constituent Assembly election Logistics support for 1,200 polling stations-Presidential election Provided 3,970 election officials-Constituent Assembly election Provided 5,636 local election officials-Presidential election Support for Council of Ministers Secretariat and facilities provided for Council of Ministers Support for work of Constituent Assembly Secretariat, simultaneous interpretation and facilities provided for the Constituent Assembly 1.2 Effective public administration and its "Timorization" Recruitment of East Timor civil service 76% of posts filled by mid-March 2002 Donor satisfaction 2001/02 budget deficit underwritten by donors and positive assessment of performance at six-monthly donors' conferences Basic services of Government managed Managed basic services across all areas of Government, including health, education and infrastructure Regulations drafted 29 regulations, 15 directives, 18 executive orders and 27 notifications issued in 2001/02 National development plan completed National development plan completed in time for May donors' conference 2002/03 budget finalized Draft 2002/03 budget finalized in time for May donors' conference Component 2: Military Stable external security environment Number of violations of East Timor's territory from external threats No violations of East Timor's territory from external threats Tactical coordination and cooperation between the Indonesian National Army (TNI) and UNTAET Peacekeeping Force (PKF) Revised military technical agreement (TNI/UNTAET PKF) concluded 28 August 2001. Further revision of MTA (TNI/UNMISET PKF) concluded on 15 July 2002 Establish arrangements for the handover of defence responsibility to the East Timor Defence Force (Falintil-Force Defensa Timor Leste (FDTL)) Arrangement for handover of defence responsibility concluded 20 May 2002 The Tactical Coordination Line (TCL) is open for the daily movement of people and goods between the two countries TCL was open for the movement of people and goods between the two countries Regular Inter-Command meetings conducted with TNI Five Inter-Command meetings conducted with TNI Monthly Tactical Coordination Working Group meetings with TNI Tactical Coordination Working Group meetings conducted fortnightly with TNI Routine military operations throughout East Timor Routine military operations conducted PKF capability to deploy a force to any part of East Timor Force Commander's Reserve was maintained, but was not required to be deployed Military liaison along TCL and throughout East Timor Regular meetings conducted between New Zealand Battalion (Cova Lima) and adjacent TNI Battalion Regular meetings conducted between Australian Battalion (Bobonaro) and adjacent TNI Battalion Regular meetings conducted among Jordanian Battalion and Korean Battalion (Oecussi), and adjacent TNI Battalion United Nations Military Observers deployed along TCL and elsewhere throughout East Timor Component 3: Police 3.1. Ensured East Timorese public law and order High-level gain of trust and confidence in the East Timorese police by the citizenry Citizenry assisted in the crime prevention programme of the East Timorese Police Force Crimes investigated Villages and sucos visited All reported crimes investigated Regular community policing visits to villages and sucos 3.2. Progress towards a professional and sustainable East Timorese Police Service (ETPS) East Timorese Police officers begin to take an active role in the policing of the country ETPS assumed responsibility for Aileu District and the Police College East Timorese Police officers trained and certified 1,250 East Timorese Police officers trained and certified Component 4: Support Increased efficiency and effectiveness in supporting the Mission SRSG is highly satisfied with Mission support Achieved Buildings maintained Generators maintained Civilian staff administered Payments made Contracts administered Purchase orders completed buildings maintained 452 generators maintained 2,046 civilian staff administered 32,800 payments made 6 contracts administered 487 purchase orders completed Contingency-owned equipment inspections conducted Aircraft inspections conducted Vehicles maintained Flight-hours completed Uninterrupted information technology and communications service provided Patients treated Military/Police deployment/repatriations conducted Shipments 41 contingency-owned equipment inspections conducted 33 aircraft inspections conducted 1,045 vehicles maintained 14,285 flight-hours completed 1,630 patients treated 16,228 Military/Police deployment/repatriations conducted 497 shipments made A. Financial resources (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002.) Variance Apportionment Expenditures Amount Percentage Category Military and police personnel Military observers Military contingents Civilian police Formed police units Civilian personnel International staff National staff United Nations Volunteers Operational costs General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Miscellaneous supplies, services and equipment Quick-impact projects Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted)a Total requirements a Reflects $60,000 from the Government of the Northern Territory, Australia. B. Other income and adjustments (Thousands of US dollars) Interest income Other/miscellaneous income Voluntary contributions in cash Prior period adjustments Savings on or cancellation of prior-period obligations Total C. Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Expenditure Major equipment Self-sustainment Catering Office Electrical Minor engineering Explosive ordnance disposal Laundry and cleaning Tentage Accommodation Observation Base defence stores Miscellaneous general stores Subtotal 5. The unutilized balance was attributable mainly to savings realized under travel for emplacement, rotation and repatriation of military observers as a result of a lower than anticipated average travel cost charged at $1,863 per trip instead of $2,250. 6. The unutilized balance was also attributable to the lower actual average number of deployed military observers (117) than budgeted average (120) during the period under review. 7. The unutilized balance resulted primarily from lower costs for emplacement, rotation and repatriation of military personnel. Both the number of trips and the average cost per trip were reduced during the reporting period. The number of trips was reduced from budgeted 7,939 to 6,792; the average cost per trip was reduced from $1,200 to $1,150 by using low-cost charter planes where possible. Civilian Police 8. The unutilized balance was due largely to the lower actual average Civilian Police strength of 1,099 during the reporting period, compared to the budgeted average strength of 1,218. 9. The unutilized balance was attributable primarily to the lower actual average formed police strength of 220 during the reporting period, compared to the budgeted average strength of 240. 10. The unutilized balance was due mainly to savings under international staff salaries as a result of the international posts filled at lower grade/step levels. 11. The unutilized balance resulted mainly from the average common staff cost per person at $374 per year rather than at $900 budgeted for the period under review. 12. The major part of the additional requirement represented the costs of services during the previous period charged against the financial period under review. 13. The additional requirement was due mainly to the fact that the planned contracts for security and cleaning services were not available at reasonable rates and therefore daily paid staff continued to be employed at a higher than budgeted cost. 14. The additional requirement resulted mainly from the hiring of 29 consultants for an average of three and a half months each in the areas of serious crimes, judicial affairs and prison management, and public information. 15. The shortfall was attributable mainly to the additional costs for fuel to run the United Nations and contingent-owned generators longer than expected owing to the intermittent and unreliable supply of local electricity. 16. The additional requirement was due mainly to the increased use of heavy vehicles, which consumed more petrol, oil and lubricants, to carry supplies of rations and water for contingents as a result of the non-availability of barges for heavy naval transportation for four months during contract negotiations with the proposed contractor. 17. The unutilized balance was largely a result of the reduction in hours flown by helicopters from 12,060 to 11,810. 18. The unutilized balance was attributable mainly to the fact that the proposed barges, which were to be used for heavy lift capability to remote areas of the Mission, were not available for four months during contract negotiations with the proposed contractor (see para. 16). 19. The unutilized balance was due mainly to the completion of Electronic Support Section repair workshops within UNTAET. The workshops absorbed the large range of repairs of communications equipment that otherwise would have been contracted out at higher cost. 20. The additional requirement was a result of the acquisition of equipment for two unbudgeted information technology projects for the period under review. The projects completed were the installation of a tape library for data back-up and additional network servers to facilitate the migration of data from UNTAET to UNMISET and to make possible the installation of new applications. 21. The major part of the additional requirement represented medical bills for two members of the Peacekeeping Force who suffered extensive injuries during the performance of their duties, thus requiring lengthy hospitalization. 22. The additional requirement is due largely to the higher than expected freight and related costs in connection with the repatriation of an engineering plant from two troop-contributing Governments. IV. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 23. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNTAET and UNMISET are: (a) A decision on the treatment of the unencumbered balance of $942,000 with respect to the period from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2002; (b) A decision on the treatment of other income and adjustments for the period ended 30 June 2002, amounting to $20,680,000 from interest income ($7,625,000), other/miscellaneous income ($1,642,000) and savings on or cancellation of prior-period obligations ($11,413,000). 