%%%MAPS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SIERRA LEONE|STAFFING|COSTS|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|APPROPRIATIONS|MILITARY PERSONNEL|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|

Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 134 Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone Budget for the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Paragraphs Page Mandate and planned results Resource requirements Financial resources Human resources Analysis of variances Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Summary of follow-up actions taken to implement requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Annex Organization chart I. Mandate and planned results 1. The mandate of the United Nations in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1270 (1999) and subsequently adjusted by the Council in its resolutions 1289 (2000) and 1389 (2002). The Council further elaborated on the mandate of the Mission in its resolutions 1346 (2001) and 1400 (2002). The continuation of the mandate was provided by the Council in its resolution 1436 (2002). 2. The Mission is mandated to help the Security Council achieve an overall objective being, namely, to consolidate peace and stability in Sierra Leone. 3. Within this overall objective, the Mission will, during the budget period, contribute to a number of accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, as shown in the frameworks below. Component 1: Political Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement Outputs 1.1 Improve the political stability of Sierra Leone Minority political parties are represented in Sierra Leone Government posts Anti-corruption measures implemented by the Government of Sierra Leone Exploitation of mineral resources regulated by the Government of Sierra Leone Participation of the Government of Sierra Leone, the Mano River Union and the Economic Community of West African States in political dialogue Facilitated political dialogue between Government and political parties Meeting on effective implementation of anti-corruption measures held with the Government of Sierra Leone Encouraged enforcement of revised mining legislation Consultations held between the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, stakeholders, subregional leaders, institutions and the Government of Sierra Leone Quick Impact Projects implemented in all 18 UNAMSIL deployment localities. The projects, costing no more than US$ 15,000 each, will cover rehabilitation of schools, provision of potable water, provision of health care, construction of recreational facilities for children and renovation of vandalized churches and mosques Media training courses conducted Regular press briefings held and close liaison with journalists maintained Regular dissemination of information in local languages on radio and television 1.2 Consolidation of Government authority throughout Sierra Leone Implementation of the national recovery strategy by the Government of Sierra Leone Increase in number of key local administrators and traditional leaders returned to the districts Election held for district councillors and paramount chiefs Increase in rehabilitation of local infrastructure Facilitated meetings and provided technical advice for the establishment and functioning of 12 District Recovery Committees plus 1 in the Freetown -- Western Area and Chiefdom Recovery/Development Committees in 149 chiefdoms across the country Supported chieftaincy elections and local council elections -- advised the Technical Committee on Elections and facilitated elections through assessment of election-related logistics need; monitored and reported the process in all 12 districts and the city of Freetown and its environs Technical advice and logistical support for the election of district councillors and paramount chiefs Chaired regular meetings at district and chiefdom levels with key stakeholders, including chiefdom and authorities, local leaders, administration and United Nations agencies, to collaborate on specific governance-related activities Encouraged the Government to adopt a law on reform of local government Trained 160 justices of the peace in four legal workshops Facilitated rehabilitation of four magistrate courts and four residences of the magistrate throughout the country 1.3 Increased respect for human rights, national reconciliation and addressing impunity in Sierra Leone Decrease in the number of human rights violations Increased capacity of local human rights groups to advocate for and report on human rights issues Functioning Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) Reform of Sierra Leone domestic laws to meet international human rights standards Increase in the number of refugees and internally displaced persons returned home Trained 2,000 soldiers, 500 police officers and 100 prison officers on human rights standards Facilitated training for 1,000 local non-governmental organization personnel and 1,000 people from civil society groups on human rights standards Facilitated the establishment of committees to resolve property and other community disputes Technical support to TRC in the areas of: :: Selection process of the National Commissioner :: Production of 100,000 information booklets on TRC dissemination :: Development of a web page :: Sensitization workshops/ events (20,000 beneficiaries) :: Drama/cartoon on TRC 1,000 human rights defenders trained on human rights issues and 50 non-governmental organization workshops held Consultations with donors to support human rights groups Transport and security for returned refugees and internally displaced persons 1.4 Promotion of the interests of vulnerable groups in Sierra Leone, particularly children and women Increase in the number of vulnerable groups and individuals participating in TRC Specialized programmes broadcasted for children on Radio UNAMSIL -- Voice of Children Trained five children in radio production and five children in broadcasting 1.5 Achieved reintegration of ex-combatants into Sierra Leone society Completion of reintegration of 56,000 ex-combatants registered for this programme 20 Stopgap projects facilitated, engaging 2,000 ex-combatants and youth in labour-intensive community infrastructural projects External factors: The Government of Sierra Leone and other parties will continue to cooperate. Subregional stability and spillover effects of conflicts in neighbouring countries will not adversely affect the Mission. Donor funding for reintegration of ex-combatants and TRC will be available. 2.1 Ensured security throughout Sierra Leone No return to widespread conflict Conducted extensive daily patrols by land, sea and air across the country 2.2 Increased responsibility for security by the Government of Sierra Leone Increase in the number of sectors in which the Government of Sierra Leone has assumed responsibility for security Implemented adjustment and drawdown of composition and size of UNAMSIL military strength External factors: The Government of Sierra Leone will have the capacity to assume security responsibility. The subregional security situation will not affect the Sierra Leone security situation. Component 3: Civilian Police 3.1 Increased responsibility for civil law and order by the Government of Sierra Leone New Sierra Leone police officers are deployed to the 17 police divisions Increase in the number of sectors where the Government of Sierra Leone assumes responsibility for civil law and order Decrease in corruption within the Sierra Leone Police Force Updated analysis of training and development of the Sierra Leone Police Force 2,000 Sierra Leone police cadets recruited and trained 100 trained Sierra Leone Police Force instructors Trained 1,000 senior Sierra Leone police officers in specialized operations -- diamond mining, airport security and cross-border crime Consultations with the Commonwealth team and other donors to facilitate provision of equipment and rebuilding of infrastructure Advice to the Government of Sierra Leone on corruption External factors: The Government of Sierra Leone and donors will provide sufficient support to ensure a viable Police Force. Qualified and willing police candidates will be available. 4.1 Increased efficiency and effectiveness in supporting the Mission Survey indicates an increased level of satisfaction, with support provided to all client offices Troops, military observers, Civilian Police, United Nations civilian staff and other entitled personnel, goods and equipment transported by road, sea and air throughout and outside the Mission area, as required Fleet of 481 United Nations-owned equipment vehicles/ trucks and engineering equipment, managed and maintained 24 aircraft managed, maintained and operated Air transport infrastructure (350 landing zones including 26 major helipads) managed, maintained and operated UNAMSIL premises and facilities managed and maintained Approximately 320 generators managed and maintained Supply items procured and distributed Medical care, including medical evacuation support services provided to all entitled personnel Contingent-owned equipment inspections conducted and verification reports forwarded to headquarters Communications and electronic data-processing support services provided daily during the year All appropriate salaries, entitlements and allowances paid Vendors paid Mission financial accounts maintained and statutory functions performed Military, civilian police, United Nations international and local civilian staff administered Contracts awarded and administered Purchase orders completed Administrative boards conducted External factors: Suppliers of goods and services will be able to deliver as contracted. A. Financial resources 1. Overall (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is 1 July to 30 June.) Category Expenditures Apportionment Cost estimates Variance Amount Percentage Military and police personnel Military observers Military contingents Civilian Police Formed police units Civilian personnel International staff a National staff b United Nations Volunteers Operational costs General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Miscellaneous supplies, services and equipment Quick-impact projects Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total resource requirements a Amount for 2003/04 is inclusive of a 20 per cent vacancy rate compared to a 10 per cent vacancy rate applied in 2002/03. b Amounts for 2003/04 and 2002/03 are inclusive of a 10 per cent vacancy rate. 2. Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment 4. Provision for major equipment and self-sustainment included in the total resource requirements for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 is as follows: (Thousands of US dollars) Major equipment Self-sustainment Catering (kitchen facilities) Office equipment Electrical Minor engineering Explosive ordnance disposal Identification Laundry and cleaning Tentage Accommodation Medical services Observation Miscellaneous general stores Subtotal Total 3. Non-budgeted contributions 5. The estimated value of non-budgeted contributions for the period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 is as follows: Estimated value Status of forces agreementa Voluntary contributions in kind (non-budgeted)b a Inclusive of land, buildings and airfield facilities. b Estimated value of $13,100 from the World Food Programme and $243,500 from non-profit organizations and an individual. 1. Military and police personnel Approved Proposed Net change 2. Civilian personnel International staff USG -ASG D-2 -D-1 P-5 -P-4 P-3 -P-1 Field Service General Security National staff Substantive Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Approved 2002/03 Proposed 2003/04 Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Operations and Management Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Governance and Stabilization Office of the Force Commandera Approved 202/03 Proposed 2003/04b Other substantive officesc,d Total, substantive Division of Administration a The office of the Chief Military Observer is combined with the Office of the Force Commander. b Reflective of the phased reduction in civilian personnel deployment levels. c Include the offices of Police Commissioner, Human Rights, Political Affairs, Policy and Planning, Civil Affairs, Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Management Unit, Public Information and Mine Action Unit. d The Mine Action Unit is to be phased out by 31 December 2003. * Cost parameters: change mission subsistence allowance level 6. The increased resource requirements result from an upward revision in the rate of Mission subsistence allowance to $115 per person per day compared to $105 per person per day budgeted in the 2002-2003 period. * Mandate: downsizing of the Mission 7. The reduction in funding levels for military contingents results from the adjustment and drawdown in the military component of the Mission from 17,240 to 12,740 contingent personnel. * Mandate: change in scale/scope of mandate 8. The variance is due to the enhanced support role of the Civilian Police component of the Mission in strengthening the Sierra Leone Police, reflected in the increased authorized strength of the Civilian Police from 60 to 170 Civilian Police advisers. 9. The civilian component of the Mission is projected to decline by 25 international staff from a level of 381 to 356 personnel. Accordingly, it is proposed that 25 international posts, comprising one D-1, one P-4, 10 P-3, two P-2, seven Field Service and four General Service (Other level) be abolished. The functions of the D-1 post of the Chief Military Observer that will be abolished are now consolidated in the Office of the Force Commander and will be carried out by the Deputy Force Commander. The D-2 post is now reflected as Deputy Force Commander/Chief Military Observer. Payment of hazard duty allowance has been discontinued for a majority of regions of Sierra Leone. National staff 10. The civilian component of the Mission is projected to decline by 42 national staff from 611 to 569 personnel. Accordingly, it is proposed that 42 national posts be abolished. 11. The civilian component of the Mission is projected to decline by 21 United Nations Volunteers from 168 to 147 personnel. Accordingly, it is proposed that 21 United Nations Volunteers positions be abolished. Moreover, payment of hazard duty allowance to volunteers has been discontinued for a majority of regions of Sierra Leone. * Management: additional inputs and outputs 12. The resource requirement is reflective of the cost of hiring two Geographic Information System Engineers for a two-month period. * Management: additional outputs and inputs 13. The increased resources requested for official travel result from significant increases in the cost of training-related travel and in Mission personnel-related travel for official meetings and consultations. 14. With the adjustment and drawdown of the Mission in both its military and civilian components, commensurate reductions in resources are projected in respect of the 2003-2004 period. Specifically, resource requirements for self-sustainment and field defence supplies as well as alteration, renovation and construction services have been reduced. * Management: reduced inputs and outputs 15. The reduction primarily relates to petrol, oil and lubricants and spare parts, owing to decreases in the Mission's vehicle establishment for United Nations-owned as well as contingent-owned fleets of vehicles. 16. Resource requirements reflect provision for the Mission's fleet of 23 helicopters, consisting of 12 helicopters under commercial contracts (4 heavy lift (MI-26) and 8 medium utility (2 MI-8 and 6 MI-8MTV)) and 11 military-type helicopters under letter-of-assist arrangements (7 medium utility (3 Puma and 4 MI-8MT) and 4 military armed helicopters (MI-24)), as well as 2 fixed-wing aircraft (1 Citation II and 1 IL-76). The Mission's air assets for the 2003-2004 period also reflect a reduction of 3 military-type light utility helicopters (Bell-206). 17. With the adjustment and drawdown of the military component of the Mission, the reduction reflects reduced self-sustainment requirements for communications equipment. * Management: additional inputs and same outputs 18. The increased resources represent replacement and maintenance of ageing information technology equipment. 19 The adjustment and drawdown of the military component of the Mission has resulted in lower self-sustainment requirements with respect to medical services. 20. The adjustment and drawdown of the military component of the Mission has resulted in lower self-sustainment requirements with respect to special equipment. 21. With the adjustment and drawdown of both the military and civilian components of the Mission, projected requirements represent reductions in resources for rations and other miscellaneous services. * Mandate: change in expected accomplishments 22. Resources represent support provided by the Mission in the delivery of humanitarian assistance, whereby the contingents are expected to implement at least one civic project in their various areas of deployment. IV. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 23. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNAMSIL are: (a) Appropriations of the amount of $520,053,600 for the maintenance of the Mission for the 12-month period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004; (b) Assessment of the amount in paragraph (a) above at a monthly rate of $43,337,800, should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the Mission. Request/Recommendation Action taken to implement request/recommendation Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/56/887/Add.3) 1. The Advisory Committee requests that the administration increase procurement training for UNAMSIL staff (ibid., para. 10). At least four Procurement Officers were trained in contract management, vendors, processing, bids and tendering. 2. In the view of the Advisory Committee, measures should be taken to improve monitoring and recording of expenditure at UNAMSIL, through, inter alia, appropriate training; as can be seen from paragraph 31 of annex II to the performance report (A/56/833), no training in accounting was conducted by the Mission during the reporting period (A/56/887/Add.3, para. 11). Several measures have been taken to improve monitoring and recording of expenditures in the financial system by adequately scrutinizing vouchers raised before they are posted. A daily verification exercise is carried out to review transactions posted. A monthly review of all transactions posted is done to ensure that they are charged to the right accounts and any misrecordings are corrected. Training has been provided for staff in the Finance and Budget Sections both externally and in-house during the budget period 2001/2002. 3. The Advisory Committee once again requests the Secretary-General to reassess the composition of the air assets maintained by UNAMSIL with a view to achieving optimum efficiency (ibid., para. 34). The process of drawdown of forces has started. The Mission is carefully reviewing the types of air assets to ensure that it retains the flexibility required to support its commitments and minimize the overall costs to the Mission. The services of three light utility military-type helicopters (Bell-206) have been discontinued. 4. The Advisory Committee observes that information on the fleet of vehicles of UNAMSIL contained in the proposed budget does not allow a clear understanding of whether the number of vehicles in use at the Mission is in line with standard ratios. The Committee requests, therefore, that such information be included in the next proposed budget for UNAMSIL (ibid., para. 35). UNAMSIL has a total of 398 4x4 GP/PU vehicles, 2 armoured 4x4, 55 minibuses, 17 medium buses, 4 vans and 5 sedan heavy vehicles. 