%%%MEDIUM-TERM PLANNING|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|ADMINISTRATION|

Fifty-seventh session Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 Programme 24 Management and central support services 1. The preparation, format and content of the medium-term plan and its revisions are governed by the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation (ST/SGB/2000/8). 2. Regulation 4.13 provides, inter alia, that the medium-term plan shall be revised as necessary every two years to incorporate required programme changes and that the proposed revisions shall be as detailed as necessary to incorporate the programme implications of the resolutions and decisions adopted by intergovernmental organs and international conferences since the adoption of the plan. 3. The revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 proposed in the annex are as follows: modification of the overall orientation (paras. 24.1 and 24.2) and of subprogramme 2 (para. 24.10) and subprogramme 3 (para. 24.14). 4. The medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 was adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/234 of 23 December 2000 and issued as document A/55/6/Rev.1. The proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 is contained in documents A/56/6 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2 (Introduction, Sects. 133 and Income sects. 1-3). It was revised and approved by the General Assembly in its resolutions 56/253 and 56/254 of 24 December 2001. 5. In the proposed revisions, new text to be inserted appears in boldface type, and text to be deleted appears in strikeout type. An explanation of the changes is provided in italic type within brackets. Proposed revisions to programme 24, Management and central support services Overall orientation 24.1 The overall objectives of this programme are to support the intergovernmental processes of the Organization by providing effective Secretariat support services to the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council and their subsidiary organs, as well as to various special conferences and meetings held under the auspices of the United Nations, and to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Organization in managing its administrative, financial and human resources. The basic mandate derives from relevant articles of the Charter of the United Nations, specifically Articles 8, 17, 97, 100 and 101. In addition, the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, the Staff Regulations and Rules, the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation (ST/SGB/2000/8), Assembly resolutions 41/213, 42/211 and the successive annual resolutions on the review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations as well as resolutions 52/12 A and B, 52/220, 53/221, 55/231, 55/258 and other relevant resolutions of the Assembly provide the basis for implementing this programme. [addition of new mandates] 24.2 The overall strategy of the Department of Management in meeting the programme's objectives follows the Secretary-General's programme for reform adopted by the General Assembly in its resolutions 52/12 B and 52/220 and other relevant resolutions and decisions. The Department aims to strengthen the Secretariat's capacity to deliver the mandated programmes, in particular through the introduction of results-based budgeting as a management tool for enhancing responsibility and accountability in the implementation of programmes and budgets. Efforts to simplify procedures will continue, whenever possible and without adversely affecting the overall quality of services to be provided, in particular through the progressive upgrading of the technological capacity of the Secretariat, including determining how and where operations can best be carried out, while leaving central management to concentrate on policy development, guidance and monitoring of compliance. Attention will be paid to further strengthening the existing common and joint services and expanding and developing new common and joint services among the United Nations organizations wherever and whenever they would be the most efficient arrangement for providing support services. In this context, specific measures will be taken to strengthen the common services provided by the United Nations Office at Nairobi. [updated to reflect General Assembly resolutions 55/231 and 55/258] Subprogramme 2 Programme planning, budget and accounts Strategy 24.10 Substantive responsibility for this subprogramme rests with the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts, with support from the related operational units of the United Nations Offices at Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi. During the plan period, attention will be focused on strengthening budgetary and accounting policies and on the systematic strengthening of compliance and administration by the Secretariat with the Financial Regulations and Rules, the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation and other relevant policies and directives to ensure efficient use of the resources of the Organization. The translation of legislative mandates into plans and programme budgets and the application of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning to the regular budget, peacekeeping operation budgets, international tribunal budgets and extrabudgetary resources will be further improved through the introduction of results-based budgeting to facilitate the effective management, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Organization's activities and resources. Measures will be also taken to ensure accuracy and timeliness in meeting the Organization's financial obligations, in full compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the Organization, in collecting, recording and processing relevant financial data and in further improving financial control and transparency in the presentation of the financial statements and the accounts of the Organization to the United Nations Board of Auditors. Special efforts will be made to exploit fully the potential of the Integrated Management Information System by further training staff and developing analytical reports to identify opportunities for servicing users better and on a timely basis. [updated to reflect General Assembly resolution 55/231] Subprogramme 3 Human resources management 24.14 Substantive responsibility for this subprogramme rests with the Office of Human Resources Management, with support from the relevant organizational units of the United Nations offices away from Headquarters. During the plan period, the strategy will be focused, in particular, on comprehensive, expeditious and systematic recruitment, placement and career development policies; strategic planning; competency and skill development; improved conditions of service; the progressive establishment and implementation of a system of staff performance recognition; and a well-designed mechanism of staff accountability and responsibility at all levels. In order to delegate authority to the heads of departments and offices for the administrative functions relating to human resources management, a well-designed mechanism of accountability would be put in place in accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/221 while the role of the Office of Human Resources Management as a central authority for formulating policies, planning and monitoring will continue and will be reinforced. In accordance with the decisions of the General Assembly contained in its resolution 55/258, the Office will concentrate on issues of improving accountability and responsibility in the reform of human resources management as well as the robust monitoring and control mechanisms, developing further criteria of mobility of staff to maximize its benefits for the Organization and further streamlining recruitment and placement procedures. The Office will ensure full compliance with the Assembly resolutions and decisions on human resources management. Attention will also continue to be paid to enhancing the internal system of justice. [updated to reflect General Assembly resolution 55/258] Legislative mandates Subprogramme 1 Management services General Assembly resolutions 54/249 Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001 55/231 Results-based budgeting 56/253 Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 53/221 Human resources management 54/139 Improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat 55/258 Human resources management 56/127 Improvement of the status of women in the United Nations system Subprogramme 4 Support services 54/14 Procurement reform 55/232 Outsourcing practices 55/247 Procurement reform 