%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|IRAQ|FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1997/873 11 November 1997 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: ARABIC LETTER DATED 11 NOVEMBER 1997 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF IRAQ TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL On instructions from my Government, I should like to transmit herewith a letter dated 11 November 1997 from Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq, addressed to you concerning relations with the Special Commission. I should be grateful if you would have this letter distributed as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Nizar HAMDOON Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page Annex [Original: Arabic] Letter dated 11 November 1997 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to the President of the Security Council I should like to refer to the letter dated 29 October 1997 from Mr. Tariq Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, addressed to the President of the Security Council. That letter announced the decision taken by the Government of Iraq that it was ready to continue its cooperation with the Special Commission and to arrive, with the Commission, at balanced arrangements enabling it to fully discharge its task in accordance with the legal framework and without exaggeration, provided that no individuals of American nationality participated in any activity of the Special Commission inside Iraq, particularly inspections, interviews, and aerial and ground surveillance. Then, on 30 October 1997, the Baghdad Monitoring and Verification Centre, which reports to the Special Commission, informed the National Monitoring Service, which is the Iraqi agency for monitoring the work of the Centre, of the suspension of the inspection activities upon instructions from Mr. Richard Butler, Executive Chairman of the Special Commission. On 3 November 1997 the Baghdad Monitoring and Verification Centre resumed its work, sending notifications and dates of intended inspections to the National Monitoring Service, in accordance with the usual procedure. It also declared the intention of the various inspection groups to carry out the inspection activities, with the details and dates given below. Each time a group was preparing to depart from the Baghdad Monitoring and Verification Centre, it was informed by the Iraqi authorities that the Americans were not permitted to carry out inspection activities. At the same time, the Iraqi authorities informed the group that they were ready to lend their full cooperation and assistance in order to facilitate inspection by the remaining members of the team, and to ensure the success of their mission. In addition, the Iraqi authorities reiterated their position each time a group arrived at the designated inspection site, and on each occasion, the group cancelled its activities immediately, or while travelling to the inspection site, or after its arrival at the site, without true justification. The details of these operations, numbered in chronological order, are as follows: Monday, 3 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on a visit to Al-Karama installation. 2. The chemical group CG-12, which divided into three subsidiary groups, the first of which headed for a private firm that sells water pumps in the district of Said Sultan Ali in Baghdad; the second headed in an unknown direction; and third headed towards the Nimer leather-tanning company. 3. The nuclear group NMG-58, whose task was to undertake a surprise visit for an unknown purpose. 4. The biological group BG-11, whose task was to undertake a visit also for an unknown purpose. 5. Two groups of inspection teams from CSCI-1, together with the first chemical group and the biological group, on their visit for an unknown purpose. Tuesday, 4 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on a surprise visit to the Ibn Al-Haytham Centre. 2. The chemical group CG-12 on its visit to the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre together with a group from the CSCI-1 team and inspectors from the nuclear group. 3. The biological group BG-11 on its visit to the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre together with the CSCI-1 team. Wednesday, 5 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on its visit to Al-Dawra refinery and the inspection of heavy engineering equipment, jointly with a biological group and a chemical group and groups from the CSCI-1 team. 2. The chemical group CG-12 on its visit to the same site mentioned in number 1 above. 3. The nuclear group NG-58 undertaking a surprise visit for an unannounced purpose. 4. The biological group BG-11 on its visit to Al-Dawra refinery and the inspection of heavy engineering equipment, jointly with a chemical group, a missile group and two groups from the CSCI-1 team. 5. The import group EG-8 upon undertaking a surprise visit for an unannounced purpose. 6. Two groups from the CSCI-1 team together with missile, chemical and biological monitoring groups on a visit for an unannounced purpose. Thursday, 6 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on a visit to Al-Karama general plant. 2. The chemical group CG-12 on a visit to the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre jointly with a group from the CSCI-1 team. 3. The nuclear group NG-58 on a surprise visit for an unannounced purpose. 4. The biological group BG-11 on a visit to the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre jointly with a group from the CSCI-1 team. 5. The import group EG-8 on a surprise visit for an unannounced purpose. 6. Two groups from the CSCI-1 inspection team jointly with chemical and biological monitoring groups on a visit for an unannounced purpose. Friday, 7 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on a visit to the Al-Karama general plant. 2. The chemical group CG-12, which divided into two groups, the first of which joined the CSCI-1 team, while the second visited the general vegetable-oil enterprise. 3. The biological group BG-11 on a surprise visit to the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre jointly with the first chemical group and two groups from the CSCI-1 team. 4. The import group EG-8 on a surprise visit for an unannounced purpose. 5. Two groups from the CSCI-1 inspection team together with chemical and biological monitoring groups on a visit for an unannounced purpose. Saturday, 8 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on a surprise visit to Al-Karama general plant. 2. The chemical group CG-12, which separated into two groups, the first of which visited the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre together with a biological group, and two groups from the CSCI-1 team and a second group visited the general vegetable-oil enterprise. 3. The biological group BG-11 on surprise visit to the Ibn Al-Bitar Centre, together with the first chemical group and two groups from the CSCI-1 team. Sunday, 9 November 1997 1. The missile group MG-15 on a surprise visit to Al-Harith general installation. 2. Two groups from the chemical group CG-12 and a group from the CSCI-1 team on a surprise inspection of the road leading to the Rashid general installation. 3. The biological BG-11 on a surprise visit to the Kandi company jointly with a group from the CSCI-1 team. 4. Two groups from the CSCI-1 inspection team together with chemical and biological monitoring groups on a visit for an unannounced purpose. As you have seen, the relevant Iraqi authorities have indicated their readiness to cooperate with all inspection teams that do not include American individuals, and the Iraqi side will continue to afford all facilities and requirements to enable the inspection and monitoring teams to complete their missions successfully. (Signed) Mohammed Said AL-SAHAF Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq Baghdad, 11 November 1997 