%%%OUTER SPACE|SPACE TECHNOLOGY|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|WORK PROGRAMME|PARTNERSHIP|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|SPACE LAW|STANDARDS|ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING|NATURAL RESOURCES|DISASTER PREVENTION|ECONOMIC SECURITY|SOCIAL SECURITY|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY|CAPACITY BUILDING|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|SPACE EDUCATION|

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Coordination of outer space activities within the United Nations system: programme of work for 2002 and 2003 and future years Report of the Secretary-General Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Participants in outer space activities of the United Nations system and matrix of outer space programmes Policies and strategies pertaining to coordination of space-related activities Enhancing partnerships with non-governmental entities Development of law, standards and ethics relating to space activities Current space-related activities Protecting the Earth's environment and managing natural resources Advancement of Earth science Assessment and monitoring of the Earth's environment Management of natural resources Using space applications for human security, development and welfare Enhancing disaster reduction capability Enhancing economic, social and cultural security Utilizing and facilitating information and communication technology for development Using and improving satellite positioning and location capabilities Building capacity for space applications for sustainable development and enhancing education Advancing scientific knowledge of space and protecting the space environment Other activities Review of matters related to the coordination of activities within the United Nations system Status of inter-agency coordination Experiences gained, lessons learned and recommendations Annexes I. Calendar of significant events in 2002 II. List of significant outputs Abbreviations AGRHYMET Regional Training Centre for Agrometeorology and Operational Hydrology and their Applications AOC-HYCOS West and Central African Hydrological Cycle Observing System AVHRR advanced very high resolution radiometer BDT Telecommunication Development Bureau (of ITU) CEOS Committee on Earth Observation Satellites COSPAS-SARSAT International Satellite System for Search and Rescue DCP data collection platform EAP.AP-Bangkok Environment Assessment Programme for Asia and the Pacific (of UNEP) ECA Economic Commission for Africa ECE Economic Commission for Europe ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean EDC EROS Data Center ENRIN Environment and Natural Resources Information Networking (UNEP) EPA Environmental Protection Agency (of the United States of America) EROS Earth Resources Observation System ESA European Space Agency ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ESCWA Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia ESRI Environmental Systems Research Institute EURISY European Association for the International Space Year EUTELSAT European Telecommunications Satellite Organization FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations GAW Global Atmosphere Watch (of WMO) GCOS Global Climate Observing System (of ICSU/IOC/UNEP/ WMO) GEF Global Environment Facility GEO Global Environment Outlook (of UNEP) GIS geographic information system GIST Geographic Information Support Team GLONASS Global Navigation Satellite System (of the Russian Federation) GNSS global navigation satellite systems GOES Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite GOS Global Observing System (of WMO) GPS Global Positioning System (of the United States of America) GRID Global Resource Information Database (of UNEP) GTOS Global Terrestrial Observing System (of FAO/ICSU/UNEP/ UNESCO/WMO) HYCOS Hydrological Cycle Observing System (of WMO) IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICIMOD International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development ICSU International Council for Science ICT information and communication technologies IGFA International Group of Funding Agencies for Global Change Research IGOS Integrated Global Observing Strategy IMO International Maritime Organization IOC Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (of UNESCO) ISDR International Strategy for Disaster Reduction ISU International Space University ITC International Institute for Aeorospace Survey and Earth Sciences ITU International Telecommunication Union ITU-BR ITU Radiocommunication Bureau ITU-R ITU Radiocommunication Sector Landsat Land Remote Sensing Satellite MED-HYCOS Mediterranean Hydrological Cycle Observing System MIRCEN microbial resources centres (of UNESCO) NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration (of the United States of America) NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (of the United States of America) RESAP Regional Space Applications Programme for Sustainable Development ROPME Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment SADC Southern African Development Community SADC-HYCOS Southern African Development Community Hydrological Cycle Observing System SCOPE Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment (of ICSU) UNDCP United Nations International Drug Control Programme UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNHCR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNISPACE III Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space UNITAR United Nations Institute for Training and Research UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services USAID United States Agency for International Development USFS United States Forestry Service USGS United States Geological Survey WCRP World Climate Research Programme (of ICSU/IOC/WMO) WFP World Food Programme WHO World Heath Organization WHYCOS World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (of WMO) WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization WMO World Meteorological Organization I. Introduction Since the beginning of the space age in 1957, space exploration and exploitation have yielded tremendous scientific as well as economic and societal benefits for humanity. Space science and technology and their applications are recognized by many as one of the major tools to understand the Earth's environment, to improve management of natural resources, to better prepare ourselves for natural disasters and to provide effective communications across long distances and to rural areas. Earth observation satellites provide an important and unique source of data for the study of the Earth's system. Information from such satellites is being used to address issues of social and economic importance in such areas as food security, land management, disaster reduction and emergency management, agricultural and fisheries management, forest resource assessment, global health, environment monitoring and development planning. Emerging new services using satellite communications provide more efficient solutions for improving education and training opportunities, ensuring access to adequate medical services, increasing the effectiveness of disaster warning and relief operations and developing adaptation or mitigation strategies in relation to climate change. Meteorological and Earth observation satellites provide the data for weather forecasts, contributing to better planning of agricultural strategies and various daily activities, while the warnings they provide on hurricanes and cyclones have dramatically reduced material and human losses in many countries that are prone to such disasters. Satellite positioning systems, such as the Global Positioning System (GPS) of the United States of America and the Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS) of the Russian Federation, originally deployed for strategic military purposes, now provide non-encrypted signals, free of charge, for civilian applications such as air, land and nautical navigation, enhancing the safety of air, land and sea travel. Space applications already contribute to the protection of the Earth's environment by providing and disseminating critical information on the state of the Earth. If used effectively, space science and technology could contribute significantly to accelerating development in many different ways without compromising the needs of future generations. They could provide better alternatives for survival to those who are caught in the downward spiral of environmental degradation and increasing poverty, forced to exploit limited natural resources for survival and impoverished further by the depletion of resources. Space applications also contribute to early warning, disaster preparedness, disaster mitigation, disaster impact assessment, risk assessment, vulnerability reduction, disaster relief and disaster rehabilitation, minimizing the loss of human life and damage to property caused by natural disasters and facilitating reconstruction of the economic and social foundation after disasters. Natural disasters can destroy in minutes all the progress made in social and economic development over years by developing countries. Space applications offer a cost-effective tool to secure sustainable economic and social development. The profile of space applications for disaster reduction and emergency management has increased in the last few years and should be strengthened in the future. Many organizations of the United Nations system promote sustainable development through their activities, in particular in developing countries. Space applications can support their efforts in various ways. Some organizations of the United Nations system have already incorporated the routine operational use of space tools in their development activities and have been active in promoting international cooperation in the application of space science and technology within their specific domain of responsibility. Recognizing the increasing need to coordinate the space activities of the various organizations of the United Nations system, the Administrative Committee on Coordination (now the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination) in 1975 established a subcommittee on outer space activities to ensure cooperation among interested organizations in future programmes and projects in the fields of communications, meteorology, remote sensing and geographic information systems (GIS). The Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities meets annually and provides a forum for the participating organizations of the United Nations system to exchange information and views on the current and future plans of space-related activities of common interest and to promote collaboration and synergy among the entities of the United Nations system. The Office for Outer Space Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat serves as the secretariat of the Meeting. In 1975, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space also recognized the growing need for coordination in view of the increasing volume of outer space activities and greater involvement of the organizations of the United Nations system and recommended that an integrated account of the plans and programmes of the organizations be prepared to ensure the effectiveness of the various programmes. The Secretary-General was asked to produce such a report, on an annual basis, for consideration by the Committee's Scientific and Technical Subcommittee. Since the first report of the Secretary-General on the coordination of outer space activities within the United Nations was submitted to the Subcommittee in 1976 (A/AC.105/166 and Corr.1), 25 reports have been issued to date. The report, including the calendar of significant events (annex I) and the list of significant outputs (annex II), is compiled by the Office for Outer Space Affairs based on submissions from organizations in the United Nations system. The Inter-Agency Meeting, at its annual session, reviews and finalizes the report. In recent years, some 10 to 12 organizations have been attending the annual session of the Inter-Agency Meeting and contributing to the report. II. Participants in outer space activities of the United Nations system and matrix of outer space programmes The participants in outer space activities within the United Nations system include the following Secretariat units, bodies, research institutes, specialized agencies and other entities: Office for Outer Space Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), secretariat for the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR), Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme (WFP), United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP), United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), World Health Organization (WHO), World Bank, International Telecommunication Union (ITU), World Meteorological Organization (WMO), International Maritime Organization (IMO), World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). III. Policies and strategies pertaining to coordination of space-related activities In its resolution 54/68 of 6 December 1999, the General Assembly endorsed the resolution of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III) entitled "The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development". In its resolution 56/51 of 10 December 2001, the Assembly urged organizations of the United Nations system to take the necessary action for the effective implementation of the Vienna Declaration. At its forty-fourth session, based on the results of the survey conducted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs among Member States, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space identified the recommendations from UNISPACE III that had been accorded highest priority by Member States and those for which some member States had offered to lead the activities. The Committee established 11 action teams under the leadership of member States to start their work in 2001 towards the implementation of those recommendations relating to environmental monitoring, management of natural resources, weather and climate forecasting, public health services, disaster management, global navigation satellite systems, Table Participants in outer space activities and matrix of outer space programmesa, b United Nations entity Development of law, standards and ethics Protecting the Earth's environment Human security, development and welfare Information and communication technology Satellite position and location capabilities Building capacity Advancing scientific knowledge Office for Outer Space Affairs Department of Peacekeeping Operations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Department of Economic and Social Affairs Secretariat for ISDR World Bank a The numbers in each column indicate the relevant paragraphs in the present report. b For continuously updated information on the coordination of outer space activities within the United Nations system, see http://www.uncosa.unvienna.org promotion of sustainable development, near-Earth objects, capacity-building, public awareness of space benefits and innovative sources of funding. The Committee encouraged the active participation of the organizations of the United Nations system in the action teams in order to ensure that the activities of those organizations contributed to the work of the action teams. As requested by the Committee, the Office conducted a survey among the organizations of the United Nations system in order to identify the recommendations for which they wished to become members of the action teams. As at 15 January 2002, 10 such organizations had indicated their interest in joining the action teams. At their sessions in 2001, the Committee and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee noted with satisfaction that the Inter-Agency Meeting had held its twenty-first session at the United Nations Office at Vienna from 22 to 24 January 2001 and that the report on its deliberations (A/AC.105/756) and the report of the Secretary-General on coordination of outer space activities within the United Nations system: programme of work for 2001 and 2002 and future years (A/AC.105/757) were before the Committee and the Subcommittee. The Committee noted that the next session of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities was scheduled to be held in Rome from 23 to 25 January 2002 and that it would be hosted by FAO. At its thirty-eighth session, in 2001, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee began to consider a new agenda item, entitled "Means and mechanisms for strengthening inter-agency cooperation and increasing the use of space applications and services within and among entities of the United Nations system" under a three-year work plan, covering the period from 2001 to 2003. In accordance with the work plan, the Subcommittee, at its thirty-eighth session, in 2001, analysed the current levels of usage of space applications and services within the United Nations system on the basis of information provided by organizations of the system. The Subcommittee noted from the information provided that several organizations were unaware of how space-based services might help them to meet their objectives. The Subcommittee was of the view that it was necessary to approach organizations of the system more actively to raise their awareness of the potential advantages of those services. For its work to be conducted during the second year of the work plan, 2002, the Subcommittee invited the Inter-Agency Meeting to consider the barriers to the use of space technology and how the Subcommittee could support the work of the Meeting and the space-related activities of organizations of the United Nations system. Following the agreement of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the Chairman of the Committee addressed a letter to the Secretary-General in order to bring to his attention the need to consider the contributions of space science and technology to a greater extent in achieving the objectives of major United Nations conferences, taking particular account of the needs of developing countries. In its resolution 56/51, the General Assembly invited all the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular those which participate in the Inter-Agency Meeting, to identify recommendations of major United Nations conferences that could be implemented with the use of space science and technology. One emerging aspect is the potential beneficial impact that satellite techniques can have on local communities in the domain of disaster reduction and emergency management. The increased impact of natural disasters and the growing vulnerability of societies to all forms of hazard have resulted in the need to develop risk management measures and to apply them to vulnerable communities worldwide, especially through regional programmes. The inter-agency agreement for cooperation concluded in 2000 by the secretariat for ISDR and the Office for Outer Space Affairs serves as a basis for the expansion of initiatives and services in that specific area. In particular, the ISDR programme provides an ideal framework within which the Office for Outer Space Affairs and its partners can pursue more effective initiatives aimed at enlarging the user base for satellite applications for disaster management and prevention, such as those of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications. In March 2000, the United Nations Geographic Information Working Group was established under the auspices of the Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions of the Administrative Committee on Coordination to coordinate activities and formulate policies concerning geographic information within the United Nations system. Its mandate is to increase the role of geographic information in both vertical and horizontal United Nations structures through cooperation with external institutions such as non-governmental organizations, research and academic institutions and technology producers. The Working Group is chaired by the Chief of the Cartographic Section of the Library and Information Resources Division of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and consists of task managers and technical focal points from agencies throughout the system. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, ECE, UNEP, UNDCP, UNHCR and UNESCO, for example, will continue their cooperation within the framework of the Working Group, whose third meeting will be held in Washington, D.C., in March 2002. The meeting will review progress made since the meeting in Rome in 2001. Particular focus will be on progress made by different working groups for the creation of a United Nations geographic database: metadatabase/clearing house; international boundaries and coastlines; administrative boundaries; remote sensing; field operations; cartographic guidelines; and training. In the area of geographic information, ECA will concentrate on raising awareness of the importance of national and regional geographic information infrastructures to encourage African Governments and societies to embark on the coordination of the resources for the production, maintenance, management, dissemination and utilization of geospatial data to make relevant geographic information available to Governments for effective decision-making and to the public to participate in the process. They will also be encouraged to develop harmonized foundation or core data sets on which to base thematic data sets for the various development sectors, such as natural resources, environment, food security, land reform, transport and communication infrastructure, human settlements, health and education, energy and tourism. Concomitant to that, equal attention will also be given to promoting the development of standard-based clearinghouse nodes and metadata systems to facilitate access to shared regional and global geographic information resources and to facilitate also the dissemination of geographic information and knowledge. In that context, assistance will be provided to ECA member States to develop appropriate national geo-information policies, standards and coordination arrangements and a standard-based portal will be implemented at ECA to provide a single point of entry to clearinghouse nodes and portals of member States and regional and global partners. ESCAP will follow up the recommendations of the Second Ministerial Conference on Space Applications for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific, held in November 1999, to strengthen further the regional cooperative network and enhance national capacities in space technology applications through the implementation of the second phase of the Regional Space Applications Programme for Sustainable Development (RESAP II). This is part of ESCAP efforts to strengthen the national capacity of members and associate members to achieve sustainable development, as well as regional and subregional cooperation on protection of the environment and development and management of natural resources, taking into account the recommendations of the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session, in June 1997, the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development scheduled for 2002, which is the 10-year review of Agenda 21, the recommendations of UNISPACE III and the priorities given by members and associate members of ESCAP at intergovernmental legislative meetings. At its fifty-seventh session, in April 2001, ESCAP emphasized that its three major development priorities were poverty alleviation; addressing the negative impacts of globalization; and emerging social issues. The implementation of RESAP II will serve those development priorities and promote operational and integrated applications of information and communication technology and space technology to address issues of common concern among countries of the region, with a focus on poverty alleviation, natural disaster reduction, environment and natural resource management and sustainable development planning. Building on the framework of cooperation of RESAP, ESCAP will continue to promote regional cooperation and facilitate among its members and associate members the equitable sharing of the benefits of space technology applications with the aim of achieving sustainable development and improving the quality of life. ESCAP will also pursue its efforts to harmonize regional initiatives in space cooperation in the region. ESCWA envisages that the recently established ESCWA Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation will facilitate cooperation among ESCWA member States in many fields of science and technology, including areas concerning applications of outer space technologies. A. Enhancing partnerships with non-governmental entities Recognizing the contributions of non-governmental entities to the success of UNISPACE III, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space encourages the participation of non-governmental entities in its work. The Committee agreed that the action teams established to implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III should actively consider non-governmental entities that could be invited to participate in the teams. Pursuant to a recommendation of UNISPACE III, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has been holding a symposium at its annual session to strengthen its partnership with industry since its thirty-seventh session, in 2000. The purpose of the industry symposium, as recommended by UNISPACE III, is to provide the Subcommittee with updated information on ongoing activities of space-related industries and to offer opportunities to managers from space-related industries to express concerns and to make suggestions aimed at promoting, in particular, the interests of developing countries. At the thirty-ninth session, in 2002, the symposium will focus on the promising area of very high resolution remote sensing and its impact on operational applications and will discuss the new situation as regards the space market. More non-governmental entities are contributing to the work of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space as observers. At its forty-fourth session, the Committee decided to grant permanent observer status to the National Space Society, the European Association for the International Space Year (EURISY) and the Space Generation Advisory Council. In its resolution 56/51, the General Assembly endorsed the decision of the Committee, increasing the number of the international organizations with permanent observer status with the Committee from 12 to 15. The Office for Outer Space Affairs forged a partnership with Space Media, Inc. to launch the UN-STARS Programme, which is a commercial education initiative of Space Media, Inc., that creates opportunities for students to design and fly scientific experiments aboard the Space Shuttle and, in the near future, aboard the International Space Station. Student researchers monitor the experiment through the Internet, while thousands of other students can watch online while conducting control experiments of their own. Through the Programme, the Office aims to provide such opportunities for students around the world, in particular in developing countries. B. Development of law, standards and ethics relating to space activities The Office for Outer Space Affairs is the secretariat of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which is the primary forum for the development of international space law. The Committee's Legal Subcommittee continues to consider legal issues of importance to the international space community, including the status and implementation of the five treaties and five sets of legal principles on outer space that have been developed under United Nations auspices. Organizations such as ITU, UNESCO and WIPO participate in the work of the Legal Subcommittee as observers, for instance through the Subcommittee's regular agenda item on "Information on the activities of international organizations relating to space law". In November 2001, the text of a multilateral Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment was finalized under the auspices of the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (Unidroit). The essential purpose of the Convention is to provide for the constitution and effects of new international interests in (high-value) mobile equipment, embracing classic security interests and their functional equivalents, through the recording of such interests in newly-established international registers. The Convention contain the basic principles of general application, but is intended to be supplemented by individual protocols for each of the different categories of equipment (aircraft, space objects, international railway rolling stock, etc.) encompassed by its sphere of application. The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the Office for Outer Space Affairs are working closely with counterparts in Unidroit on the development of the draft space equipment protocol and the subject was formally considered by the Committee's Legal Subcommittee at its fortieth session, in 2001. In addition, pursuant to an agreement of the Committee, two sets of intersessional working meetings amongst member States were organized under the auspices of the Subcommittee in September 2001 and January 2002. It is anticipated that the regimen established by the Convention and the protocol on space equipment may significantly improve conditions for secured transactions and asset-based financing within the field of commercial space activity, thereby reducing project costs on a global scale and enabling increased access to space projects financing, for instance for entities from developing countries. In 2002, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space will start a new work plan on space debris. That work plan may result in the Subcommittee's adoption of voluntary measures that could be taken by national authorities to reduce the creation of space debris. Proposed debris mitigation measures are being developed by the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee, a body composed of representatives from various national space agencies, and may be presented to the Subcommittee as early as 2003. The Scientific and Technical Subcommittee is also reviewing the item "Use of nuclear power sources in outer space" within the context of the Principles Relevant to the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space (see General Assembly resolution 47/68), a set of non-binding legal principles adopted by the Assembly in 1992. IAEA is participating in the review. The Office for Outer Space Affairs will continue to maintain, on behalf of the Secretary-General, the United Nations Public Register of information furnished in accordance with article IV of the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (General Assembly resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex) and to disseminate such information to Member States. Information in the Register can be accessed and searched easily online at http://www.oosa.unvienna.org/OSOIndex/index.html The World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST) of UNESCO, through its Subcommission on the Ethics of Outer Space, has prepared recommendations based on ethical principles and guidelines, aimed at facilitating the emergence of an ethics of space. Those recommendations, which are intended to ensure constant respect for human rights and freedoms in the development of the use of outer space and related technologies, will be presented to UNESCO member States during the biennium 2002-2003. Given their common fields of action in the ethics of outer space, COMEST has established cooperative relations with the Office for Outer Space Affairs and the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. To that end, the Committee invited COMEST to join forces with a group of experts appointed by States members of the Committee in order to prepare a joint report presenting an analysis of the ethical principles that should be applied to human activities in outer space, within the framework of the United Nations treaties on outer space. The report is due to be submitted to the Committee in 2003. WIPO recognizes that significant changes and developments in space activities give rise to new issues, in particular in the area of intellectual property. In 2001, WIPO announced its intention to launch worldwide consultations among Governments and users of the patent system under a new initiative, the WIPO Patent Agenda, in order to develop a strategic blueprint for the future evolution of the international patent system. The WIPO Patent Agenda will complement and strengthen ongoing patent-related projects such as the draft substantive patent law treaty and the reform of the Patent Cooperation Treaty. Although those activities cover the protection of inventions in general, they are also relevant to the protection of intellectual creations relating to outer space activities. Further, the WIPO programme and budget for the biennium 2002-2003 include the consideration of the measures to take and the form to give to any conclusions member States of WIPO may draw on the protection of industrial property in outer space. IV. Current space-related activities A. Protecting the Earth's environment and managing natural resources 1. Advancement of Earth science In 2001 and 2002, the Office for Outer Space Affairs, ESCAP, UNEP, FAO, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO and WMO will continue to contribute to the work of the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) as associate members as well as participating in the implementation of the Integrated Global Observing Strategy (IGOS). ESCAP will contribute to the activities of the new ad hoc Working Group on Education and Training for Developing Countries of CEOS. FAO, the International Council for Science (ICSU), UNEP, UNESCO and WMO are founding members of the Global Terrestrial Observing System (GTOS). The central mission of GTOS is to provide policy makers, resource managers and researchers with decision support tools and access to the data needed to detect, quantify, locate, understand and warn of changes (especially reductions) in the capacity of terrestrial ecosystems to support sustainable development. GTOS focuses on five issues of global concern: changes in land quality; availability of freshwater resources; loss of biodiversity; pollution and toxicity; and climate change. The system aims to provide guidance in data analysis and to promote (a) integration of biophysical and socio-economic geo-referenced data; (b) interaction between monitoring networks, research programmes and policy makers; (c) data exchange and application; and (d) quality assurance and harmonization of measurement methods. The FAO Environment and Natural Resources Service hosts the GTOS secretariat at its headquarters on behalf of the GTOS sponsors. The GTOS secretariat, under the guidance of the GTOS Steering Committee, is currently developing a global terrestrial observing network and a terrestrial ecosystem monitoring sites metadatabase, and is planning to hold joint regional workshops with the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) to formulate regional activities. Closer cooperation is also envisaged with other parties in the framework of priorities identified by the IGOS partners, including in particular a theme on terrestrial carbon monitoring, initially involving the estimation of global net primary productivity, evolving into an international global carbon observations theme, which would initially include global mapping and monitoring of carbon sources and sinks. Following formal endorsement of the IGOS theme of terrestrial carbon observation at the thirteenth plenary meeting of CEOS, held in Stockholm in November 1999, planning meetings for future activities were held in Ottawa and Lisbon in February and May 2000, respectively. GTOS is also actively developing subregional data and information networks in eastern Europe and southern Africa. Further details on GTOS activities can be found at http://www.fao.org/gtos ICSU, UNEP, IOC and WMO continue to support the implementation of a global system for observing climate through their sponsorship of GCOS. GCOS is a longer-term, user-driven operational system capable of providing the comprehensive observations required for monitoring the climate system, for detecting and attributing climate change, for assessing the impact of climate variability and change and for supporting research aimed at improving the understanding, modelling and prediction of the climate system. It addresses the total climate system, including physical, chemical and biological properties and atmospheric, oceanic, hydrologic, cryospheric and terrestrial processes. The GCOS Initial Operational System (IOS) is being implemented under the direction of the GCOS Steering Committee and supported by the GCOS secretariat, which is located at WMO in Geneva. IOS is made up of the relevant components of existing or planned observational networks such as the WMO Global Observing System (GOS) and Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) and the climate components of the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) and GTOS as well as the enhancements and new systems needed to meet the requirements for climate observations. Space-based observations form an integral and crucial part of IOS for such observations. GCOS science panels have defined the detailed requirements and GCOS works in close cooperation with CEOS in attempting to ensure that the necessary observations from space will be obtained. Revised and updated space observations and in situ observation plans, including recommendations and a list of user requirements can be found on the GCOS web site, http://www.wmo.ch/web/gcos/gcoshome.html The GCOS secretariat, on behalf of its observing system partners, has provided input on systematic observations to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change through its Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice. The Conference of Parties to the Framework Convention has adopted several decisions supporting the development of global observing systems for climate that are based on the integration of space-based and in situ observations. Those decisions are resulting in the development of national plans for systematic observation and the organization of regional workshops and regional action plans to improve climate observations in developing countries. ICSU, UNEP, IOC and WMO continue to cooperate closely in the development, planning and implementation of GOOS. IOC will continue to contribute to the work of CEOS in the development of user requirements for sensors and data management systems within the framework of the GOOS programme. As a member of the IGOS Partnership, IOC, along with UNEP, WMO, FAO, ICSU, the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), CEOS and the International Group of Funding Agencies for Global Change Research (IGFA) developed during 2000 a thematic approach to IGOS in which the first element to be developed was the oceans theme. The oceans theme document was approved by CEOS in November 2000 and published in January 2001. In addition, GOOS is working with the ocean carbon community to develop an ocean carbon component of the integrated global carbon observations theme, and with UNEP and others to develop a coastal theme, the first subtheme of which will be devoted to coral reefs. IOC, through the newly formed Coastal Ocean Observations Panel, stresses the importance of ocean colour data, in particular the optimization of quality of data for validation especially of coastal waters. The panel continues to advocate the collection of essential ocean and atmospheric data, data merging and access to data. The WMO/IOC Joint Technical Commission for Oceanography and Marine Meteorology maintains a high level of interest in the use of satellites for ocean remote sensing and the provision of marine services based on satellite data. A rapporteur reports to the Commission and WMO members on issues relating to requirements for, access to and applications of remotely sensed ocean data. The rapporteur also liaises with the WMO Commission for Basic Systems and prepares regular reports for the Commission. UNEP, FAO, IOC, WMO, UNESCO and ICSU have in the past cooperated frequently in the development of global environmental monitoring systems and more particularly in recent years in those systems designed to tackle climate-related issues. The emergence of IGOS is providing a suitable framework to facilitate the on-forwarding of appropriate advice and recommendations to the governing bodies of these organizations sponsoring environmental observing systems through their relevant steering committees, secretariats and expert panels. UNEP, FAO, IOC, WMO, UNESCO and ICSU will continue to cooperate in the Sponsors Group for the Global Observing Systems. A number of partners, including CEOS, FAO, UNESCO, ICSU, IOC, UNEP, WMO and IGFA have been working together closely since 1998 on the development of an IGOS in an effort to optimize space-based and in situ observing networks and application programmes at the global, regional and national levels. IGOS was presented at UNISPACE III at a one-day high-level forum coordinated by FAO. Conclusions and proposals of the International Forum on the Integrated Global Observing Strategy are contained in the report of UNISPACE III. IGOS has developed a theme approach towards an integrated strategy and has endorsed themes on oceans, integrated global carbon observations, integrated global atmosphere chemistry observations and integrated global water cycle observations and a coral reef subtheme as the first component of an expected coastal theme. A geological-geophysical hazards theme is being prepared by UNESCO, ICSU and the European Space Agency (ESA). The potential of support from space applications and services is always considered in the various ECLAC technical assistance missions and policy documents on subjects such as climate change issues. The application of satellite technology in meteorology, climatology and operational hydrology forms an important element of the technical cooperation activities of WMO. Those activities are generally undertaken with assistance from either the Organization's Voluntary Cooperation Programme or other sources of funding such as UNDP, trust funds, the World Bank and the European Commission. The following activities are planned for 2001 and future years: (a) Africa (i) A number of WMO members, including France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, are donating data collection platforms (DCPs) to countries in Africa for the collection of meteorological data via the geostationary meteorological satellite Meteosat, to improve the availability of observational data at national meteorological centres; (ii) Eight Intelsat satellite stations were installed in the countries that are members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel, with funding from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), in order to enhance the flow of data and products between the Regional Training Centre for Agrometeorology and Operational Hydrology and their Applications (AGRHYMET) in Niamey and national AGRHYMET centres; (iii) In collaboration with the World Bank, WMO has drawn up plans to set up in Africa an advanced hydrological and environmental monitoring system using Meteosat. More than 100 DCPs will be installed on major rivers, costing between $10 million and $20 million over a period of five years; (iv) The European Union has approved a project to provide support for the replacement of ground receiving satellite equipment in 47 African countries in order to enable them to receive data and products from the Meteosat second-generation satellites; (v) Within the framework of the Mediterranean Hydrological Cycle Observing System (MED-HYCOS), a project funded by the World Bank for the establishment of a hydrological information system for the Mediterranean basin, based, inter alia, on the collection of near real-time data, a network of 36 Meteosat DCPs has been installed in 13 countries of the Mediterranean rim. The planned second phase of MED-HYCOS also makes provision for the purchase and installation of about 40 Meteosat DCPs to strengthen the existing real-time observing network; (vi) Similarly, within the framework of the SADC-HYCOS project funded by the European Commission, 42 Meteosat DCPs have been established in 11 Southern African Development Community (SADC) countries, as a part of a network of 55 stations supplying near real-time data to a regional hydrological information system. Another 50 new DCPs are planned to be installed within the framework of the second phase of SADC-HYCOS currently being prepared; (vii) With the support of France, the pilot phase of the Western and Central African Hydrological Cycle Observing System (AOC-HYCOS) project is being implemented, involving 11 countries of Western and Central Africa. AOC-HYCOS is maintaining a regional database collecting data from about 100 hydrological stations of the region, including about 70 Meteosat or Argos DCPs belonging to the networks of the Niger Basin Authority, the WHO African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control and the Upper Niger Basin Environmental and Hydrological Management (GHENIS) project, funded by the Netherlands; (viii) The funding and implementation of the IGAD-HYCOS project for the countries of Eastern Africa is being discussed with the European Commission. Within the framework of that project provisions are sought for the installation of about 50 Meteosat DCPs in regionally significant hydrological stations of the region; (b) Americas. The increasing demand in many developing countries of WMO regions III and IV (South and North America) and the limited availability of experts in the major satellite-operating countries prompted WMO to develop a new training strategy known as "training the trainers". That strategy takes an innovative approach to both training and applied research in satellite data utilization and shows how a regional meteorological training centre could develop considerable expertise in the utilization of and training capability with digital geostationary operational environmental satellite imagery by participating in a "virtual laboratory" with the Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere and Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies, both of the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). In addition to the above, through the ongoing project of regional cooperation activities in support of the research on global change in the Inter-American Institute for Global Climate Change countries, WMO provides training related to satellite image analysis and processing, using GIS, GIS-SPRING and Met-View software, to 15 countries of WMO regions III and IV. CD-ROM Land Remote Sensing Satellite (Landsat) images have been bought for the project to enhance the capabilities of the participating countries to process and analyse such data, using modern techniques already provided for the project in previous training courses and seminars. The DCP ground equipment is being replaced with the support of the United States. WMO is providing technical support to the Mexican National Water Commission in the implementation of the water resources management project funded by the World Bank. Within the framework of the project new telemetric networks are to be installed in priority catchment areas. In particular 44 DCPs using the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) have been installed in the Mexican part of the Rio Bravo (Grande) catchment area and another 60 are planned for 2002. To support the flood forecasting and warning component of the proposed CARIB-HYCOS project for the Caribbean islands, a few strategically located real-time DCPs are planned; (c) Europe and newly independent States. Installation of small satellite Earth stations to provide meteorological services will be pursued and strengthened, in particular for newly independent States, for the reception of meteorological information distributed via European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT) satellites, by RETIM of France and FAX-E(urope) of Germany within the framework of regional meteorological telecommunications. As already reported under (a) above, the MED-HYCOS project has installed a network of 36 Meteosat DCPs in countries of the region and about 40 other are foreseen in the planned second phase. The World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (WHYCOS) component for the Baltic Sea basin (Baltic-HYCOS) is being developed and provisions are made for equipping some 40 existing stations with DCPs, or in some cases for upgrading the telemetry equipment already in place; (d) Asia and the Pacific. Satellite-based telecommunications systems are playing an increasing role in the distribution of meteorological data and products to national meteorological services. The international satellite communication systems operated by the National Weather Service of the United States have been extended to serve countries in the South Pacific. A satellite-based communications system is being operated to distribute meteorological information within Asia and is likely to be expanded to other countries in the area of coverage of the Asiasat satellite. Inmarsat-M Earth Stations are also being considered for improving communications of meteorological services in countries of the South Pacific. The overall long-term goals of WCRP, jointly sponsored by WMO, ICSU and IOC, are to determine to what extent climate can be predicted and the extent of human influence on climate. Progress in the scientific programme depends on the successful continuation of existing and the development of new space-based Earth observing systems. The successful implementation of the scientific plans for WCRP depends crucially, among other factors, in the development of a comprehensive and sustained global climate observational network, such as that envisaged in GCOS, in order to acquire the data needed to monitor climate, to detect climate change and establish its causes and to validate and improve climate models. In addition, special data are needed in support of an ever-widening variety of complex dynamic, physical, chemical and biological processes that help govern the state and evolution of the climate system. Such specialized data sets are likely to need to be highly resolved in time and space and therefore gathered initially for a limited period only. High-priority process studies include cloud-radiation-climate interactions, aspects of the global hydrological cycle and air-sea interactions. Climate studies are by their very nature global in character and this necessitates extensive use of space observations to provide the necessary coverage and continuity. The strategy of WCRP continues to be to pursue its objectives through a small number of large-scale research, observational and modelling projects focused on aspects of climate that are best approached on an international basis. The current projects are the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE); the Climate Variability and Predictability (CLIVAR) Study; the Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX); the Stratospheric Processes and their Role in Climate (SPARC) Project; the Arctic Climate System Study (ACSYS); and the Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Project. Each uses observations from both operational meteorological and other satellites and depends on the planned and proposed new Earth observation satellites to be launched throughout the coming decade. In particular, the coordinated enhanced observing period (CEOP) being developed within GEWEX seeks to constitute an initial step towards establishing an integrated global observing system for the water cycle that responds to both scientific requirements and social needs. To achieve its aims, it will be necessary to make maximum use during 2002-2004 of the new generation of Earth observation satellites, in addition to existing operational ones, through an integrated validation strategy. Climate system monitoring activities within the World Climate Data and Monitoring Programme make use of satellite data for monitoring such parameters as sea level, atmospheric temperature, sea ice, snow cover, solar radiation, aerosol optical depth, albedo and clouds. The WMO World Climate Data Information Referral Service (INFOCLIMA) includes information on some available satellite data sets needed for climate monitoring and research. A climate change detection project has been established under the World Climate Data and Monitoring Programme to advise on the suitability of data, including satellite data, for detecting climate change. The World Climate Applications and Services Programme continues to investigate and promote development of potential uses of satellite data in climate prediction and applications, especially within the framework of the Climate Information and Prediction Services (CLIPS) project. The WMO World Climate Programme publishes on a regular basis information on the global climate system within the framework of projects such as the climate system monitoring and CLIPS projects. The information draws heavily on data received from space-based observation platforms. The WMO Commission for Atmospheric Sciences continues to rely on the use of satellite data for research and for weather analysis and prediction on all time scales. The WMO programmes on weather prediction and tropical meteorology research continue to study the application of high-resolution quantitative satellite data. The newly established World Weather Research programme, focusing on high-impact weather with major socio-economic consequences, has a strong nowcasting component that relies heavily on real-time satellite imagery. As a part of its scientific activities, the WMO Commission for Hydrology has appointed an expert on remote sensing applications in hydrology to evaluate advances in and the application of remote sensing in hydrology, as well as the national capabilities in developing countries to make use of those technologies. The application of satellite-based observation technologies is also addressed by the experts in network design, risk management, hydrological forecasting and technology transfer, as well as by many working groups on hydrology of the six WMO regional associations. WHYCOS is a global programme launched by WMO aimed at strengthening hydrological information systems and further promoting international cooperation to enhance sustainable socio-economic development. WHYCOS is implemented through regional or basin-wide HYCOS components. Within the framework of the programme, some 17 HYCOS components are at various stages of implementation or planning. A key element of many of the projects is the rehabilitation and upgrading of the local hydrological observation networks through the installation of a network of automatic satellite-linked DCPs. Through the WMO Global Telecommunications System (GTS) and other global networks such as the Internet, collected data are made available in near real time to water resource planners, decision makers, scientists and the general public. Within the framework of the two ongoing projects, MED-HYCOS for the Mediterranean rim and SADC-HYCOS for southern Africa, networks of 36 and 42 Meteosat DCPs, respectively, are being installed. AOC-HYCOS started a pilot phase in November 1999. Similar developments are expected during the coming years in other regions, such as eastern Africa, the Caribbean, the South-Western Pacific, the Baltic, the Black Sea, the Aral Sea and the Himalayan region basins, as soon as the relevant HYCOS components at present being developed are funded and launched. The Data Buoy Cooperation Panel, a joint undertaking of WMO, IOC and all data buoy operators, makes constant use of the satellite-based location and data collection system, ARGOS (which flies on board the NOAA operational satellites as well as the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite II (ADEOS-II)), for data collection and platform location. The system is also being used in the Argo (Global Array of Profiling Floats) project, which deals with subsurface floats. IOC is working with representatives of member States to improve access to remotely sensed data and their application in the creation of products for the use of decision makers regarding marine environmental questions. As a follow-up of the workshop held in Nairobi in November 2001, proposals will be developed for submission to funding agencies through the African Process during 2002. UNESCO has made available substantial new funding for a cross-cutting intersectoral project on the use of remote sensing and communication technologies for water resources and ecosystems in Africa, which aims at improving access to remotely sensed data and its application in the creation of products for the use of decision makers regarding water resources and ecosystems. IOC, together with ICSU, co-sponsors the activities of the International Ocean Colour Coordinating Group, which investigates new methods for extracting useful environmental information from ocean colour data (e.g. through the development of new algorithms) and provides training for scientists in developing countries in the interpretation of ocean colour data. WMO issues an annual report on the status of implementation of the World Weather Watch. The report includes a section on the space-based portion of GOS, consisting of a network of geostationary and polar-orbiting satellites. The status of satellite technology for application in meteorological observations and telecommunications is considered at each session of the WMO Commission for Basic Systems, which meets on a biennial basis. The last session of the Commission was held in late 2000. 2. Assessment and monitoring of the Earth's environment In 2002, the Office for Outer Space Affairs will continue to support the joint United Nations/ESA training courses follow-up programme on the use of remote sensing technology in sustainable development initiated in 1998 by ESA, the Office and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat as a follow-up to the series of United Nations/ESA training courses on the use of European remote sensing satellite data. The programme assists selected institutions/organizations in Asia (Viet Nam), Africa (AGRHYMET (Niger and Burkina Faso) and Latin America (Argentina, Bolivia and Chile) in implementing ongoing projects of national or regional importance in the areas of natural resource management, environmental monitoring and sustainable development by providing necessary technical assistance and related hands-on training in the use of remote sensing technology. The Asian element of the programme, on the application of remote sensing technology for coastal zone management, was successfully completed in 2001 and demonstration products in the form of thematic maps were presented to the Government of Viet Nam by the Remote Sensing Centre of the General Department of Land Administration in Hanoi. A project in Africa on the development of an information system for determining, monitoring and assessing flood areas together with establishing an inventory of superficial waters in the Nakamb river basin of Burkina Faso and a project in Latin America on the use of C-band synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and optical data to monitor glaciers and snow cover for optimization of water supply predictive models, study of climatic changes and natural hazards will be continued through the year 2002. ESCAP will develop and implement through a phased approach, within the framework of RESAP II, regional cooperative projects on space technology applications for environmental monitoring. In future years, when resources become available, ESCAP will implement common denominator projects addressing environmental concerns of member countries, including projects on capacity-building in disaggregated poverty mapping and its integration with environment information; promoting regional cooperation for integrated coastal zone management; and enhancing the capacity for urban and rural development planning. ESCAP will promote and conduct in future years, when resources become available, a regional research project on the utilization of the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite-II (ADEOS-II) and the Advanced Land Observing Satellite (ALOS) data for applications related to Earth's environment. Through its Division of Early Warning and Assessment and the Global Resource Information Database (GRID) network, UNEP maintains linkages with providers and users of remote sensing and information technology applications in many countries to support an assessment framework for reviewing the state of the global environment and environmental issues of international significance. The GRID network now consists of 15 centres. Four of them, the Environmental Assessment Programme for Asia and the Pacific (EAP.AP-Bangkok), GRID-Geneva, GRID-Nairobi and GRID-Sioux Falls, have a UNEP staff presence. GRID-Arendal is operated as a private foundation supported by the Government of Norway, through direct support to UNEP, in accordance with a memorandum of understanding between the partners. The other centres of the GRID network are at the following locations: the International Centre for Integrated Antarctic Research, Christchurch, New Zealand; the National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan; the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Kathmandu; the National Institute for Space Research (INPE), So Jos dos Campos, Brazil; the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing, Ottawa; the Environmental Information Centre, Warsaw; the Ministry of the Environment, Budapest; the Blue Plan Office Regional Activity Centre of the Mediterranean Action Plan (MAP), Sophia Antipolis, France; Moscow, within the Russian Federation's Ministry of Natural Resources; and the Ministry of the Environment in Tbilisi. The results of activities of those centres are shared through the GRID network and archived at the regional GRID centres in Bangkok, Geneva, Nairobi and Sioux Falls. Through its Division of Early Warning and Assessment, UNEP has embarked on a major new information system development in conjunction with the Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) in Redlands, California, United States, and a number of other partners. The system, known as UNEP.Net, will provide a single point of access to a vast array of environmental data and information and related output products available in various forms from UNEP and its assessment networks, as well as those from a number of close partner organizations. The development of UNEP.Net was initiated at a meeting in Redlands in October 2000, where more than 30 persons from the Division of Early Warning and Assessment and other divisions of UNEP and ESRI conceived the system and planned its development. The system is based on Internet map server technologies, such as "dynamic maps", and related state-of-the-art software technologies that serve to access, analyse and acquire environmental data and information, such as satellite imagery and related products, at various geographical resolutions and scales. UNEP.Net is a long-range strategic effort, but there is already an immediate and intensive campaign under way by the Division of Early Warning and Assessment and its various regional GRID and other centres to develop and bring online environmental data mapping services. These will initially be located at UNEP headquarters in Nairobi and gradually thereafter will be introduced in the various regions served by the organization. The prototype version of UNEP.Net was presented to the Governing Council of UNEP at its twenty-first session, in February 2001. A medium-term build-up phase foresees development of additional applications and the integration of services hosted at different UNEP and partner locations. That integration will emphasize extension of services across the entire UNEP programme to other divisions. In mid-2001, GRIDs-Arendal, Bangkok, Geneva, Nairobi, Sioux Falls and the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, in collaboration with UNEP regional offices, were mandated to develop regional and thematic data portals for UNEP.Net. For example, GRID-Geneva assumed either full or partial responsibility to oversee or carry out the initial development of no less than five of the regional and thematic "portals", including for Europe, West Asia, early warning/environmental vulnerability and socio-economic and urban environment, as well as ongoing maintenance and improvement of the "GEO Data Portal" containing the "core data sets" (and thus becoming the socio-economic portal of UNEP.Net). UNEP.Net is to enter a relatively stable operational period throughout most of the biennium 2002-2003. Towards the end of that period, by mid-2003, a cycle of review and evaluation will then lead to planning the next phase of service. Through the "GEO Data Portal" online environmental database (http://geo3.grid.unep.ch), GRID-Geneva is providing UNEP collaborating centres involved in the preparation of the flagship publication, the Global Environment Outlook (GEO), access to a common and consistent set of major global and regional core data sets from a wide variety of recognized sources. By the end of 2001, the Data Portal held more than 250 environmental data variables covering a wide variety of subjects for the time period 1972-2002. In addition, a considerable selection of geospatial data sets, such as land cover and population density maps were also made available online. The unique gateway will be incorporated into UNEP.Net during 2002, thereby enabling users to conduct their own environmental assessments using reliable and verified data. GRID centres continue to produce, add value to and disseminate data sets useful for environmental assessment. UNEP will place greater emphasis on bringing the centres closer together and is considering the creation of a steering committee to oversee the development of a more integrated operation. The GRID centres continue to serve as the foundation for UNEP Environment and Natural Resources Information Networking (ENRIN) projects, implemented by cooperation agreements with governmental and intergovernmental organizations in developing countries and countries with economies in transition to create environmental assessment and reporting networks. ENRIN projects are intended to promote the flow of information on environmental assessment between partner institutions and UNEP; provide for policy and planning consultations related to international environmental assessment and reporting; and provide a vehicle to catalyse and facilitate capacity-building of participating institutions. UNEP will continue to operate its North American node of GRID as a key centre for land cover assessment in cooperation with the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the United States Forest Service (USFS) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Through GRID-Sioux Falls, UNEP will maintain access to the world-class expertise and unique facilities of the USGS Earth Resources Observation Systems (EROS) Data Center (USGS-EDC), EPA, NASA and USFS, in the use of applied data and information technology for the benefit of developing countries. UNEP, through GRID-Sioux Falls, has been active in the design, development and timely delivery of scientifically credible information products, recognizing that it is a formidable challenge to provide decision makers with information useful for environmental planning, management and policy formulation in a timely manner and understandable formats. USGS-EDC is the largest satellite data centre in the world, with about 600 scientists. Extensive partnerships with the private sector, non-governmental organizations, scientific bodies and academic institutions have been established. The Center has an active programme dealing with integration and analysis of data sets from multiple sources to derive policy-relevant information about freshwater, biodiversity loss, land cover changes and population-environment interactions. Activities include monitoring of environmental hot spots around the world using satellite data, assessing the status of the world's remaining closed forests, rapid response to environmental emergencies, environmental vulnerability assessment and integrated river basin assessment. GRID-Sioux Falls started an initiative related to the Atlas of Global Change to document changes over the last 30 years using satellite data. The atlas will incorporate satellite imagery, maps, ground photographs and text. The project goal is to educate policy makers and the general public about the environmental situation in specific locations throughout the world. Environmental topics may include water issues, deforestation, desertification, disasters, fires, urbanization and agriculture-related issues. GRID-Sioux Falls continues its work on an assessment of the world's transboundary protected areas by geographical location and protection status. The basic goal is to identify the continental distribution of transboundary protected areas to provide a basis for international cooperation. By combining several factors, such as land cover and population density, it is hoped to identify transboundary protected areas that will be at highest risk of degradation in the future. GRID-Sioux Falls continues its work on integrating ground-based data and spaceborne images for the assessment of transboundary movement of pollutants as an early warning system. It also continues to develop a Global Environment Facility (GEF) Programme Tracking and Mapping System. The project leverages advanced Internet technology to connect all GEF projects and enable them to communicate, exchange information and perform activities that cut across agency boundaries. The GEF secretariat's project tracking system was released on the GEF web page under "Project map" (http://www.gefweb.org). Through EAP.AP-Bangkok, UNEP distributes copies of the Asia-Pacific mosaic based on 1993 NOAA advanced very high resolution radiometer (AVHRR) high-resolution picture transmission data obtained from USGS-EDC, the NOAA National Environmental Satellite, Data and Information Service, the National Research Council of Thailand, the State Meteorological Administration/Satellite Meteorology Centre of China, GRID-Tsukuba, the Centre for Environmental Remote Sensing of Japan and Chiba University in Japan. The mosaic is available for downloading at http://www.rrcap.unep.org/lc/cd/html/ mosaic.html In addition, through EAP.AP-Bangkok, UNEP also distributes an Indian Remote Sensing Satellite (IRS) Wide Field-of-view Sensor (WiFS) mosaic for Cambodia, northern India, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Myanmar and Thailand. EAP.AP-Bangkok, together with the European Community Joint Research Centre, has completed a research project to test the usefulness of VEGETATION data for forest cover monitoring in Indochina. UNEP has for five years operated Mercure, a satellite-based telecommunications system operating through the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). Mercure was designed to improve global access to environmental information and provides key infrastructure for the UNEP environmental information Internet, UNEP.Net. It uses INTELSAT satellites in geosynchronous orbit over the Indian and Atlantic Oceans. Eight high-capacity Earth stations operated at six cities around the world serve the information management needs of national and regional environment authorities and UNEP headquarters and regional offices. Nine lower-capacity stations established in nine cities around the world serve the information management needs of national environment agencies. The Mercure collaboration centred on a five-year agreement between UNEP and European donors, which came to an end in November 2001. At that time, UNEP transferred ownership of ground stations to the partner States that had been hosting them and has reduced operations to a single link between Europe and Kenya to support United Nations operations in Nairobi. The UNEP Regional Office for West Asia is supporting the Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment (ROPME) in the establishment of a remote sensing receiving station for the ROPME sea area. The station would provide data on the characteristics and dynamics of natural freshwater, coastal and marine resources and habitats and the ongoing discharges of oily and other wastes into the marine environment through the acquisition of satellite data on a region-wide scale and provide information and/or image analyses and interpretation to member States. Using RADARSAT space technology coupled with the European Remote Sensing (ERS)-1 and 2 satellites and NOAA-AVHRR, the station would provide the region with a powerful system that has a wide geographical coverage, longer observation time and the ability to observe and track oil spills for a longer period and to map and follow up coastal changes, assess habitats, measure oceanographic parameters, such as chlorophyll, temperature and turbidity, and map terrestrial ecosystems. Training and exchange of experience and expertise in the region is another major objective of the project in establishing the station. The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development have approved contributions for the station. UNEP and ROPME are in discussion with the Islamic Development Bank and GEF on developing the proposal further in order to meet their funding conditions. Emphasis has been placed on the benefits of the project in protecting biodiversity and commercially important species of fish and shrimp and on the linkage between the station and existing national centres. A greater commitment by member States to the operational phase of the project was also considered necessary. UNEP is in the process of establishing a regional resource centre for early warning and assessment for West Asia. The project will institutionalize environmental assessment and early warning in West Asia at the national, subregional and regional levels. This will enable a more coherent and coordinated structure to strengthen capacity-building for environment assessment and early warning, reporting and information management to support policy and informed decision-making in the context of sustainable development. It is intended to fulfil two main streams of needs, being mutually interlinked, with one end servicing the other and vice versa. One is to directly support UNEP needs for environment assessment and early warning and the other is to support and service those same needs at the regional and national levels within the West Asian region. The centre will work by pooling the resources of many assessment and information institutions, such as research centres, academic institutions, remote sensing and GIS facilities, information centres, specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations (including associations and forums) and the private sector, within a regional framework to bring about coherent and harmonized actions. The strategy of the centre is to be based on UNEP's approach of an integrated observing, assessment and reporting framework. Thus, the centre will support the process at "nested" geographical scales from regional to national, with integration into the global framework and will initiate the development of a regional cooperative environment assessment and early warning network, as an integral part of the global UNEP framework, which is vital in order to fulfil its assessment mandate. Negotiation is under way with the Arabian Gulf University to host the centre at its premises. The University is a regional academic institution, which has been a UNEP collaborating centre for the GEO process in West Asia since GEO-1 (1995). The centre's activities will focus on assessment and reporting, including support for the GEO process, producing regional reports on the state of the environment, supporting other assessments such as the regional preparatory assessment for the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the Millennium Assessment and assessment of key regional eco-regions. Other key activity areas are early warning, capacity-building and technical assistance, data and information management and networking. At the heart of those activities will be development of Internet Web sites, GIS systems, remote sensing and other information technology tools, which will serve and support the functions of the centre. The UNEP Regional Office for West Asia (ROWA), ROPME, the Arab Centre for Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands (ACSAD), GRID-Geneva and GRID-Sioux Falls are carrying out a comprehensive scientific assessment of the Tigris-Euphrates river basin, including the associated marine area of the northern Persian Gulf. The project is entitled "Evaluation of Land Cover/Use Changes in the Tigris-Euphrates Basin and the Wetlands of Lower Mesopotamia, including the northern Persian Gulf". Each of the parties is providing input on a priority issue facing the region. GRID-Geneva and GRID-Sioux Falls are to carry out a land cover change detection analysis of the Mesopotamian marshlands and the headwater region in Turkey respectively. The Arab Centre for Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands is to provide hydrological data and prepare a report on the basin's water resources. Finally, ROPME is to analyse the data and produce a report on the state of the coastal and marine environment, with GRID providing 43 Landsat satellite images to assist in the surveys. The first output of the project is an assessment report entitled "The Mesopotamian Marshlands: Demise of an Ecosystem", prepared by GRID-Geneva in collaboration with GRID-Sioux Falls and the UNEP Regional Office for West Asia and published in August 2001. Based on an analysis of satellite imagery, the study shows that 85 per cent of the marshlands -- the largest wetland in the Middle East and one of the most outstanding freshwater ecosystems in the world -- have been lost. The desiccation of the marshlands, which originally covered between 15,000 and 20,000 square kilometres, is attributable to two main causes: upstream dams and drainage schemes. A small northern fringe of the wetland system straddling the border between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq is all that remains of the marshlands. The Arab Centre for Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands has prepared a draft report entitled "Surface Water Resources in the Euphrates and Tigris River Basins" which is to be finalized by early 2002. GRID-Sioux Falls will also be completing its study of the headwater region in Turkey. An assessment of the state of the marine environment in the northern Persian Gulf, which is connected to the Tigris-Euphrates river system both hydrologically via the Shatt al-Arab estuary and through the migration of aquatic species, will be made by ROPME. The studies are to serve as background documents for the development of an integrated regional programme of action for water resource management involving all riparian countries. The programme will emphasize a country-driven approach, including monitoring and assessment of river and estuarine water quality, monitoring of river discharges and uses and basin management. UNEP continues to provide a number of CEOS-related information services intended to increase environmental applications of Earth observation data. UNEP hosts sites of the CEOS International Directory Network (IDN) in Hungary, Kenya and Switzerland. UNEP has also adopted the CEOS Information Locator System (CILS) as a core item of its information servicing infrastructure. IDN and CILS are outcomes of the Working Group on Information Systems and Services of which UNEP is currently user vice-chair. IOC also cooperates closely with CEOS in the activities of the Working Group. UNEP is also very active in CEOS-based activities relating to metadata for spatial data, including Earth observation data sets. UNEP now represents the Working Group in the technical committee on spatial metadata of the International Organization for Standardization. UNEP continues to provide technical backstopping assistance to Eritrea, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. Continuing cooperation in the development of environmental information systems in Africa is coordinated through the Advisory Committee on Environmental Information Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa. Sponsored by the World Bank, UNEP, the UNDP Office to Combat Desertification and Drought, the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), USAID and the Norwegian Agency for International Development, the Advisory Committee provides a forum for coordination and the exchange of ideas. UNEP also cooperates with the FAO Regional Office for Africa in Accra in strengthening institutional capacities for developing coastal and marine environmental databases for some countries along the west African coast, such as the Gambia, Ghana and Guinea. Through GRID-Arendal, UNEP is continuing to maintain the Baltic Sea catchment area database. The database can be accessed through the Internet and the World Wide Web. Through its Global International Waters Assessment office in Kalmar, Sweden, and supported by GRID-Arendal, UNEP will maintain an international water assessment gateway within the framework of UNEP.Net. Also through GRID-Arendal, UNEP will further develop a gateway to Arctic environmental and natural resource data and information sources, in close cooperation with the working groups under the Arctic Council and the Arctic research community. In cooperation with other United Nations agencies and organizations and through GRID-Arendal, UNEP will develop the first global assessment on loss of biodiversity due to human activity, based on recently available global GIS data sets. UNEP, through EAP.AP- and GRID-Bangkok, has completed the Coastal and Marine Environmental Management Information System for the South China Sea Area, covering Cambodia, southern China and Viet Nam and continues to work on further development of the North-West Pacific Action Plan of the UNEP Regional Seas Programme. Subject to the availability of finances, UNEP will continue to seek opportunities to offer short-term fellowships to appropriate persons from developing countries to work at GRID-Sioux Falls and to develop or analyse data sets relating to environmental issues in their home countries. UNEP and UNESCO will continue to work with the ICSU Scientific Committee on the Problems of the Environment. Preserving the Earth's biodiversity has become a matter of global significance. One of the key means of attaining success in the field is increasing knowledge and awareness about biodiversity among the public (especially youth). The issue has been addressed recently by UNEP/GRID-Warsaw through its initiative to create a specially designed multimedia educational programme entitled "Biological Diversity in Poland". The programme will be distributed free of charge to secondary schools in Poland. Its main purpose is (a) to increase environmental knowledge and awareness among students; (b) to promote pro-environmental attitudes and practices; and (c) to foster understanding of the importance of biodiversity and the need for its protection. Even though the programme mostly presents biodiversity in Poland, numerous references have been made to regional and global biodiversity issues. For maximum educational impact, emphasis has been placed on presenting the knowledge in a systematic, comprehensive and attractive format. One of the prime examples of such an approach is to employ satellite images as one of the means of detecting, monitoring, analysing and assessing natural processes occurring on Earth. Building environmental awareness and pro-environmental attitudes among the public is frequently based on the "think globally -- act locally" principle, where knowledge about one's own area or country is linked to global phenomena. The rapid development of information technology and the availability of computers has opened new possibilities for creating and utilizing novel tools for environmental education. The Electronic Atlas of Environment in Poland is a multimedia presentation programme developed by UNEP/GRID-Warsaw. The main idea behind creating the atlas was to increase knowledge of Polish nature and environmental awareness among the youngest members of society, although it can well serve a wide variety of users seeking quality, comprehensive environmental information in an attractive, user-friendly and highly interactive package. A number of different multimedia tools (thematic maps, diagrams, tables, text, photos and animations) enable easy and highly functional access to geographical data. Despite focusing on the territory of one country, much of the environmental and geographic information contained therein is depicted on a broad regional, European and global scale. Efforts are under way to have the atlas translated into English, as it can also serve as a model environmental education tool in other countries. UNHCR is currently developing a framework for environmental assessments and monitoring methodologies using a combination of traditional field surveys, satellite imagery and GIS to develop indicators for undertaking sound environmental projects. The project is supported by the French Fund for the Global Environment and UNHCR. Within the framework of the Man and the Biosphere Programme, UNESCO will continue to cooperate with UNEP, FAO, WMO and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme of ICSU concerning GTOS, notably through its World Network of Biosphere Reserves (411 sites in 94 countries). Two initiatives are at present being developed, the first of which deals with the use of biosphere reserves as ground truth sites for the GTOS project on net primary productivity, which is coordinated through the international long-term ecological monitoring programme, in cooperation with NASA. Additionally, 125 biosphere reserves have been selected for possible inclusion in the GTOS terrestrial ecosystems monitoring sites exercise. The second is the development of a biosphere reserve integrated monitoring programme aimed at integrating biodiversity, environmental and social monitoring within biosphere reserves and related findings, including information obtained by remote sensing and GIS applications. Within the framework of the Man and the Biosphere Programme, UNESCO will continue to cooperate with the Sahara and Sahel Observatory (OSS) in the creation of an ecological observatory network, ROSELT, in Africa. UNESCO will assist, in particular, in introducing the use of space technology for monitoring fragile ecosystems in dry lands, semi-arid and arid regions. During the International Year of the Mountains in 2002, UNESCO will initiate international research projects on new methodologies for the rehabilitation of mountain ecosystems using remote sensing and GIS technologies. As sponsors of the Diversitas Programme (an international programme on biodiversity science) and as a follow-up of the International Biodiversity Observation Year in 2001, UNESCO, ICSU and several ICSU affiliates will promote biodiversity activities with strong remote sensing and GIS components. UNESCO created the Regional School on Integrated Tropical Forest Management (ERAIFT) in 1999 in cooperation with UNDP, Belgium, the European Commission and several countries of the Sub-Saharan Africa and Indian Ocean region. The Regional School, which is located at the University of Kinshasa, has established a remote sensing/GIS mapping laboratory for postgraduate students in management of African tropical forests. In cooperation with the International Institute for Aerospace Survey and Earth Sciences (ITC) and the World Wildlife Fund, UNESCO is developing a training programme on remote sensing and GIS for the rehabilitation of panda habitats in China. The training programme is for both scientists and managers. UNESCO actively supports the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security (GMES) initiative of the European Union and ESA, which seeks to bring the needs of society for information associated with the issues of environment and security together with the advanced technical and operational capability offered by terrestrial and space-borne observation systems. Besides ensuring European access to independent information on the environment at the global, regional and local levels, the initiative also addresses such issues as crisis management and humanitarian aid. UNESCO is a member of the EURISY Programme Committee for the preparation of the Conference on GMES Services and Benefits to Users, to be held in late 2002. ITU will participate in two pilot projects initiated by Tunisia entitled "Establishment of a terrestrial and space telecommunications infrastructure for an integrated information system on the environment and sustainable development in Tunisia" and "Establishment of a satellite-based network for the remote monitoring of sea water quality". In collaboration with UNITAR, the ITU Telecommunication Development Bureau (BDT) has organized several subregional training seminars in Africa on the development and use of telecommunication and information technology for protection of the environment and sustainable development. ITU/BDT is collaborating with the Sahara and Sahel Observatory and UNITAR for the preparation of the project document for the second phase of the Environmental Information System on the Internet for Africa (SISEI). Two meetings, organized by ITU/BDT in Geneva, jointly with the Sahara and Sahel Observatory and UNITAR, were held in March and October 2001 respectively with potential sponsors and partners and the beneficiary African countries. The project document was adopted at the first meeting and the project and the associated campaign for the mobilization of resources were officially launched at the second. This second phase is expected to run from 2002 to 2005. ITU/BDT and UNEP are supporting a new initiative among information and communication technology service providers and suppliers, the Global e-Sustainability Initiative. Through the Initiative, the information and communication technology industry aims to help improve the global environment and to enhance human and economic development and thereby make a key contribution to a global sustainable future. The Initiative was officially launched on 5 June 2001 in Turin, Italy, on World Environment Day. WMO continues to provide valuable data and assessments concerning atmospheric status under the Atmospheric Research and Environment Programme through GAW, which it established in 1989 as a long-term monitoring and research system to detect changes in the composition of the atmosphere on global and regional scales. Work includes monitoring and research on pollutants, acid deposition and greenhouse gases, including ozone, aerosols and other trace substances in the atmosphere that may lead to global climate change. GAW data include surface and vertical observations, which provide the information required to verify satellite-based measurements of selected atmospheric constituents. In particular, through its more than 150 total ozone monitoring stations, GAW has furnished critical ground truth data to calibrate ozone observations from space. Those satellite observations, in turn, provide vital information used in the preparation of near real-time ozone bulletins on the state of the ozone layer during both the austral spring and the northern hemisphere winter. In addition, using four-dimensional variational assimilation techniques, major global numerical weather forecasting centres are starting to assimilate real-time ozone observations from satellites as well as ground-based measurements, in order to improve the analysis of stratospheric winds and ozone radiative effects. Such activities will benefit from better cooperation with space observing programmes and, in that respect, a new integrated global atmospheric chemistry observation theme is being developed within IGOS for the monitoring of atmospheric chemical components such as ozone and greenhouse gases. 3. Management of natural resources The ECE Environment and Human Settlements Division will continue to develop the use of remote sensing and GIS for land use/land cover information for specific applications in the region and in particular with reference to the ECE multilateral environmental agreements. For example, monitoring implementation of the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution requires harmonized land use maps in order to identify impacts across the region; those maps also need to be harmonized with mapped land use information to be used for modelling of pollutant deposition. ESCAP will develop and implement, within the framework of RESAP II, regional cooperative projects on space technology applications for natural resource management. ESCAP, in close cooperation with FAO, will implement in 2002 and beyond the common denominator project on development and applications of a multi-purpose environmental and natural resource information base for food security and sustainable development in the ESCAP region. ESCAP will continue to implement common denominator projects for the sustainable management of the natural resources of its member States, including projects on integrated land and water resource management, crop monitoring and agricultural production forecasting. In future years, when resources become available, ESCAP will develop and implement projects on the mapping for groundwater potential and identification of recharge zones, potential offshore fishery area delineation and inland aquaculture development and cropping system and precision farming studies. ESCAP will hold the annual meeting of the Regional Working Group on Remote Sensing, Geographic Information System and Satellite-based Positioning in Beijing in 2002. The venue of the annual meeting in 2003 is to be determined. Through GRID-Geneva, UNEP continued work on a project related to biodiversity mapping in Madagascar. The broad objective of the project is to develop a method to map and qualify biodiversity, which will be part of an efficient and user-friendly GIS to manage biodiversity data in relation with other environmental information, for instance the location and intensity of forest fires and wildfires. The more specific aims of the project are (a) to examine different methodologies used for land cover mapping (such as the FAO Land Cover Classification System); (b) to make existing land cover data comparable and thus more effective for analyses of land cover and land cover changes at the regional or global levels; and (c) to derive biodiversity-related information from land cover maps. In order to achieve this, GRID-Geneva is producing a land cover and biodiversity map for the northern part of Madagascar. Through EAP.AP-Bangkok, UNEP continues to undertake land cover assessment and monitoring studies with subregional and national agencies. It has completed the assessment and monitoring of 12 countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam) with NOAA-AVHRR data and is currently performing land cover analysis of Bhutan and Sri Lanka. UNEP has also prepared through EAP.AP-Bangkok a new publication on land use/land cover change in South-East Asia, which is being distributed free of charge. A compact disc containing data and publications relating to land cover projects has been prepared and is now available on request. The contents of the compact disc are also available online on the EAP.AP web site (http://www.eapap.unep.org/ lc/cd/html/assess_monitor.html). EAP.AP-Bangkok has also initiated the land use/land cover mapping of Greater Mekong subregion countries using both large resolution (Landsat Thematic Mapper) and coarse resolution (NOAA-AVHRR) data. Having completed the World Soils and Terrain Digital Database (SOTER) on the scale 1:5,000,000 for Latin America, UNEP, together with the International Soil Reference and Information Centre and FAO, continues to advance the work on and coverage of SOTER. Environmental information systems are one of the key tools used worldwide in environmental resource management of national parks. UNEP/GRID-Warsaw is in charge of developing the GIS for Karkonosze National Park. The project constitutes a milestone in the process of standardization and unification of GIS methodology that is to be implemented in all Polish national parks within a few years' time. The project will yield a database and a set of computer application tools that will make possible effective management of natural and cultural resources of the park, in line with its protection plan. It will also help monitor human activities and predict possible threats to and disturbances in the Karkonosze environment. The global dimension to the project is evidenced by the fact that Karkonosze National Park holds Man and the Biosphere Reserve status. Since 1996, the World Bank and FAO have been implementing the Regional Environmental Information Management Project in Central Africa. The project aims at improving and strengthening the planning and management of natural resources in the countries of the Congo basin by providing the various stakeholders with appropriate environmental information. The project involves some 100 organizations from the public, private and non-governmental sectors, which all work in a national and regional network structure. FAO is the lead agency for the normative as well as the technical control activities of the project, which is supported by a multi-donor fund of more than $10 million involving Belgium, Canada and France, the World Bank, the European Union and GEF. The main recent activities of the project include: (a) the preparation of a number of geodatabases and reviews on the environment, forests and land use; (b) capacity-building, provision of equipment and training; and (c) establishment of Internet-based thematic networks on the main environmental priorities of the subregion (biodiversity, forestry and coastal zones). Particular attention is paid in the project to involving the users of information at all decision-making levels. UNHCR is a partner within the framework of the project and will provide standard procedures and integrate geographical information for refugee contingency planning activities. The FAO Environment and Natural Resources Service has operated the AFRICOVER project since 1995. The project aims to establish a digital land cover database for selected subregions in Africa. It produces land cover maps on the scale 1:250,000 (1:1,000,000 and 1:100,000 in certain cases), using the same geographical references and projection system in Africa, as well as a common harmonized legend, with updated information on features including drainage, toponymy, roads and land cover. The project has been implemented through close cooperation between regional and national remote sensing centres and mapping agencies in Africa under the supervision of FAO. A further two-year phase of the AFRICOVER East Africa project was approved by the Government of Italy in August 2000 with a focus on the application of access to and distribution of established AFRICOVER data sets and application of the Land Cover Classification System methodology at the national, regional and global levels. FAO also cooperates with the European Commission Joint Research Centre, UNEP and UNESCO by participating in working groups on the harmonization of land use and land cover classification. FAO implements a number of GIS analysis and applications projects. These include: (a) preparation of the GIS vector and raster versions of the FAO/UNESCO soil map of the world; (b) estimation of available arable lands for the major FAO study entitled "Agriculture Towards 2010"; (c) analysis of the suitability of inland aquaculture sites of Africa and South and Central America for fish farming potential; (d) soil suitability analysis studies for various crops in Africa; and (e) a dominant land resource map for Africa. The UNESCO Division of Earth Sciences will continue to carry out the Pan-African Network for a Geological Information System (PANGIS) project, which is standardizing the geoscience databases of African countries to facilitate the collection, electronic exchange and retrieval of geodata for better resource management and sustainable planning and development. In Asia, the first phase of the South-East Asian Network for a Geological Information System (SANGIS) project is being implemented; a regional workshop on geodata handling is foreseen in 2002-2003. The above projects are carried out by UNESCO in cooperation with the Commission on the Management and Application of Geosciences Information of the International Union of Geological Sciences, the International Centre for Training and Exchanges in Geosciences, France, and the Royal Museum of Central Africa, Belgium. UNESCO will continue to support international postgraduate courses on the geological, geophysical and coastal zone applications of remote sensing and GIS technologies organized by ITC. Within the framework of the Man and the Biosphere Programme, UNESCO will continue to organize training courses on remote sensing and GIS technologies for biosphere reserve managers in developing countries and to develop pilot projects on the operational use of GIS. Remote sensing and GIS technologies were introduced in biosphere reserve management by UNESCO in cooperation with Conservation International, Intel (United States) and the Nippon Electric Company (Japan). The UNESCO Coastal Regions and Small Islands Unit has produced the seventh computer-based Bilko software learning module on the applications of satellite and airborne image data to coastal management. The module is available in CD-ROM and on the Internet (http://www.unesco.bilko.org). Moreover, a remote sensing handbook for tropical coastal management has been produced and is being distributed free of charge. A new computer-based learning module will be produced in 2002 on the use of multi-sensor, multi-temporal remote data sets for fisheries. The World Water Assessment Programme, a United Nations system-wide programme whose secretariat is located in the UNESCO Division of Water Sciences, will make considerable use of remote sensing and GIS technologies such as in the assessment of surface water, soil moisture, groundwater distributions both for water availability and for assessing the impact of floods and droughts and assessment of uses of water, such as forestry and agriculture. GIS will be used extensively as a tool for data intercomparisons within specific geographical units, for example, overlaying of water availability maps with maps of water use. In the framework of the UNESCO/International Union of Geological Sciences Geological Applications of Remote Sensing programme, the UNESCO Division of Earth Sciences will organize regional workshops in the Arab region in 2002 and 2003 on the use of remote sensing and GIS technologies related to the study of geological parameters that influence desertification and on management of transboundary groundwater aquifers. In cooperation with the UNESCO International Hydrological Programme, a session on remote sensing and GIS applications will be organized during the International Workshop on Transboundary Aquifer Systems, to be held in May 2002 in Tripoli. In cooperation with EURISY and the Royal Centre for Remote Sensing (CRTS) of Morocco, a symposium on improving water resource management and desertification control using space-based information will be held in Rabat on 21 and 22 March 2002. UNESCO will assist in strengthening the remote sensing and GIS infrastructure of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by organizing training courses aimed at improving the study of the country's hydrological and geological resources. UNESCO, FAO, the International Association of Hydrogeologists and ECE have established a collaborative programme on internationally shared aquifer resource management to improve understanding of the scientific, socio-economic, legal, institutional and environmental aspects of regional groundwater resource management. The programme will draw on expertise from the Geological Applications of Remote Sensing programme regarding data fusion and use geological mapping information in the framework of the UNESCO/Commission for the Geological Map of the World cooperation. The programme will also produce documentation on the application of remote sensing and GIS technologies to the evaluation and management of transboundary aquifer systems. B. Using space applications for human security, development and welfare 1. Enhancing disaster reduction capability The IGOS partnership, including FAO, UNESCO, ICSU, IOC, UNEP, WMO and IGFA, endorsed the Disaster Management Group, established under CEOS, to continue its work on disaster management and supported the close interaction with the inter-agency secretariat for the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR) and the Office for Outer Space Affairs on the subject matter. "The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development", adopted by UNISPACE III and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/68, called for action, among other things, to implement an integrated, global system, especially through international cooperation, to manage natural disaster mitigation, relief and prevention efforts, especially of an international nature, through Earth observation, communications and other space-based services, making maximum use of existing capabilities and filling gaps in worldwide satellite coverage. In response to that call, the Office for Outer Space Affairs, within the framework of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications, has undertaken to organize a series of workshops on the use of space technology in support of disaster management. The objectives of the workshops are: (a) to increase the awareness of managers and decision makers involved in disaster management of the potential benefits and the cost-effectiveness of using space technologies; (b) to determine the types of information and communications needed in managing specific disasters and the extent to which they could be provided using space technologies; and (c) to develop a blueprint of actions that could lead in the near future to pilot projects whereby interested national institutions responsible for disaster management incorporate and test the use of space tools. The pilot projects would be designed and carried out through international cooperation. The process will seek to establish synergies among initiatives that are being carried out on the same theme by various institutions or groups of institutions. 