%%%REFUGEE ASSISTANCE|REFUGEE PROTECTION|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|INTERNAL OVERSIGHT|INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS|CONSULTATIONS|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|REFUGEE-RECEIVING COUNTRIES|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|STAFF SECURITY|BUDGET PROJECTIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/AC.96/969 26 September 2002 Original: ENGLISH EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER'S PROGRAMME Fifty-third session REPORT OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE (24 - 26 June 2002) I. INTRODUCTION 1. The meeting was opened by the Chairman of the Executive Committee, His Excellency, Ambassador Johan Molander (Sweden). His welcoming address included congratulations to the four new members of the Executive Committee: Ecuador, Guinea, New Zealand and Yugoslavia, recently elected by ECOSOC at its organizational session. He informed the Committee of requests for observer status from Angola, Belarus, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Republic of Moldova, Yemen and Zambia. In accordance with the decision taken by the Executive Committee at its fifty-second session on observer participation (A/AC.96/959, para 29 (b)), the Standing Committee agreed to these requests. 2. Discussions on the Global Report on Activities in 2001 and on Evaluation and Policy Analysis (items 3 (ii) and 4 (ii) respectively), as well as the statement by the Chairperson of the Staff Council, were chaired by His Excellency, Ambassador Fisseha Yimer (Ethiopia). II. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING The agenda for the meeting (EC/52/SC/CRP.5) was adopted. III. ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT REPORT OF THE TWENTY-THIRD MEETING 4. The Chairman presented for adoption the draft report of the Standing Committee's twenty-third meeting (EC/52/SC/CRP.4), held on 5 - 7 March 2002. One delegation observed that para. 42 of this document did not adequately cover the debate that had taken place. The Chairman requested the Secretariat to take note of this observation. Another delegation presented an amendment to para. 49 of the draft report. The draft report was adopted with this amendment. IV. HIGH COMMISSIONER'S STATEMENT 5. In a statement to the Committee, the High Commissioner drew attention to issues of current concern to UNHCR. These included: the Global Consultations on International Protection and their follow up; the UNHCR 2004 process; recent initiatives on durable solutions; challenges in Afghanistan, Angola and West Africa; and the funding situation. 6. Many of the delegations who responded expressed thanks for this update and reaffirmed their ongoing support for the work of UNHCR and its staff. On funding issues, there was concern over the serious shortfall for 2002 and the impact of potential cuts. Several delegations mentioned in this context the importance of giving priority to programmes in Africa. There was also considerable interest in the High Commissioner's vision of working towards durable solutions in partnership with development agencies. 7. Several delegations expressed concern over unmet needs for the Afghanistan repatriation programme. They looked forward to the forthcoming Afghanistan Support Group meeting as an opportunity for donors to honour the pledges they had made at the meeting in Tokyo in December 2001. The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran also referred to its cooperation with UNHCR in the large-scale repatriation taking place from his country. Delegations expressed deep appreciation for the work accomplished by the Global Consultations on International Protection and interest in examining the Agenda for Protection which would serve to map out priorities for the way ahead. V. PROGRAMME AND FUNDING A. Update on annual programme budget and funding projections for 2002 8. Introducing this item, the Deputy High Commissioner gave details of current funding requirements in the light of new Supplementary Programmes since the approval of the budget for 2002. UNHCR was again facing a significant shortfall in its operational budget. She drew attention to the fact that earmarking of contributions aggravated the problem of under-funding, and appealed to donors to avoid earmarking in the second half of the year. She also described the various measures being undertaken by UNHCR to broaden and diversify its donor base. These included attempts to identify and secure complementary funding, as recently discussed at consultations held within the framework of the Standing Committee. She looked forward to pursuing these discussions at the time of the Executive Committee and called upon donors to maintain and, if possible, increase their support. 9. Delegations were unanimous in expressing concern over the serious situation created by the shortfall, emphasising the importance of keeping cuts in the field to a minimum. Many delegations acknowledged and supported UNHCR's efforts to broaden its donor base, mentioning in particular private sector fund raising. They also welcomed the dialogue on complementary sources of funding and pledged their continued support of UNHCR's efforts in this direction. 10. Some delegations noted that it was proposed to maintain elements of the Afghanistan repatriation operation as a supplementary programme in 2003, rather than integrating the entire budget within the Annual Programme Budget. They acknowledged that this was necessary as an exceptional measure in view of the magnitude and evolving nature of this operation. One delegation stated a preference for its incorporation in the Annual Programme Budget. 11. Several delegations welcomed the inclusion in the conference room paper of a chart giving a list of developing countries hosting refugee populations, in recognition of the contributions made by these countries. They noted that this was the first time that this information was provided in the update on programme and funding, and UNHCR was strongly encouraged to continue this practice. On the issue of earmarking, many delegations noted the request made by UNHCR for increased flexibility, particularly as the year progressed. Several delegations nevertheless drew attention to constraints at national level, and proposed that the draft decision submitted to the Committee be amended to take account of such requirements, by adding the word "preferably" towards the end of OP6. In response to specific questions raised by delegations, the Director of Communication and Information (DCI) observed that earmarking, if required, should preferably be limited to regional or country level. He acknowledged the interest shown by delegations in private sector fund raising, emphasizing that this was an investment for the longer-term. He welcomed the useful discussions that had taken place on complementary sources of funding and looked forward to pursuing this creative, joint effort. 14. In conclusion of this item, the Committee adopted the draft decision as amended by delegations. The decision appears in Annex to this report. B. Global Report on Activities in 2001 15. The Director of DCI presented the Global Report which described how UNHCR's main activities had been carried out in the various regions in 2001, and provided key information of interest to donors, including major protection challenges, policy priorities and global themes on issues of current concern to UNHCR. It also reviewed the funding situation during the year and provided details on: both public and private sector contributions, including an acknowledgement of the importance of those made by refugee-hosting countries; levels of earmarking; and donor profiles. The purpose of this report was to meet the reporting requirements of as many of UNHCR's donors as possible. The information presented in the country chapters had been structured in order to report against the stated objectives on: the working environment; achievements and impact; organization and implementation; and an overall assessment for the year. The Director of DCI invited comments and suggestions for further improvements. He also drew attention to the information on Quarterly Refugee Trends January-March 2002, which had just been published by the Population Data Unit and was available to delegations. The 2001 Global Report was welcomed by several delegations as a well-balanced, attractive, and comprehensive source of information. Several delegations took the floor to comment on specific issues relating to the reporting of concerns and activities in their country or region. In responding, the Director of DCI confirmed that these points would be taken up on a bilateral basis, as required. Further consultation to ensure that information presented in the Global Report was as accurate as possible would take place with field offices. VI. STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STAFF COUNCIL 17. At the invitation of the Chairman, the Staff Council Chairperson addressed the Standing Committee in the course of the meeting. He raised a number of current issues, including the decision to re-create two distinct divisions to deal with human and financial resources which he welcomed as a means of focusing greater attention on the management of staff. He regretted the lack of progress on many urgent issues, in particular: developing a more efficient and fair posting system; addressing the problem of staff in-between assignments (SIBAs); implementing an equitable and efficient rotation policy, giving serious consideration to the Rotation Working Group's conclusions and recommendations; and performance management. In relation to the allegations of sexual exploitation of refugee children in West Africa, he insisted on the need for concrete, preventive action, together with personal and managerial accountability measures for any staff found to be involved, but cautioned that the image of staff at large should not be tarnished by indiscriminate accusations. In concluding, he expressed concern over the current financial deficit, recalling in particular that the staff had made strenuous and, at times, painful efforts to implement the results of actions 1,2 and 3, and appealed to the international community to put the organization's work-in-progress on a solid financial foundation. VII. MANAGEMENT, FINANCE, OVERSIGHT AND HUMAN RESOURCES A. Evaluation and policy analysis: UNHCR's plan and activities In his introductory statement, the Head of the Evaluation and Policy Analysis Unit drew attention to the various purposes of evaluation. These ranged from reinforcing accountability to influencing UNHCR's organizational culture, as outlined in the background paper submitted to the Committee (EC/SC/52/CRP.7). 21. In the discussion that followed, many delegations commended EPAU for the marked progress achieved over the past years, commending in particular the transparency of its work. Likewise, appreciation was expressed with regard to the innovative methods developed by EPAU such as the real-time evaluations and joint evaluations. 22. Several delegations noted that the evaluation function was vital for UNHCR to enhance institutional learning, policy development and accountability towards donors and other key stakeholders, including beneficiaries. There was general agreement that resources for this important activity should be appropriately secured (or even increased) and not suffer from any budget cuts. One delegation also suggested that, in the interest of maintaining the independence of the evaluation function, extensive use should be made of external consultants. 23. Some delegations urged that the draft evaluation policy be endorsed and implemented soon. They welcomed the establishment of the Evaluation Advisory Group with broader membership. Several delegations suggested that both evaluation and policy analysis functions be given equal attention in EPAU's work. Many laid emphasis in their statements on the issue of follow-up to the findings of the evaluations, including translating their recommendations into operational policies and guidelines. Several acknowledged that EPAU alone could not achieve this goal, and that other key actors, including senior management, needed to provide their firm commitment. In his response, the head of EPAU thanked delegations for the interest and encouragement they had expressed, noting a number of specific suggestions they had made for future evaluations. He also indicated that the fourth real-time evaluation of the Afghanistan emergency was currently under consideration. On the issue of linkage between evaluation and monitoring in the draft evaluation policy, the Head of EPAU acknowledged that monitoring had been given little attention to date in the organization, and suggested that UNHCR initiate discussion on this matter. He mentioned, however, that EPAU lacked the capacity and mandate to undertake systematic and comprehensive monitoring. 25. Closing this item, the Assistant High Commissioner announced that an arrangement was underway to ensure an integrated and global follow-up to the evaluation on refugee women and refugee children, mentioned by several delegations. He also confirmed the support of the High Commissioner for the evaluation function, and the importance for EPAU to remain independent and thus critical. B. UNHCR's inspection and investigation activities 26. The Inspector General highlighted key points from the background paper document (EC/52/SC/CRP.12) presented to the Standing Committee. This had been an intensive year with particular emphasis on investigations, which had allowed less focus on the important function of inspection. Nevertheless, 13 inspections had been carried out. A paper outlining conclusions on common observations/recommendations from inspections during the period March 1999-March 2002 had also been compiled and made available to delegations. 27. Measures underway to strengthen the organization's capacity to cover both inspection and investigation needs included: the establishment of a new Investigation Unit by end July; the establishment of a confidential `Hotline' system, linking field offices to the Inspector General's Office; constitution of a database; and the preparation of an investigation manual (in the process of finalisation). The Inspector General also drew attention to areas where she felt lessons learned needed to be fed in more consistently to UNHCR policy and practice. 28. Delegations who took the floor commented on the quality of the Inspector General's report, welcoming in particular the compilation of observations from inspection missions as a means of sharing of good practices. There was approval of the Inspector General's focus on achieving a comprehensive, systematic and timely assessment of the management of UNHCR operations. One delegation pointed out the need for strong commitment by UNHCR and the international community to strengthen overall safety and security in camps through early warning mechanisms, strong protection management and safety networks to avoid the risk of abuse or corruption. 29. On the issue of allegations of sexual exploitation of children in West Africa, one delegation felt that more information could have been provided on positive steps taken to counter the risk of abusive behaviour as follow-up to the investigations. While welcoming the timely establishment of the new Investigation Unit, this delegation highlighted the need for UNHCR to hire experienced investigators and indicated its willingness to work in partnership with the Inspector General's Office to offer support and training to staff in this area of expertise. Another delegation suggested that UNHCR's counterparts could also benefit from training to enhance overall efficiency in field activities, whether related to protection, administration or programme management. 30. In responding to these interventions, the Inspector General reiterated her belief that the Inspector General's Office needed to be in a strong position to deal with accountability and management issues. She confirmed that she would inform ExCom more fully of the proactive measures being put in place such as the confidential 'Hotline' and on developments in inspection activities. C. UNHCR's human resources management 31. In his introductory statement, the Head of Human Resources Service (HRS) outlined main features of the past year, such as the staffing of the Afghanistan operation through a fast track model, as well as progress on a number of interrelated issues on the human resources agenda: rotation, workforce profiling and planning, performance management, contracts and recruitment. Progress had not always been as fast as hoped, partly due to limited resources. 32. In their statements many delegations paid tribute to the staff of UNHCR - the core of the organization - many of whom served with dedication in challenging and often demoralizing circumstances. Some delegations referred to the turbulent times experienced by the organization and the negative effects this could have on staff. They also emphasized the priority that should continue to be given to staff security, including that of local staff. 33. Several delegations welcomed the improvement in the staff/management dialogue, as well as the creative approach demonstrated by the accelerated postings process, and the fast track procedures that had applied in the case of staffing the operations in Afghanistan. It was generally noted, however, that progress in many areas had been slow and there was an urgent need for a more efficient posting process. Particular attention was drawn to the persistent problem of staff between assignments and its negative effects both financially and for the morale of the staff concerned. One delegation suggested that more pro-active planning could help. Another delegation drew attention to the ongoing problem of filling long-vacant posts in Africa. The lack of progress on workforce profiling was regretted by another delegation. 34. Some delegations alluded to cases of misconduct and enquired how staff were held accountable and what measures was put in place to ensure disciplinary measures. Several delegations welcomed the drafting of the Code of Conduct as a useful step, but questions were raised as to its implementation. Some also referred to the appraisal process as an essential tool for personal accountability. 35. Several delegations expressed an interest in receiving regular and comprehensive statistics on the balance of staff between Headquarters and the Field, geographical and gender balance and other essential factors. One delegation suggested that the "State of UNHCR's Staff" should be updated. On the issue of rotation, UNHCR was encouraged to ensure transfer of professional experience between and among regions. One delegation observed, however, that rotation should be gender-sensitive and take account of the situation of the individual. This delegation also called for UNHCR to increase the overall per centage of female staff, in particular in senior positions, suggesting that serious consideration be given to the use of quotas. Other issues raised by delegations included UNHCR's recruitment policy. Some delegations felt that the organization's skills base could be invigorated by new blood, both through better use of the JPO programme, and through entry at more senior levels. 37. In his response, the Director of HRS took note of the wide rage of issues raised by delegations. He confirmed that updated statistical analyses would be made available at the time of the Executive Committee. He also confirmed that discussions were currently underway through staff/management dialogue on many of the problems areas identified, recalling that lack of resources was partly responsible for slow progress in some areas. VIII. INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION Adoption of the draft report of the fourth meeting under the third track of the Global Consultations on International Protection 38. In his capacity as Chairman of the Global Consultations, the ExCom Rapporteur presented the draft report of the fourth meeting under the third track of the Global Consolations (22-24 May 2002). He recalled that the subjects covered at the meeting, which was also the last in the Global Consultations process, had included durable solutions as well as the protection of refugee women and of refugee children. The draft report, as contained in document EC/GC/02/10 was adopted. B. Draft Agenda for Protection 39. Introducing this item, the Chairman recalled that the draft Agenda for Protection contained in document EC/52/SC/CRP.9 had already been the subject of a series of consultations within the Standing Committee. Amendments suggested at the last of these consultations were contained in an addendum to the document. In view of the very lengthy discussions that had already taken place, he therefore appealed to the Committee to offer substantive rather than editorial comments, and to focus on basic issues such as those of implementation of the Agenda. 40. The Director of UNHCR's Department of International Protection introduced the Agenda for Protection, recognizing that the Agenda was an ambitious undertaking, whose realization would have to be progressive. Amongst priorities for UNHCR would be improving UNHCR's own delivery of protection, not least as regards better protection of refugee women and children; promoting new models for increased and predictable burden-sharing; contributing to reducing migratory pressure on asylum systems; and implementing the Agenda's ambitious programme of standard-setting. 41. The Director also referred to the High Commissioner's opening remarks, in which he strongly supported the suggestion that UNHCR continue to provide a high-level forum for more thematic discussion on how to operationalize the Agenda, so as to ensure better protection and burden-sharing, and pledged to organize high-level meetings on specific themes or situations requiring international attention. While the Standing Committee remained the most appropriate venue for discussion of problems confronting implementation of protection responsibilities, she suggested that there was also a need for delegations to be able to step back from operational exigencies and explore how the larger problems affecting refugee protection could be tackled, involving a broader range of stakeholders than Executive Committee members. 42. Delegations unanimously praised the Global Consultations process and many expressed appreciation to the Department of International Protection for having launched it. They variously described the process as timely, thorough and inclusive, particularly as regards the valuable input of non-governmental organizations. Delegations agreed that the Global Consultations had served to reflect upon today's protection dilemmas and identify what needed to be done to bolster the international regime for the protection of refugees in the light of contemporary challenges, while taking into account the legitimate concerns of States. A number of delegations stressed that the Agenda, while not a legally binding text, provided an excellent basis for future cooperation and variously described it as a "road map", an "inventory of activities" and a "blueprint". Some highlighted the importance of the Agenda's emphasis on strengthening responsibility- and burden-sharing. In this regard, a number of delegations pointed to the need for sustained support for UNHCR's programmes in Africa. 43. Many delegations confirmed their commitment to working with UNHCR in the Agenda's implementation, noting that this effort would require the full support of all stakeholders, notably of States, but also United Nations, development and other intergovernmental partners, in order to be effective. One delegation encouraged UNHCR to ensure that all staff become familiar with the Agenda's contents, since it represented a new phase in cooperation between all stakeholders. With respect to implementation, all speakers highlighted the need for further consultations to agree upon priorities for follow-up, given the Agenda's breadth and complexity, and to establish a programme for implementation. Some delegations put forward criteria that might be used to set priorities or described their own priorities. 44. A number of delegations referred to the High Commissioner's opening remarks to the Standing Committee regarding a high-level forum for more thematic discussion on how to operationalize the Agenda. There was a divergence of views on this point. For many delegations, the existing Standing Committee and Executive Committee process offered the most appropriate venue for managing implementation of the Agenda, while tracking and monitoring the priorities eventually agreed upon. One delegation, supported by another, suggested the creation of informal working groups within the Standing Committee, if required, with expanded participation - notably of experts. In this regard, a number of delegations suggested that the involvement of States Parties and NGOs would be important. Another delegation suggested that the Standing Committee could include the Agenda for Protection as a standard agenda item of all of its meetings, but said it would be open to further discussion about a forum for expert or "think tank" analysis on thematic issues. A number of delegations observed that the Standing Committee process would not preclude the possibility of convening other broadly based meetings to discuss newly emerging protection demands or refugee emergencies requiring broad consultations. One delegation suggested that it would be important to assess cost implications of a high-level forum, as part of further discussions on this proposal. 45. Several other delegations went further in supporting the establishment of a specific forum for protection discussions, which could also follow-up on implementation of the Agenda for Protection. They requested additional consultations on this issue. One delegation felt that it was possible to draw lessons from the past, and recommended that the Executive Committee consider re-establishing a Sub-Committee of the Whole on International Protection. 46. In the course of the discussions on the text of the Agenda for Protection, some additional adjustments were made, following a lively exchange. A revised version of the text was made available during the meeting (EC/52/SC/CRP.9 Rev.1). The Standing Committee decided to refer the text, as amended, to the Executive Committee for endorsement. There was general understanding that further consultations on implementation - focusing on initial priorities and suggested timeframes, as well as resource implications - would take place thereafter. IX. PROTECTION/PROGRAMME POLICY A. Economic and Social Impact of Refugee Populations on Host Developing Countries as well as Other Countries: Partnerships with Bilateral Development Agencies 47. Introducing the conference room paper EC/52/SC/CRP.10 entitled Economic and Social Impact of Refugee Populations on Host Developing Countries as well as Other Countries: Partnerships with Bilateral Development Agencies, the Director of the Division of Operational Support (DOS) emphasized the importance for UNHCR of forging partnerships with international bilateral development agencies. This paper gave the example of the "Zambia Initiative". In this context, she also emphasized the need for host countries to place refugees on their development agendas. 48. In the discussions that followed, several delegations from developing countries hosting refugees drew attention to the significant socio-economic impact that resulted from their presence, and voiced concern that measures to mitigate this impact were inadequate. Some delegations urged that a case-by-case analysis of implications of the long-term presence of refugees should be undertaken, with a view to addressing its consequences and ease the burden on host countries. Several delegations also referred to the work undertaken by an informal group as part of efforts to highlight the sizeable contributions of host countries, using selected indicators. They considered this a useful initiative which should continue, possibly in a more structured format. 49. Some delegations also noted the positive effects that refugees could bring, provided they were empowered for self-reliance, as a first step towards durable solutions. Several delegations recalled in this context the discussions that had recently taken place as part of the Global Consultations, which had examined self-reliance as distinct from local integration. 50. Many delegations welcomed the "Zambia Initiative" as an important landmark in the development of effective forms of bilateral cooperation in addressing a refugee situation, and expressed their interest in replicating this model elsewhere. Several delegations highlighted the importance of integrating refugee issues into development plans of host countries as well as poverty reduction strategies and Common Country Assessment/United Nations Development Assistance Framework (CCA/UNDAF); the key responsibilities of host governments; and the important potential contributions of bilateral and multilateral development actors. They encouraged UNHCR to strengthen its advocacy and catalytic role with these various partners. 51. Some delegations felt that efforts should be continued in order to find solutions to the root causes which force the refugees to leave their country of origin. One delegation expressed the importance of developing bilateral cooperation programmes as a priority in countries of origin, so that they could act as a critical "pull" factor for refugees to return home and for an effective and sustained reintegration process. 52. Responding to the many statements that had been made, the Director of DOS reiterated the commitment of UNHCR to continue its catalytic and advocacy work with development agencies, and stressed the importance of forging joint partnerships at an early stage of post-conflict situations. B. Safety and security issues 53. The Head of the Emergency and Security Service (ESS) presented this topic, making reference to document (EC/52/SC/CRP.11) which provided an update on progress made in efforts to enhance UNHCR's management of both staff and refugee safety and security, and also some of the outstanding challenges. Key initiatives to minimize the risks for staff in the field included: various moves to strengthen human resources through additional recruitment and more flexible arrangements for deployment of security officers to high risk operations; the broadening of implementation of the Minimum Operating Standards (MOSS); the reinforcement of training and provision of support and equipment to upgrade security requirements; and measures to safeguard financial resources allocated for security from potential budget cuts. 54. Cooperation with UNSECOORD was being given high priority; nevertheless, there was awareness of the need for a security management system that can be more responsive to the diversity of field conditions under which organizations such as UNHCR often operate, in order to facilitate operations without compromising on staff safety. The Head of ESS also referred to the early success of a pilot initiative in Guinea to enhance security collaboration with NGOs through the secondment of an International Rescue Committee (IRC) security officer to UNHCR. Efforts to address issues of refugee insecurity through collaboration with governments and with the Department of Peace-Keeping Operations (DPKO) remained a challenge. There was a lack of any predictable technical capacity for UNHCR to call upon whenever there are security threats to refugees that are beyond the capacity of the Office to deal with effectively. 55. Delegations were unanimous in commending ESS for its work and many who took the floor paid tribute to UNHCR's staff dedication in difficult working and security conditions. There was strong support for continued improvement of security measures for humanitarian personnel and enhanced coordination with UNSECOORD and with NGOs. A number of delegations emphasized the need to strengthen the governance mechanisms for UNSECOORD as a key means of ensuring that established security procedures maximize staff safety while keeping an agency like UNHCR operational in difficult working environments. Another delegation expressed particular concern over the security risks for both staff and refugees, notably in protracted refugee situations, and urged further support for UNHCR, stressing that UNSECOORD's action focussed mainly on capital cities whereas UNHCR's work was principally in the field. With regard to the challenge of dealing with refugee security, one delegation spoke of current work towards the deployment of international security experts to address refugee camp security issues, including the possible role of international military forces. Refugee security needed to be seen as integral to the other functions of the Office. UNHCR was thus encouraged to pursue further development and mainstreaming of a holistic strategy towards refugee security, bringing together protection, assistance and community services. This required the provision of adequate tools to help staff recognize and respond to potential threats, and ensure clear lines of accountability and responsibility. Several delegations encouraged UNHCR to build close links with DPKO as an important means of responding to threats to the civilian nature of refugee camps. There was widespread support for expanding security training and awareness-building for as many UNHCR staff as possible. 57. In her response, the Head of ESS thanked the delegations for their support and affirmed UNHCR's commitment to work closely with UNSECOORD, in particular towards the development of flexible systems and procedures for ensuring appropriate operational flexibility for UNHCR while safeguarding staff security. She reiterated that the Office would remain an active and committed member of the UN Security Management System. On the issue of refugee security, she emphasized that UNHCR's strategy must be built around the responsibility of host States to ensure the safety and security of refugees, as well as appropriate burden-sharing among concerned governments. X. ANY OTHER BUSINESS 58. There being no other business, the Chairman closed the meeting. DECISION ON OVERALL PROGRAMME AND FUNDING PROJECTIONS FOR 2002 The Standing Committee, Recalling the Executive Committee's decision at its fifty-second session on administrative, financial and programme matters (A/AC.96/959, para. 25) as well as its discussions under the programme and funding item at the twenty-third and twenty-fourth meetings of the Standing Committee, Recalling also the further consultations on funding mechanisms and issues held by the Standing Committee on 12 March and on 28 May 2002, Reaffirms its appreciation of the efforts of the High Commissioner to keep the Committee regularly informed of funding needs and the opportunities provided for substantive and transparent discussion of budget proposals for 2003, prior to the adoption of the annual programme budget by the Executive Committee at its forthcoming fifty-third session; Notes that UNHCR's overall needs under its Annual Programme for 2002, based on currently known requirements, amount to US$ 828.6 million, as approved by the Executive Committee at its fifty-second session (which includes the amount of $ 19.9 million from the United Nations Regular Budget and $ 7 million for Junior Professional Officers); Notes that Supplementary Programme budgets established since the approval of the Annual Programme, currently amount to $ 203.6 million, and that the needs under the Afghan Supplementary Programme may need to be revised upwards; Notes that projected income for the year 2002 reveals a possible shortfall of $ 98.7 million under the Annual Programme budget and of $ 21.7 million under the Supplementary Programmes as they currently stand; Notes with concern that these shortfalls will require limitations on obligation levels during the third and fourth quarters of the year affecting operations at field level; Emphasizes the importance of adequate and flexible funding for UNHCR's programmes on the part of the international community, and calls for firm indications of additional pledges as soon as possible, preferably before 30 June 2002, noting that any contributions beyond that date should preferably be unearmarked; Notes in this context that refraining from earmarking after 30 June will assist UNHCR to manage its funding shortfall and avoid the need to cut essential assistance to beneficiaries of UNHCR's programmes; Acknowledges with appreciation the burden shouldered by developing countries hosting refugees, and recommends that the consultations undertaken to quantify and reflect such burdens should be pursued; Encourages governments to ensure that in formulating their national budgets sufficient resources are allocated as contributions to UNHCR to enable the Office to fulfil its mandate. 