%%%SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|NATURAL RESOURCES|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|DEVELOPMENT|INTERNATIONAL YEARS|MOUNTAIN ECOSYSTEMS|CLIMATE CHANGE|CONFERENCES|ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS|RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT|LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|TRANSIT COUNTRIES|ILLICIT FUNDS TRANSFER|

Second Committee Summary record of the 38th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 20 November 2002, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Suazo (Honduras) Contents Agenda item 86: Sustainable development and international economic cooperation (continued) Agenda item 87: Environment and sustainable development (continued) (a) Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 (continued) (c) Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind (continued) Agenda item 90: Training and research (continued) (a) United Nations University (continued) Agenda item 93: High-level international intergovernmental consideration of financing for development (continued) Agenda item 84: Macroeconomic policy questions (continued) (c) Science and technology for development (continued) (f) Preparations for the International Ministerial Meeting on Transit (continued) Agenda item 85: Sectoral policy questions (continued) (c) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such funds to the countries of origin (continued) The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m. Draft resolution on the International Year of Mountains, 2002 (A/C.2/57/L.49) 1. Mr. Chave (Switzerland) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.49 on behalf of its sponsors. He announced that the following countries also wished to sponsor the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Ecuador, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, France, Guatemala, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Morocco, Nepal, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovenia and Spain. The International Year of Mountains had received the support of numerous countries, 74 of which had manifested their support through the creation of national committees. Many governments and non-governmental organizations had contributed actively to the Year's success. The resolution sought to build on that success and proposed various means of ensuring follow-up to the Year. He hoped that the experience acquired would not be lost and that it would serve as a basis for the promotion and implementation of sustainable development in mountain regions. He encouraged all interested parties to join the International Partnership for Sustainable Development in Mountain Regions launched at the Johannesburg conference. 2. The representatives of Croatia, the Czech Republic, Greece, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and the Russian Federation said that their countries wished to become sponsors of the draft resolution. Draft resolution entitled "United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development" (A/C.2/57/L.45) 3. Mr. Mizukami (Japan) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.45 on behalf of its sponsors, noting that Jordan, Luxembourg and Uganda had also become sponsors. The draft resolution recommended that the ten-year period beginning on 1 January 2005 be proclaimed the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development, recognizing that education was an indispensable element for achieving sustainable development. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization would be designated as the lead agency for the implementation of the Decade, and governments would be invited to include concrete measures for its implementation in their respective national educational plans. Japan hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus. 4. The following countries announced that they wished to join in sponsoring the draft resolution: Algeria, Belgium, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Haiti and Russian Federation. Draft resolutions A/C.2/57/L.43 and A/C.2/57/L.47 5. Mr. Vallenilla (Venezuela) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.43, entitled "Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind", on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. 6. Mr. Traub (United States of America), alluding to the financial implications of paragraph 8 of draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.43, recalled that the adoption of draft resolution A/C.2/56/L.50 had led to certain problems within the Fifth Committee. He therefore asked that the Secretariat explain what had become of the decision included in that resolution, as well as the procedures arising from the adoption of the draft resolution by the Second Committee. 7. Mr. Isakov (Russian Federation) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.47 on the World Climate Change Conference. He said that the Russian Federation attached great importance to addressing the adverse effects of human activities on the environment and that it was essential for all countries to step up their efforts in that regard. For that reason, his country had taken the initiative to convene the World Climate Change Conference, to be held in Moscow in 2003. The Conference would afford an opportunity to reflect on how to strengthen international cooperation for that purpose. The Russian Federation and the other sponsors of the draft resolution had worked hard to find wording that was constructive and that would be acceptable to all, and they hoped that the resolution would be adopted by consensus. 8. He informed the Committee that the Czech Republic, Malta, Norway, New Zealand, Poland, Romania and Switzerland had also become sponsors of the draft resolution. 9. Mr. Gebert (Denmark), speaking on behalf of the countries of the European Union, said that the countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the European Union (Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia) and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey aligned themselves with his statement. The European Union welcomed the interest expressed by the Russian Federation with regard to the World Climate Change Conference as a multi-stakeholder forum consistent with the Framework Convention on Climate Change. Having recently ratified the Kyoto Protocol, the European Union also welcomed the Conference as an event to be held within the overall framework of the Kyoto process, as had been stated by the Russian Federation during the Second Committee's discussions of the matter. On the understanding that the Conference would thus contribute further to the process of the Framework Convention on Climate Change, the work and findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol, the member States of the European Union - Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Sweden - together with the associated countries mentioned earlier, wished to be added to the list of sponsors of the draft resolution. 10. Mr. O'Brien (Australia) welcomed the draft resolution and congratulated the Russian Federation. Australia was also very concerned about the effects of climate change, which were truly a global problem requiring the cooperation of all. 11. Mrs. Tovšak (Slovenia) said that her country also wished to become a sponsor of the draft resolution. (a) United Nations University Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.48 12. Mr. Mizukami (Japan) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.48, entitled "United Nations University", on behalf of the following countries: Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Uganda and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 13. Since its founding in Tokyo in 1975, the United Nations University (UNU) had become the core of the United Nations system in the area of research and training. Given the need for debate and reflection on numerous current issues, the role of the UNU should be expanded and its effectiveness in carrying out research on matters of global concern should be strengthened. The sponsors of the draft resolution had expressed those needs in clear and concise language, drawing on the essential elements contained in previous resolutions on the matter. 14. On behalf of the co-sponsors of the draft resolution, the Japanese delegation expressed the hope that the draft resolution, on which consensus existed, would be adopted by the General Assembly. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.44 15. Mr. Niño Gómez (Venezuela), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, recalled that in introducing the draft resolution sponsored by the Group of 77 and China on the follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development, he had mentioned that another draft resolution would be proposed with a view to ensuring effective support for the follow - up to the Conference. That resolution was draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.44, entitled "Ensuring effective support for sustained follow-up to the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development". 16 He then introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.44, prepared on the basis of consultations within the Group of 77. He pointed out that the Spanish version of the draft resolution did not state clearly what the representatives of the Group of 77 and China had expressed in the English text. He therefore requested the Secretariat, through the Chairman of the Second Committee, to produce a new Spanish version that was more faithful to the English original. Draft resolutions A/C.2/57/L.7 and L.42 17. The Chairman announced that the following countries had also become sponsors of draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.7: Afghanistan, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Portugal, Romania, Senegal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Yemen. 18. Mr. Benmellouk (Morocco), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.42, entitled "World Summit on the Information Society", prepared on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.7, submitted by Switzerland and Tunisia. He thanked all the delegations that had participated in the informal consultations, noted that consensus had been reached on the text and submitted the draft resolution for adoption by the Committee. 19. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.42 was adopted. 20. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.7 was withdrawn. 21. The Chairman said that the Committee had concluded its consideration of item 84(c). Draft resolutions A/C.2/57/L.2 and L.32 22. M. Benmellouk (Morocco), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.32, entitled "Preparations for the International Ministerial Meeting on Transit", prepared on the basis of informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.2, submitted by Venezuela on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. He thanked the facilitator, Mrs. Marthini (Indonesia) and the delegates who had participated in the consultations and announced that consensus had been reached on the text, which could now be adopted. 23. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.32 was adopted. 24. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.2 was withdrawn. 25. Mr. Mizukami (Japan) drew the Committee's attention to paragraphs 9 and 11 of the draft resolution just adopted (A/C.2/57/L.32), recalling that the expenditures associated with the preparatory process for the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation and for the Conference itself were to be financed out of the budget of the United Nations and through voluntary contributions. Japan intended to provide a contribution and encouraged other countries to do the same so as to ensure the success of the Conference. 26. Mr. Kommasith (Lao People's Democratic Republic), speaking on behalf of the Group of Landlocked Developing Countries, thanked all Member States, in particular neighbouring transit countries and development partners, for their cooperation and constructiveness, which had made it possible to adopt draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.32 by consensus. The landlocked developing countries looked forward to collaborating closely with all States Members and with other international organizations in order to ensure the success of the upcoming major conference. 27. The Chairman said that the Committee had concluded its consideration of item 84(f). Draft resolutions A/C.2/57/L.9 and L.46 28. Mr. van der Pluijm (Belgium), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.46, entitled "Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such funds to the countries of origin", submitted on the basis of informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.9. As consensus had been reached on the draft resolution, he recommended that the Committee adopt it. 29. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.46 was adopted. 30. Draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.9 was withdrawn. 31. The Chairman said that the Committee had concluded its consideration of item 85(c). The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m. 