%%%APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|BIOGRAPHY|

Fifty-seventh session Fifth Committee Agenda item 17 (d) Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments Appointment of members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal * Reissued for technical reasons. Note by the Secretary-General 1. As indicated in document A/57/104, the General Assembly will be required, during its current session, to appoint two persons to fill the vacancies that will occur in the membership of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal for a four-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2003. 2. The following persons have been nominated by their respective Governments for appointment or reappointment: Kevin Haugh (Ireland); Jacqueline R. Scott (United States of America). 3. The candidates' curricula vitae follow. Date of birth 1 June 1944 1965 Bachelor of Civil Law, University College, Dublin 1966 Conferred with the Degree of Barrister at Law and called to the Irish Bar, following studies at King's Inns, Dublin; practised at the Irish Bar as a Junior Counsel until 1983 Elected to the Bar Council and served on it during the 1970s. The Bar Council regulates the conduct of barristers, particularly pertaining to disciplinary matters and codes of conduct 1983 Called to the Inner Bar and continued in practice as a Senior Counsel until 1996 1994 Elected a Bencher of the King's Inns; this body regulates the system of education of future barristers and all matters pertaining to their work practices, discipline and regulation 1996 Appointed a Judge of the Circuit Court in July 1996. The Circuit Court deals with both Criminal and Civil cases -- the latter includes appeals from the Employment Appeals Tribunal; these appeals encompass every type of dispute and disagreement that arises between employer and employee Appointed a Judge of the Special Criminal Court, which is a non-jury court dealing with terrorist offences, subversion, and other cases not deemed suitable for trial by jury Member of a Committee appointed to advise the Minister for Justice on the videotaping of prisoners in custody Chairman of a Tribunal dealing with the appointment of medical consultants 1998 Elected a Judge of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal 2001 Elected as Second Vice-President of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal Interests Hot air ballooning, gardening, travel and reading Experience 2002 Co-founder of the firm Fortney and Scott, Washington, D.C. Represent clients in wide variety of domestic and international tax and business matters and matters involving the workplace, including equal employment opportunity requirements; federal contractors' affirmative action and non-discrimination obligations; wage and hour matters; and pension and welfare benefits. 1998-present Founder, principal, Scott Legal Placement, McLean, Virginia. Founded professional recruiting firm that provides placement services to major law firms and corporations nationwide. 1994-2002 Principal, Law Office of Jacqueline R. Scott, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and McLean, Virginia. Represented clients in tax and business matters, matters involving the workplace, securities litigation and compliance, and Railroad Retirement Act of 1974. General Counsel to 1,500 member not-for-profit corporation. Federal and state litigation, trial and appellate. 1992-1994 Partner, Rawle and Henderson, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Sole tax partner in 60-person firm; represented clients in matters of domestic and international tax, including mergers and acquisitions, tax-free reorganizations, partnerships, tax-exempt financings, and formation of business entities. Represented major national insurance company in Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) litigation. 1990-1992 Associate, Chadbourne and Parke, Washington, D.C. Represented clients in all aspects of domestic and international tax, including mergers and acquisitions, tax-free reorganizations, partnerships, project finance (including tax-exempt financings of projects), formation of business entities, foreign transactions (including cross-border leasing, inbound and outbound transactions, foreign sales corporations, treaty interpretation and application), alternate fuels credits. 1986-1990 Associate, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, Alexander and Ferdon, New York, New York. Represented clients in all aspects of domestic and international tax, including mergers and acquisitions, tax-free reorganizations, foreign transactions (including cross-border leasing, inbound and outbound transactions, foreign sales corporations, treaty interpretation and application), partnerships, tax-exempt financings (representing bond issuers, underwriters and lenders), project finance (representing owner participants, guarantors and lenders), formation of business entities, alternate fuels credits, ERISA. 1981-1985 Attorney, Merrill Lynch and Co., New York, New York. Represented Merrill Lynch and Co., its divisions and subsidiaries before state and federal courts, the New York Stock Exchange, the National Association of Securities Dealers, and the Commodities Futures Exchange in matters of securities and commodities issuance and compliance and employment. Education 1985-1986 New York University School of Law, New York, New York LL.M. in taxation 1978-1981 Vanderbilt University School of Law, Nashville, Tennessee J.D. 1974-1978 Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee B.A., cum laude Professional activities National Association of Securities Dealers, Arbitrator (Public) Foreign languages French and Spanish 