%%%AGEING|DEMOGRAPHIC AGEING|AGEING PERSONS|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|

Report of the Commission for Social Development acting as the preparatory committee for the Second World Assembly on Ageing on the work of its second session Addendum Annex III Draft political declaration Chair's second draft (on basis of comments received on first draft from Canada, the Czech Republic, the European Union, Switzerland and the United States of America) Article 1 We, the representatives of Governments meeting at the Second World Assembly on Ageing in Madrid, have decided to adopt an international plan of action on ageing to respond to the opportunities and challenges of population ageing in the twenty-first century and promote the development of a society for all ages. (pending) New: Article 2 We recognize that at the beginning of the twenty-first century the world is experiencing a [Canada: dramatic] (Canada: significant) demographic transformation [the United States of America (US): which] (US: that) will [Group of 77 and China (G77): create entirely new challenges and opportunities] [European Union (EU): (G77: have profound consequences for every aspect of individual, community, national and international life. In this regard, we note that the fast growth of the population in the first half of the twenty-first century means that the number of persons over 60 will increase from about 600 million in 2000 to almost 2,000 million in 2050 and that the proportion of persons defined as older is projected to increase globally from 10 per cent in 1998 to 15 per cent by 2025. The increase will be greatest and most rapid in developing countries where the older population is expected to quadruple during the next 50 years.)] [G77: due mainly to the fact that by 2050 the number of persons over 60 will increase from 600 million to almost 2,000 million and the proportion of persons aged 60 years and over is expected to double from 10 per cent to 21 per cent.] Article 3 [US: We reiterate the commitment made by our heads of State and Governments [G77: to fully implement the Millennium Declaration] to contribute to the promotion of international and national environments that will foster a society for all ages.] We furthermore reaffirm the Principles and Recommendations for Action of the International Plan of Action on Ageing endorsed by the United Nations General Assembly in 1982 [EU: (G77: and the United Nations principles for older persons adopted by the General Assembly in 1991, which provided guidance in areas of independence, participation, care, self-fulfilment and dignity.) (Mexico: We emphasize the importance of international cooperation to fully implement the Plan of Action on Ageing, therefore, we encourage the international community to strengthen the mechanisms already established to enhance cooperation among all actors involved.)] (US: Move original last sentence of text to end of article 1) Article 4 (former article 5) (G77: delete whole of article 4 -- idea contained in para. 6 and others) [G77: We celebrate rising life expectancy as one of humanity's major achievements. [EU: Population ageing is a universal [US: force] (US/Canada: trend) that has the power to shape the future of our societies. We recognize that our [US: accumulated] global capacities offer promising opportunities for social and economic progress. They enable us to take action to improve the opportunities and quality of life of people as they age [US: and to ensure the adequacy and sustainability of necessary support system.] {Agreed: When [ageing] (Canada: old age) is embraced as an achievement, the reliance on human skills, experiences and resources of [the higher age groups] (Canada: older persons) is naturally recognized as an asset [Canada: in the growth of mature, fully integrated, human societies]]. Canada proposes new article 4 bis: (We are committed to actions on three priority directions: older persons and development; advancing health and well-being into old age; and, ensuring enabling and supportive environments.) Article 5 (former article 2) We commit ourselves to [US: strive for] the full protection and promotion of (G7: all) human rights and fundamental freedoms (G77: including the right to development without distinction as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, age, political or other opinion, descent, national or social origin, property, birth or other status) [G77: for all] (US/Canada: persons, including older persons). We also recognize that [US: quality of life [is] (G77: should be) on a par with longevity, and that] people, as they age, should enjoy a life of fulfilment, health, security and active participation in the economic, social, cultural and political life of their societies. We are determined to enhance the dignity of older [people] (G77: persons), [G77: to recognize their achievements,] [EU: to pursue policies aimed at the eradication of poverty] and [to] (US: the) eliminat[e](ion) all forms of abuse, violence (G77: against and), marginalization (G77: of) and [G77: discrimination against] older persons. (G77: We commit ourselves to eradicate age discrimination, to enhance the dignity of older people and to recognize their achievements. (first sentence of article 7) conscious that stereotyping of older persons can lead to their discrimination, which constitute violations of human rights.) EU proposes new paragraph 5 bis: (We recognize that concerted action is required to empower men and women to realize the opportunities and the quality of life as they age and to ensure the sustainability of their support systems, thus building the foundation for a society for all ages.) Article 6 (EU/Canada -- delete entire article 6) (Agreed: [EU: The modern world has unprecedented wealth and technological capacity and has presented extraordinary opportunities: to empower men and women to reach old age in better health, and with more fully realized well-being; to seek the full inclusion and participation of older persons in societies; to enable older persons to contribute more effectively to their communities and to the development of their societies; and to steadily improve care and support for older persons as they need it. (G77: We recognize that) [Mexico: Concerted action] (Mexico; In this regard international cooperation) is required to transform the opportunities and the quality of life of men and women as they age and to ensure the sustainability of their support systems, thus building the foundation for a society for all ages.] Article 7 (former article 11) (G77/EU -- delete whole of article 7 -- elements contained in article 5) [G77/EU: We commit ourselves to eradicate age discrimination, to enhance the dignity of older people and to recognize their achievements. We reiterate the importance of universal respect (US: for) and [Canada: observance] (Canada: protection) of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction [US: as to] race, colour, sex, language, religion, [US: age,] political or other opinion, [US: descent,] national or social origin, property, birth or other status, [US/Canada: conscious that stereotyping of older persons can lead to their discrimination, which constitute violations of human rights.]] (US: reverse order of first two sentences) (Canada: move first sentence to last sentence) Article 8 (former article 7) (Canada/Australia: delete entire article) [EU: Failure to fully participate in the global economy of (US: some) developing countries, in particular (US: some) least developing countries [and] (US: as well as) some countries with economies in transition, may be a contribut[or](US: ing) factor to increasing poverty of a growing number of people, including older persons. For this reason we recognize the importance of (US: addressing ageing as a key development issue and of) [US: placing ageing as a key topic in the development agendas and in] seeking to achieve the full participation in the global economy of developing countries and of countries with economies in transition. Our task is] (EU: We commit ourselves) to effectively incorporate ageing within social and economic strategies, policies and action integrating a gender perspective and recognizing that specific policies will vary according to conditions within each country. (EU: We should give due priority to ageing in development of agendas, as well as in strategies for the eradication of poverty, giving special attention to the needs, priorities and perspectives of the developing countries and to some countries with economies in transition. In this regard we stress that older women should be given priority attention in our policies on ageing.) Canada (supported by Australia) proposes alternative article 8: (We recognize the importance of ageing in development agendas, and in seeking to achieve the full participation in the global economy of developing countries and of countries with economies in transition. Our task is to effectively incorporate ageing within social and economic strategies, policies and action while recognizing that specific policies will vary according to conditions within each country. We recognize the need to mainstream a gender perspective into all policies and programmes to take account of the needs and experiences of older women and men.) Article 9 (former article 8) (Canada: delete entire Article) {Agreed: It is essential to integrate [EU: the evolving process] (EU: all dimensions) of global ageing within the larger process of development. Policies on ageing deserve close examination from the developmental perspective of a broader life course and a society-wide view, [US: taking into account recent global initiatives and the guiding principles set down by major United Nations conferences and summits.]} Article 10 (former article 12) The potential of [Canada: the ageing population] (Canada: older persons) is a powerful basis for future development. This enables society to rely increasingly on the skills, experience and wisdom of older persons, not only to take the lead in their own betterment but also to participate actively in that of society as a whole. [Canada: The participation of the ageing population in the active labour force contributes to national economic well-being and social development particularly in achieving integrated societies for all.] EU proposes alternative text: (We emphasize the importance of a worldwide research agenda on ageing and age related issues, as an important instrument for ageing and policy formulation. Governments, in collaboration with research institutions, statistical institutes, population centres, universities and non-governmental organizations should strengthen information systems to produce reliable and harmonized data and indicators.) Article 11 (new) (US/Canada: delete whole of article 11) The expectations of older persons and the economic needs of society demand that older workers enjoy a life of fulfilment, health, security and active participation in the economic, political, social and cultural life of their societies, thereby ensuring maximum productive capacity throughout life. Older persons must have the opportunity to work for as long as they wish and are able, in satisfying and productive work, continuing to have access to education and training programmes. The empowerment of older persons and the promotion of their full participation, are essential elements for active ageing. At the same time, as we are benefiting from the contribution to economic growth of older persons through their skills and experience, we must ensure the provision of appropriate sustainable social protection systems for those in need. Article 12 (US/Canada: delete whole of article 11) [Mexico/EU: We recognize our responsibility for the provision of support and care for older persons, working together with local authorities, non-governmental organizations, individual volunteers and voluntary organizations, including associations of older persons, as well as families and communities. (Mexico: We stress our primary responsibility for providing or ensuring access to basic social services and physical and mental health for all, bearing in mind specific needs of older persons. We also stress that) [EU: The] (that) care of older persons should involve their total well being,] taking into account the interdependence of the physical, mental, social, spiritual and environmental factors.] [Mexico: We stress the primary responsibility of Governments for ensuring access to high quality care and social and health services, [EU: and reaffirm] (EU: are convinced) that the care for older persons should take into account all aspects of the well-being of older persons.] Article 13 (new) (US/Canada: delete whole of article 13) We recognize the importance of the tasks carried out by families, volunteers, communities, older persons organizations and other community-based organizations providing support and informal care to older persons in addition to those provided by Governments. Article 14 (Canada: delete whole of article 14) We recognize the need to strengthen the solidarity between generations, keeping in mind the particular needs of both older and younger ones, and we call for persons of all ages to nurture and encourage reciprocal relationships between generations. Mexico proposes merging articles 15 and 17 with following text: (Governments have the primary responsibility to provide leadership on ageing matters and on the implementation of the Plan of Action on Ageing. Notwithstanding, the implementation of the Plan of Action will require the partnership the partnership and involvement of many stakeholders: national and local governments, international agencies, professionals organizations; corporations; workers and workers organizations; cooperatives; research academic and other educational and religious institutions; and the media. Therefore, we invite all people in all countries from every sector of society, both as individuals and members of public, private or civil society organizations, to join in our dedication to a shared vision of equitable societies for all ages.) Article 15 (former article 9) {Agreed: Governments have the primary responsibility to provide leadership on [US/Canada: ageing matters and on] the implementation of the Plan of Action on Ageing [US/Canada: but] (Canada: in) [Canada: effective] (US: in) collaboration [US: [Canada: between] (Canada: with) (EU: all levels of decision-making bodies,) [Canada: national and local] (US: with other stakeholders, including all levels of) Governments, international agencies,] older persons themselves and their organizations, [US/EU: other parts of] [EU: civil society, including non-governmental organizations,] [US/Canada: and] the private sector (US: and international agencies.) [US/Canada: is essential. The implementation (EU: , the follow up and monitoring) of the Plan of Action will require the partnership and involvement of other stakeholders, civil society organizations,] professional organizations; corporations; workers and workers organizations; cooperatives; research, academic, and other educational and religious institutions; and the media.} Article 16 (new) (Canada: delete entire article 16) We underline the important[ce] (US: important role that the) United Nations (US: system, including the) regional commissions (US: can) play in the implementation of the International Plan of Action [US: in line with the differences in economic, social and demographic conditions existing among the regions. They should cooperate as much as possible in order to foster mutual support and the exchange of best practices.] Article 17 (former article 15) We invite all people in all countries from every sector of society, both as individuals and members of [US/Canada: public, private or civil society] organizations, to join in our dedication to a shared vision of equality for persons of all ages. 