%%%SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|GENDER EQUALITY|WOMEN|PEACE|ENVIRONMENT|WOMEN'S HEALTH|

Commission on Sustainable Development acting as the preparatory committee for the World Summit on Sustainable Development Fourth session Bali, Indonesia, 27 May-7 June 2002 Item 4 of the provisional agenda* Multi-stakeholder dialogue segment Note by the Secretary-General Addendum** Dialogue paper by women*** Women demand a peaceful and healthy planet * A/CONF.199/PC/15. ** The document was submitted late to the conference services without the explanation required under paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 53/208 B, by which the Assembly decided that, if a report is submitted late, the reason should be included in a footnote to the document. *** Prepared by the Women s Environment and Development Organization; the views and opinions expressed do not necessarily represent those of the United Nations. 1. We the women of the world have a vision of a future built on the principles of peace and solidarity; equity and shared power; environmental integrity; social justice and respect for human rights, cultural and biological diversity. At the World Summit on Sustainable Development, to be held in Johannesburg in August 2002, diverse women from all regions of the world will issue the "Women's action agenda for a peaceful and healthy planet 2015", a comprehensive blueprint of their dreams and goals for sustainable, gender-sensitive, people-centred development. Highlights of the agenda are set out below. Peace 2. Violence is incompatible with sustainable development. Increased militarization and military expenditures (more than $800 billion per year), accompanied by rapid growth in the arms trade, has derailed sustainable development, diverting vital human, natural and financial resources away from pressing social needs and polluting land, water and air. In war and conflict, women particularly experience displacement, widowhood and loss of livelihoods and community support. Sustainability presupposes human security and therefore the protection of all human rights, as well as steps to address the ecological, social, economic and political causes of conflicts, violence and terror. 3. The following actions are recommended: (a) Strengthen adherence to international law, in particular the agreed provisions of treaties on arms control and of international humanitarian and human rights law; (b) Promote universal ratification and implementation without reservation of the International Criminal Court, emphasizing the responsibility of all States to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, including those relating to sexual and other violence against women; (c) Implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), ensuring women's equal participation in conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and peace-building; (d) Include peace as a subject in all school curricula; (e) Promote non-violent forms of conflict resolution and women's contribution to fostering a culture of peace. Globalization for sustainability 4. Left unchecked, economic globalization driven by liberalized market forces results in growing gaps between rich and poor, increasing poverty, violence and crime, and environmental degradation. The current economic system perpetuates inequitable distribution of wealth and the means of production, skewed power relations, overconsumption and irresponsible use of natural common resources. Privatization has deprived women of essential services formerly provided by the state. Thus women bear the impact on multiple levels -- juggling more work and household tasks with less income and less access to land. Women's economic inequity is further exacerbated by the failure of international institutions to formulate and evaluate financial and trade policies from a gender perspective, and the failure of Governments to address working conditions in the informal sector and wage inequities in the formal sector, or to integrate women's unpaid work into national accounting systems. 5. The following actions are recommended: (a) Replace the neo-liberal paradigm governing the global economy with a sustainable, gender-sensitive and environmentally sound development framework that addresses the needs of people and the planet in equal measure to economic concerns; (b) Governments must aim to halve by 2015 the number of the world's people living on less than one dollar a day, the majority of whom are women and children, in keeping with the millennium development goals; (c) The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization (WTO) -- working under the auspices of the United Nations and monitored by a United Nations-established external gender-monitoring group involving civil society -- must set goals and timetables for increasing the number of women in decision-making positions to at least 30 per cent and mainstream gender perspectives in all institutional programmes, policies and operations; (d) Guarantee that United Nations conference outcomes are not compromised in the process of building greater coherence with the international finance and trade institutions; (e) Ensure that international trade and investment policies are transparent, and that mechanisms are established for participation of the most vulnerable stakeholders; (f) Establish a United Nations convention on corporate accountability, and reinstate the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations with a broader mandate and the necessary resources to monitor and address violations by corporate entities; (g) Governments should adopt gender budgets at the national level. Access and control of resources 6. The earth's biological diversity is threatened by the irreversible destruction of natural habitats and the endangerment of animal and plant species due to production and consumption patterns driven by market forces. Women's contribution to biodiversity in terms of labour and skills and their knowledge of how to use and manage natural resources are most often overlooked or, when acknowledged, are exploited. A major cause of women's impoverishment and social insecurity is lack of equal property and inheritance rights, especially land rights. Trade-related intellectual property rights that do not provide safeguards against bio-piracy further undermine women's autonomy and access to and control over vital resources. 7. The following actions are recommended: (a) Implement all instruments to halt the further depletion of natural resources, ecosystems and biodiversity and for protecting those resources, including the treaty restricting and/or eliminating the use of persistent organic pollutants, the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Kyoto Protocol concerning global warming; (b) Establish systems of accountability for those responsible for polluting or depleting the environment and its natural resources and biodiversity; (c) All Governments and national and international agencies must promote gender mainstreaming and ensure gender balance in decision-making, based on gender-disaggregated data, in all environment- and sustainable development-related policies and programmes; (d) WTO must undertake a gender and social impact assessment of existing and new international intellectual property rights regimes and instruments, including trade-related intellectual property rights; (e) Apply the precautionary principle of bio-safety and social justice to all genetic modification, and take steps to halt all patenting of biological resources, processes and knowledge, and to condemn so-called "terminator technology"; (f) Implement the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, including the adoption of gender equality legislation that guarantees women's equal rights to own, manage, inherit and control land, and to access credit and appropriate technology; (g) Phase out the production and use of nuclear energy and toxic substances while developing and expanding the use of safe alternatives, including renewable, solar and other clean energy sources, in cooperation with the scientific community. Environmental security and health 8. Worldwide environmental security of rural and urban communities is at risk, and people -- especially those living in poverty -- are exposed to toxic substances and radiation, lack clean and safe water and sanitation or live in disaster-prone areas. Global climate change contributes to those dangerous situations. Women and men have different susceptibilities to various environmental hazards, but women are further challenged by unequal opportunities to protect and promote their health. Women's human rights and economic security are unattainable without accessible and affordable basic health and reproductive health services. 9. The following actions are recommended: (a) In monitoring implementation of Agenda 21, include gender-disaggregated data and report on women's health risks related to the environment; (b) Increase access to sexual and reproductive health care for all individuals of appropriate ages by 2015 through the primary health-care system; (c) Implement the millennium development goal to reduce maternal and child mortality by 2015; (d) Governments should aim to halve by 2015 the proportion of people with no access to safe drinking water as recommended in the millennium development goals; (e) Increase young people's access to HIV-prevention information and services as well as affordable drugs in keeping with the millennium development goals (90 per cent by 2005, increasing to 95 per cent by 2010). Governance for sustainable development 10. Governance for sustainable development includes but is not limited to full and proportional participation of all stakeholders/citizens at all levels of decision-making, accountability of Governments to their citizens, transparency, inclusiveness, the rule of law and equality. Governance is not gender-neutral. Women's participation in governance structures at the local, regional and international levels remains woefully low. The unprecedented rise of transnational corporations has resulted in the concentration of global power in the hands of a few, mostly men based in the industrialized countries, excluding large segments of global society, particularly women, from political and economic decision-making. 11. The following actions are recommended: (a) Governments and international institutions must commit to measurable goals and timetables to achieve critical mass (30 per cent) of women in decision-making by 2003 and gender balance by 2005; (b) A reporting mechanism, in addition to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women process, should be instituted within the United Nations system by the year 2004 to allow tracking over time of women in decision-making roles in countries worldwide; (c) Local Agenda 21 processes must be promoted as part of local government structures and engendered; (d) Strengthen links between local Agenda 21 processes and the implementation of the Habitat Agenda. Capacity-building 12. Access to education is essential for sustainable development, but many educational programmes fail to consider sustainable development as critical to the future of all generations. Women's education is key to the promotion of poverty eradication and sustainable development but women and girls comprise the majority (65 per cent) of the world's non-literate. 13. The following actions are recommended: (a) Implement programmes to achieve full literacy for all, ensuring that rural and urban people, especially the poor, benefit from education relevant to their needs; (b) Promote gender-sensitive education for sustainability at all educational levels and ensure that sustainable development is integrated in all curricula; (c) Integrate and protect women's traditional and indigenous knowledge in education, policy and decision-making processes; (d) Use and promote gender-disaggregated instruments, such as gender impact analysis, gender budgeting, data and indicators; (e) Governments must seek to narrow the gender gap in primary and secondary education by 2005 and to ensure that, by 2015, all children complete a full course of primary education, as recommended by the millennium development goals. Partnerships for sustainable development 14. Partnerships between Governments, institutions and civil society should be built on principles of respect for human rights, transparency and accountability, inclusiveness, equal participation, and gender balance and equality, and should include genuine consultation and dialogue as well as policies and actions that support local communities and improve ecosystems. Many partnerships already exist among women's organizations worldwide, including partnerships in the areas of peace, governance, environmental security and economic justice. 15. The following actions are recommended: (a) Develop a clear and enforceable partnership code of conduct, including a gender audit, that has an inbuilt system of monitoring and assessing inputs, results, impacts and benefits; (b) Provide financial and other capacity-building resources to enable true participation and equal partnerships. 