%%%RESERVATIONS AND DECLARATIONS|HUMAN RIGHTS|MULTILATERAL TREATIES|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 6 OTHER SPECIFIC HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUES* Reservations to human rights treaties Working paper preparatory to the submission of the expanded working paper by Françoise Hampson submitted in accordance with the Sub-Commission decision 2002/17 1. In its decision 1998/113, the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights requested Ms. Françoise Hampson to prepare a working paper on the question of reservations to human rights treaties. A first working paper (E/CN.4/Sub.2/1999/28 and Corr.1) was submitted, identifying the issues raised by reservations to human rights treaties. In resolution 2001/17, the Sub-Commission entrusted Ms. Hampson with the task of preparing an extended working paper based on her working paper, as well as the comments made and discussions that took place at the fifty-first and fifty-second sessions of the Sub-Commission. The study was to avoid duplication with the work of the International Law Commission. * In accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/208B, paragraph 8, this document is submitted late so as to include the most up-to-date information possible. GE.02-14647 090802 of the six United Nations human rights treaties was prepared, which indicates which States have made reservations or interpretative declarations, whether reservations were with regard to normative or procedural provisions, whether any other States objected and, if so, whether that was on the grounds that the reservation/interpretative declaration was incompatible with the objects and purposes of the treaty. The chart is attached at annex (the chart has not been translated). 3. A study has also been made of the discussions in the treaty bodies, particularly in the context of the examination of State reports, and, where relevant, in the context of individual petitions. Some treaty bodies, but not all, discuss with State representatives the possibility of withdrawing or narrowing the scope of reservations. 4. The results of the study will be submitted to the Sub-Commission at its next session. harts of reservations to United Nations Human Rights Treaties 1. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2. (a) International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (b) First Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 3. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 4. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 5. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 6. Convention on the Rights of the Child 