%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS|CAPACITY BUILDING|REPORT PREPARATION|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2002/6 13 August 2002 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION ON ITS SIXTEENTH SESSION, HELD AT BONN, FROM 10 TO 14 JUNE 2002 Contents Paragraphs Page Annex List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its sixteenth session. 19 OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) The sixteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the Maritim Hotel, Bonn, from 10 to 14 June 2002. The Chair of the SBI, Mr. Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina), opened the session on 10 June 2002 and welcomed all Parties and observers to the session. He noted that, to date, a total of 186 Parties had ratified or acceded to the Convention and 74 Parties had ratified or acceded to the Kyoto Protocol. He welcomed the new members of the SBI Bureau: Ms. Daniela Stoytcheva (Bulgaria), Vice-Chair, and Ms. Emily Ojoo-Massawa (Kenya), Rapporteur. In his opening statement, the Chair emphasized that the SBI was entering a new working period after the Marrakesh meetings and that it would be appropriate for the SBI to focus on the implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Particularly relevant topics in that respect were the consideration of national communications from Parties and the review of the financial mechanism. The Chair welcomed the new Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC secretariat, Ms. Joke Waller-Hunter, and invited her to address the SBI. In her opening statement, the Executive Secretary indicated that she shared the Chair's view that a major focus for the work of the Convention bodies in the coming period would be on implementation. The Subsidiary Body for Implementation therefore had a major role to play. The Executive Secretary stated her commitment to work in an open, transparent and accessible manner and to provide Parties with the best possible secretarial support. She thanked the German Ministry for the Environment and the City of Bonn for their excellent support in the organization of the current session. Organizational matters (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st, 5th and 6th meetings, on 10, 12 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2002/1) and the supplementary provisional agenda (FCCC/SBI/2002/1/Add.1). Statements were made by the representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 6th meeting, the SBI agreed to add an item entitled "Effective participation in the Convention process" to the agenda of its seventeenth session. At the same meeting, the representatives of two Parties requested that Parties be provided with an opportunity to submit views on this item for compilation in a miscellaneous document, for consideration by the SBI at its seventeenth session. At the same meeting, the SBI adopted the following agenda: Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda; Organization of the work of the session. National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention: Consideration of the reviews of national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention; Status report on the review of third national communications. National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention: Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention; Report of the workshop on the revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention; Provision of financial and technical support. Review of the financial mechanism. Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention: progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7. Matters relating to the least developed countries: report of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group. Capacity-building. Request from a group of countries of Central Asia and the Caucasus, Albania and the Republic of Moldova regarding their status under the Convention. Preparations for the World Summit on Sustainable Development. Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings: Eighth session of the Conference of the Parties; Arrangements for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol; Programme for future sessions; Budget for conference services; Ninth session of the Conference of the Parties. Administrative and financial matters: Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002-2003: status of contributions as at 31 May 2002; Possible options for responding to late payment of contributions; Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. Other matters: Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry; Matters referred to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice. Report on the session. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 10 June, at which the Chair drew attention to the tentative schedule contained in document FCCC/SBI/2002/1, annex II, noting that it should be used as a guide and might be modified as necessary. At the same meeting, the secretariat informed the SBI that applications for provisional accreditation to the sessions of subsidiary bodies had been received from one intergovernmental organization and 11 non-governmental organizations. National communications from Parties included in ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION (Agenda item 3) Consideration of the reviews of national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 3 (a)) 1. Proceedings The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st and 6th meetings, on 10 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2002/3. At the 1st meeting, the secretariat made a presentation based on the above-mentioned document. Statements were made by the representatives of 16 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the Central Group 11. 2. Conclusions Conclusions on this sub-item are contained in paragraph 11 below. Status report on the review of third national communications (Agenda item 3 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st and 6th meetings, on 10 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.4. A statement was made by the representative of one Party. At its 6th meeting, on 14 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the following conclusions: The SBI took note of document FCCC/SBI/2002/3. The SBI also took note of suggestions relating to the further improvement of the review process, contained in document FCCC/SBI/2002/3. The SBI acknowledged the proven utility of the current review process and concluded that any improvement to this process would require further consideration taking into account, inter alia, financial and budgetary implications. The SBI agreed to consider this issue, including the periodicity of the consideration of matters related to national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties), at its next session; With regard to the division of work between the SBI and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA), the SBI concluded that it should continue to consider the information contained in national communications and annual inventory submissions by Annex I Parties, and recommended that the SBSTA should continue its work on methodological and technical aspects of this information; The SBI expressed concern about the delays incurred by Annex I Parties in submitting national communications to the secretariat and urged those Parties that had not yet submitted their national communications, due by 30 November 2001, and annual inventory submissions, due by 15 April 2002, to do so as soon as possible. The SBI agreed to consider at its next session what action could be taken to facilitate the timely submission of national communications and requested the secretariat to prepare proposals to facilitate its discussions; The SBI noted that, owing to delays in the submission of national communications, the compilation and synthesis report would be prepared by the secretariat for the eighteenth session of the SBI; The SBI welcomed the in-session presentation of the main results of the analysis of inventory data, and requested the secretariat to continue this practice where appropriate; The SBI requested the secretariat to compile the complete set of greenhouse gas inventory data for the period 1990-2000 and to make it accessible and searchable via the UNFCCC web site, in keeping with SBSTA conclusions on this subject. National communications from Parties not included IN ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION (Agenda item 4) Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 4 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st, 3rd and 6th meetings on 10, 11 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2002/2 and FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.3. At the 1st meeting, the Chair of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE), Ms. Isabelle Niang-Diop (Senegal), made an oral report on the fifth meeting of the CGE. Statements were made by the representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the African Group. The SBI took note of the information contained in the reports of the fourth meeting of the CGE (FCCC/SBI/2002/2) and of the workshop held by that Group (FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.3); The SBI also took note of the oral report by the Chair of the CGE on the activities undertaken by the Group since its previous report submitted to the SBI (FCCC/SBI/2001/15) and on its views on possible future activities to improve the preparation of national communications, such as technical assessment of national communications on a voluntary basis, organization of workshops on specific topics, monitoring of capacity-building programmes as they relate to the preparation of national communications, and strengthening of coordination between the national communication process and reporting activities under other environmental agreements; The SBI expressed its gratitude to the CGE for its reports and for its significant contribution to improving the process of preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. The SBI commended the secretariat for the significant support it had provided to the CGE in the discharge of its mandate; The SBI noted the views expressed by some Parties supporting the continuation of the CGE with a revised mandate, and recalled that the mandate and terms of reference of the CGE would be reviewed by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its eighth session, in accordance with decision 31/CP.7, taking into account the review of the guidelines for national communication from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention, in accordance with decision 32/CP.7; The SBI invited Parties to submit, by 15 July 2002, their views on the review of the mandate and terms of reference of the CGE. In addition, the SBI requested the secretariat to compile these submissions as a miscellaneous document, for consideration by the SBI at its seventeenth session, with the aim of recommending a decision on this matter for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its eighth session. Report of the workshop on the revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 4 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 11 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.2. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair invited the representative of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to make a statement. Statements were made by the representatives of 15 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the African Group. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this sub-item by way of a contact group chaired by Mr. JosRomero (Switzerland). The SBI took note of the report of the workshop on the revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties, as contained in document FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.2. The SBI also took note of the SBI Chairman's text for the improvement of the existing guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.2, annex I); The SBI took note of the views expressed by Parties on the SBI Chairman's text for the proposed improved guidelines. The SBI noted that not all developing and developed country Parties were able to attend the workshop where the SBI Chairman's text was discussed, and some Parties expressed the need to further consider this text; The SBI recalled decision 32/CP.7 and the date of 5 August 2002 that had been fixed for the submission of views from Parties on the proposed improved guidelines, with a view to improving them at COP 8; The SBI reiterated that, pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Convention, developed country Parties and other developed Parties included in Annex II shall provide new and additional financial resources to meet the agreed full costs incurred by developing country Parties in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 1, and taking into account Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Convention; The SBI took note that adequate funding for second national communications on the basis of the revised guidelines should be provided in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 3, and taking into account Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Convention, and noted the views expressed by some Parties on the need for the Conference of the Parties to provide guidance to the operating entity of the financial mechanism, with a view to providing adequate financial support in a timely manner to non-Annex I Parties for the preparation of national communications; The SBI noted the views expressed by some Parties on the need to further consider the time frame for the submission of second national communications by non-Annex I Parties; The SBI commended the CGE for the excellent work it had done in providing input to the proposals for the improvement of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties; The SBI requested the secretariat to facilitate consideration of the SBI Chairman's text for the proposed improved guidelines by inviting representatives of the GEF to provide, at the seventeenth session of the SBI, their views on funding of the activities outlined in the SBI Chairman's text. The SBI also requested the secretariat to organize, at the same session, a question-and-answer special side event on the issues mentioned above to enable Parties to have a substantive dialogue with the GEF representatives. Provision of financial and technical support (Agenda item 4 (c)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 11 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.1 and web-only texts FCCC/WEB/2002/1 and FCCC/WEB/2002/2. Statements were made by the representatives of six Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Some Parties reported on problems encountered with the funding of their initial national communication, and with the approval process for funding of their second national communication and the implementation of decisions 11/CP.2, 8/CP.5 and 32/CP.7 by the GEF. Some Parties requested clarification regarding the definition, implementation and management of project procedures established recently by one of the implementing agencies of the GEF. The SBI took note of the progress made by non-Annex I Parties in the preparation of their national communications (FCCC/WEB/2002/2) and of the list of projects submitted by non-Annex I Parties for funding in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Convention (FCCC/WEB/2002/1), and recommended that these projects be brought to the attention of the GEF and, as appropriate, other bilateral and multilateral financing institutions, through the established channels; The SBI noted the information provided by the operating entity of the financial mechanism, the GEF, on details of its financial support, namely, the dates of disbursement of funds for enabling activity projects for the preparation of initial national communications by non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.1). Review of the financial mechanism (Agenda item 5) The SBI considered this item at its 2nd and 6th meetings, on 10 and 14 June, respectively. Statements were made by the representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this item by way of a "Friends of the Chair" group chaired by Mr. Rawleston Moore (Barbados). The SBI noted the instrumental role being played by the operating entity of the financial mechanism in the effective implementation of the Convention. It also noted that, pursuant to Article 11, paragraph 4, of the Convention, the Conference of the Parties at its fourth session had adopted decision 3/CP.4, entitled "Review of the financial mechanism", according to which the second review of the effectiveness of the financial mechanism was to be carried out by 2002; The SBI noted that the review of the financial mechanism was to be conducted on the basis of the guidelines contained in the annex to decision 3/CP.4, which specifies the objectives, methodology and criteria to be used in assessing the effectiveness of the financial mechanism; The SBI also noted the need to initiate the process of reviewing the financial mechanism at its sixteenth session in order that the Conference of the Parties might adopt a decision at its eighth session; The SBI invited Parties and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide, by 8 July 2002, information on their experience regarding the effectiveness of the financial mechanism, in accordance with the criteria set out in the guidelines contained in the annex to decision 3/CP.4; In order to perform the review, the SBI requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on the financial mechanism for consideration at its seventeenth session, on the basis of submissions received, the Second Overall Performance Study of the GEF, published in January 2002, and other GEF documents, including GEF Council documents relevant to the assessment of the effectiveness of the financial mechanism. Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention: PROGRESS ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES UNDER DECISION 5/CP.7 (Agenda item 6) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 11 and 14 June, respectively. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair of the workshop on the status of modelling activities to assess the adverse effects of climate change and the impact of response measures already implemented on individual developing country Parties, held from 16 to 18 May 2002, Ms. Daniela Stoytcheva (Bulgaria), Vice-Chair of the SBI, made an oral report on the workshop. Statements were made by the representatives of 14 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the African Group, and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this item by way of a contact group chaired by Ms. Daniela Stoytcheva. At the 6th meeting, Ms. Daniela Stoytcheva reported on the group's consultations. At the 6th meeting, during the adoption of the conclusions on this item, the representative of one Party requested the secretariat to expedite the report of the workshop mentioned in paragraph 26 (b) and to ensure that the report of the meeting reflects the full mandate provided by decision 5/CP.7. The SBI noted the provisions of decision 5/CP.7 on implementation of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention (decision 3/CP.3 and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol); The SBI welcomed the oral report on the workshop on the status of modelling activities to assess the adverse effects of climate change and the impact of response measures already implemented on individual developing country Parties, including on how to enhance the participation of developing country experts in such efforts, the terms of reference of which workshop included assessments of approaches to minimize the adverse effects of response measures on developing country Parties; The SBI invited Parties to submit, by 1 August 2002, their views on issues referred to in paragraph 26 (b) above, and on issues relating to progress in the implementation of decision 5/CP.7. The SBI stressed the importance of the workshops referred to in decision 5/CP.7, paragraph 34, on insurance and risk assessment in the context of climate change and extreme weather events, and in decision 5/CP.7, paragraph 35, on insurance-related actions to address the specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties arising from the adverse effects of climate change and from the impact of the implementation of response measures; The SBI invited Parties to submit, by 1 August 2002, their views on possible additional terms of reference for the workshops referred to in paragraph 26 (d) above, and on the possible engagement and role of other relevant institutions in the proceedings of the workshops. The SBI decided to consider, at its seventeenth session, the outcome of the workshops referred to in paragraphs 26 (b) and (d) above, as well as the submissions referred to in paragraph 26 (c) above. Matters relating to the least developed countries: report OF THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES EXPERT GROUP (Agenda item 7) The SBI considered this item at its 4th and 6th meetings, on 11 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2002/5. At the 4th meeting, the Chair of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), Mr. Bubu Jallow (Gambia), made an oral presentation on the above-mentioned document, and on the membership and programme of work of the LEG. Statements were made by the representatives of four other Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the least developed countries. Because of time constraints, the representatives of four other Parties were invited to provide the secretariat with their statements in writing instead of making oral statements. The SBI took note of document FCCC/SBI/2002/5, containing the report on the first meeting of the LEG, including the membership of the LEG and the proposed programme of work of the LEG for the remainder of its term; The SBI endorsed the above-mentioned programme of work, noting with appreciation the efforts made by the LEG so far in implementing its programme of work in support of the mandate contained in decision 29/CP.7; The SBI invited the Chair of the LEG to update the SBI at its seventeenth session on progress in the implementation of the LEG's programme of work. Capacity-building (Agenda item 8) The SBI considered this item at its 4th and 6th meetings, on 11 and 14 June, respectively. At the 4th meeting, a representative of the secretariat made an oral report on the status of implementation of capacity-building decisions adopted by the COP at its fourth and seventh sessions. Statements were made by the representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the Central Group 11. The SBI thanked the secretariat for its oral report on the status of implementation of capacity-building decisions adopted by the COP at its fourth and seventh sessions; The SBI emphasized the importance of capacity-building activities for effective implementation of the Convention and for the participation of Parties in the Kyoto Protocol when it enters into force, and stressed the need for full and timely implementation of the activities listed in the annexes to the capacity-building decisions (decisions 2/CP.7 and 3/CP.7) adopted by the COP at its seventh session; The SBI noted that a small number of Parties had submitted proposals to the GEF for funding to implement their national capacity self-assessment projects covering climate change, biodiversity and land degradation; The SBI further noted that several Parties had received funding from the GEF to implement national, regional and global capacity-building activities in priority areas, in accordance with decision 2/CP.4; The SBI noted the need to support the implementation of activities included in the annex to decision 3/CP.7, in particular the capacity-building activities relating to the preparation of national inventories and establishment of national systems; The SBI invited Parties to submit, by 20 August 2002, their views on the extent to which the implementation of the national capacity needs self-assessment projects, funded by the GEF, addresses activities identified under the initial scope of needs and areas for capacity-building listed in the annex to decision 2/CP.7, for compilation in a miscellaneous document, for consideration by the SBI at its seventeenth session. Request from a group of countries of Central Asia and THE CAUCASUS, ALBANIA AND THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA REGARDING THEIR STATUS UNDER THE CONVENTION (Agenda item 9) The SBI considered this item at its 5th meeting, on 12 June. Statements were made by the representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 5th meeting, on 12 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI requested the Chair to continue consultations during the intersessional period and report back to it at its seventeenth session. Preparations for the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Agenda item 10) The SBI considered this item at its 2nd meeting on 10 June. The representative of the President of the Conference of the Parties at its seventh session made an oral report on the preparations for the World Summit on Sustainable Development. Statements were made by the representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. The SBI thanked the President of COP 7 for the information provided and requested the Executive Secretary to inform the COP at its eighth session on the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development. Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings (Agenda item 11) The SBI considered this item at its 2nd and 6th meetings, on 10 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2002/4 and FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.1. Statements were made by the representatives of 17 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the least developed countries. The SBI took note of the information on arrangements for intergovernmental meetings, contained in document FCCC/SBI/2002/4. Eighth session of the Conference of the Parties (Agenda item 11 (a)) Conclusions The SBI expressed its thanks to the Government of India for its generous offer to host the eighth session of the Conference of the Parties. The SBI noted with appreciation the preparations being made by the Government of India and the secretariat to convene COP 8 in New Delhi, India, from 23 October to 1 November 2002; The SBI endorsed the dates of 30 October to 1 November 2002 for the high-level segment to be attended by ministers and other senior officials. The SBI recommended that ministerial round-table discussions, open to all heads of delegations, be the vehicle for ministers to exchange views at COP 8. The SBI invited the Bureau of COP 7, in collaboration with the secretariat and the Government of India, to give further consideration to the details and format, including themes for the round-table discussions, of the high-level segment of COP 8; The SBI invited the Executive Secretary to take note of views expressed by Parties on the possible elements of the provisional agenda for COP 8; The SBI took note of the information provided by the secretariat on contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and urged Parties in a position to do so to contribute to the Trust Fund so that funding would be available to each eligible Party to attend COP 8. Arrangements for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 11 (b)) The SBI took note that, as at 10 June 2002, 74 Parties to the Convention had deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Kyoto Protocol, including 21 Parties included in Annex I accounting for 35.8 per cent of the total 1990 carbon dioxide emissions of the Parties included in Annex I; The SBI also took note of views expressed by Parties on the procedural issues concerning the arrangements for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the first meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 1), including the need to ensure that the sequencing of meetings of the COP and COP/MOP promotes efficiency and avoids duplication of work. The SBI agreed to consider this issue further at its seventeenth session. Programme for future sessions (Agenda item 11 (c)) The SBI took note of document FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.1 on the programme for future sessions, containing information on proposed workshops and meetings of constituted bodies for 2002 and 2003. The SBI noted that workshops played an important and useful role in the UNFCCC process, but expressed concern about the number of workshops and the associated financial implications; The SBI encouraged the secretariat, in scheduling workshops, to explore the possibility of convening some in association with the sessional period, while recognizing the constraints that would impose on small delegations. The SBI invited its Chair and the Chair of the SBSTA to keep the workshop calendar under review and advise the secretariat on the overall schedule. Budget for conference services (Agenda item 11 (d)) At its 6th meeting, on 14 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI took note of the developments concerning the conference services budget that had taken place at the fifty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. The SBI also noted views expressed by Parties on the issue of how UNFCCC conference services should be financed. Ninth session of the Conference of the Parties (Agenda item 11 (e)) At its 6th meeting, on 14 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI noted that the ninth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 9) would be convened during the sessional period from 1 to 12 December 2003. The SBI also noted that the secretariat had not received any offers from Parties to host COP 9. It urged Parties to come forward with offers to host COP 9, so that an appropriate decision could be taken at COP 8. Administrative and financial matters (Agenda item 12) Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002-2003: status of contributions as at 31 May 2002 (Agenda item 12 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd meeting, on 10 June. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.5. Statements were made by the representatives of two Parties. At its 2nd meeting, on 10 June, the SBI took note of the status of contributions as at 31 May 2002. Possible options for responding to late payment of contributions (Agenda item12 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 6th meetings, on 10 and 14 June. The secretariat referred to document FCCC/SBI/2001/18, annex I, as a possible basis for discussion. Clarification was sought by the representative of one Party. At its 6th meeting, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI requested the Chair to continue his consultations and report back to it at its seventeenth session. The SBI also requested the Chair to reformulate the document and present it to its next session. Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement (Agenda item 12 (c)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd meeting, on 10 June. The representative of Germany gave an oral report on the progress made by his Government in providing office space to the UNFCCC secretariat and other United Nations entities in Bonn, developing conference facilities and improving conditions for staff members and their families. The Executive Secretary, in response, expressed thanks to the officials of the Government of Germany for their friendly and collegial approach to the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement and looked forward to continuing improvements on all fronts in the context of the Headquarters Agreement. A statement was made by the representative of one Party. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI took note of the statements made by the host Government and the Executive Secretary, and invited them to report on further progress at its next session. Other matters (Agenda item 13) Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry (Agenda item 13 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 5th meeting, on 12 June. Statements were made by the representatives of two Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI agreed to resume consideration of this item at its seventeenth session and requested the Chair to continue his consultations. Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (Agenda item 13 (b)) Proceedings At its 6th meeting, on 14 June, the Chair informed the SBI that no matter had been referred to the SBI by the SBSTA at its current session. The Chair also informed the SBI that, there being a wide consensus, he had agreed with the SBSTA Chair that the reporting and review guidelines for greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I would be sent directly to the COP instead of through the SBI. Report on the session (Agenda item 14) At its 6th meeting, on 14 June, the SBI considered the draft report on its sixteenth session (FCCC/SBI/2002/L.1). A request was made by the representative of one Party that the proceedings of the report reflect the statement he had made during the adoption of the conclusions under agenda item 6. On a proposal by the Chair, the SBI authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report on the session, under the guidance of the Chair. LIST OF DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE AT ITS SIXTEENTH SESSION FCCC/SBI/2001/18 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its fifteenth session, Marrakesh, 29 October-8 November 2001 FCCC/SBI/2002/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2002/1/Add.1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary. Addendum. Supplementary provisional agenda FCCC/SBI/2002/2 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to and Corr.1 the Convention. Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2002/3 National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Consideration of the reviews of national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2002/4 Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2002/5 Matters relating to the least developed countries: meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.1 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Information on activities taken by the Global Environment Facility FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.2 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Report of the workshop on the revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.3 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Report of the workshop of the Consultative Group of Experts FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.4 National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Status report on the review of third national communications FCCC/SBI/2002/INF.5 Administrative and financial matters. Status of contributions as at 31 May 2002 FCCC/SBI/2002/L.1 Report on the session. Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its sixteenth session FCCC/SBI/2002/L.2 Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/L.3 National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Consideration of the reviews of national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Status report on the review of third national communications. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/L.4 Capacity-building. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/L.5 Review of the financial mechanism. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.1 Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings. Programme for future sessions FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.2 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.3 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Provision of financial and technical support. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.4 Matters relating to the least developed countries: Report of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.5 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Convention: progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2002/CRP.6 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Report of the workshop on the revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair 