%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|GREENHOUSE GASES|EMISSION INVENTORIES|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6 12 August 2002 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE ON ITS SIXTEENTH SESSION, HELD AT BONN, FROM 5 TO 14 JUNE 2002 Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes I. Draft terms of reference and an agenda for work to develop definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol in the first commitment period. 28 II. Expert Group on Technology Transfer. Programme of work, 2002 - 2003. 33 III. List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its sixteenth session . 41 OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) The sixteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the Maritim Hotel, Bonn, Germany, from 5 to 14 June 2002. The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland), opened the session on 5 June and welcomed all Parties and observers to the session. He noted that the current SBSTA session would focus on the implementation of the Convention and the Marrakesh Accords. He pointed out that the provisional agenda of the session included progress reports on numerous intersessional and pre-sessional activities undertaken since the fifteenth session of the SBSTA. The Chair welcomed the new members of the SBSTA Bureau, Mr. Philip Weech (Bahamas), Vice-Chair, and Ms. Tatyana Ososkova (Uzbekistan), Rapporteur, and expressed regret that they were not able to attend the session. He announced that, in the absence of the Rapporteur, he would present the report to the SBSTA at its concluding meeting. He also mentioned that he would consult with the delegations concerned to avoid such a situation in future. The Chair outlined his vision for the work of the SBSTA and stressed that, in his view, the Convention process should satisfy several requirements. It should be sensitive to the legitimate concerns of Parties to make the process fair. An effort should be made to include all participants in the proceedings. The process should be focused and effective. Finally, he underlined that the process needs to be relevant and responsive to new scientific information. The Chair then welcomed the new Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC secretariat, Ms. Joke Waller-Hunter, and invited her to address the SBSTA. In her opening statement, the Executive Secretary mentioned that 5 June was not only the opening day of the SBSTA, but also World Environment Day. She informed participants that a total of 74 Parties had to date ratified the Kyoto Protocol, accounting for 35.8 per cent of total 1990 carbon dioxide emissions of Parties included in Annex I, compared with the figure of 55 per cent needed to bring the Kyoto Protocol into force. She expressed her commitment to work in an open, transparent and accessible manner and to provide Parties with the best possible secretarial support. She thanked the German Ministry for the Environment and the City of Bonn for their excellent support in the organization of the current session. Statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, one on behalf of the Central Group 11, one on behalf of the African Group, and one on behalf of the least developed countries. ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings on 5 June and at its 6th meeting on 11 June. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/1/Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the Central Group 11. At the 1st meeting, the Chair drew the attention of the SBSTA to item 10 (c) of the supplementary provisional agenda, "Implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol", which had been added at the request of a Party, in accordance with the draft rules of procedure, as applied. The Chair also noted that provision had been made for the SBSTA to take up any items referred to it by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) at its sixteenth session. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA adopted the supplementary provisional agenda contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/1/Add.1, with the exception of sub-items 10 (b) and (c), which were held in abeyance, pending further consultations. At its 6th meeting, the SBSTA adopted the following agenda: 1. Opening of the session. 2. Organizational matters: (a) Adoption of the agenda; (b) Organization of the work of the session. 3. Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 4. Methodological issues: (a) Guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5); (b) Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol; (c) Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: uniform reporting format; (d) Development of good practice guidance and other information for land use, land-use change and forestry; (e) Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. 5. Development and transfer of technologies. 6. Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons. 7. "Good practices" in policies and measures. 8. Cooperation with relevant international organizations. 9. Article 6 of the Convention: education, training and public awareness. 10. Other matters: (a) Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention; (b) Issues related to cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy; (c) Issues related to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol; (d) Matters referred to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation. 11. Report on the session. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 5 June. Parties were informed of the status of documentation, the applications for provisional accreditation to the sessions of the subsidiary bodies received from one intergovernmental organization and 11 non-governmental organizations, and the suggested schedule. The Chair noted the increasing number of workshops and meetings and mentioned that this situation would be kept under review throughout the session by himself, the Chair of the SBI and the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties (COP). He further noted that the organization of workshops was becoming difficult due to the burden it placed on Parties and the financial implications. Parties would have the opportunity to comment on this issue, under item 11 (c) of the supplementary provisional agenda of the SBI, "Programme for future sessions". He concluded by mentioning that he had asked the secretariat to introduce a few items using visual aids on a trial basis and, if deemed useful, this approach would be pursued in the future. Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel ON CLIMATE CHANGE (Agenda item 3) 1. Proceedings The SBSTA considered this item at its 1st and 2nd meetings on 5 June and at its 8th and 9th meetings on 13 and 14 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.5. Statements were made by representatives of 22 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the Central Group 11. A statement was also made by the new Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Mr. Rajendra Kumar Pachauri. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Rawleston Moore (Barbados) and Mr. David Warrilow (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). At the 8th meeting, Mr. Warrilow reported on the contact group's consultations. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Moore and Mr. Warrilow. At the 9th meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on these consultations. At the 9th meeting, the representative of New Zealand expressed regret at the way the conclusions had been finalized in the contact group, and that they did not explicitly request the SBSTA at its seventeenth session to begin to consider information in the Third Assessment Report (TAR) relevant to the ongoing work of the Convention bodies, including on the future development of the Convention and the achievement of its objective. 2. Conclusions At its 9th meeting, on 14 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA welcomed the statement made by the Chair of the IPCC on the current activities of the IPCC; The SBSTA took note of the report of the workshop on the TAR of the IPCC, held from 4 to 6 April 2002 in Bonn (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.4) and the information contained in the submissions by Parties on the TAR and possible IPCC activities in support of the needs of the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.5); The SBSTA noted that the TAR covers three broad areas of climate change: the scientific basis; impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and mitigation in addressing natural and anthropogenic climate change. The SBSTA agreed that in general the TAR should be used routinely as a useful reference for providing information for deliberations on agenda items of COP and its subsidiary bodies; In addition, the SBSTA identified three preliminary areas which could be considered regularly by the SBSTA, taking into account relevant agenda items, the workload of the SBSTA, available resources, and the need to avoid duplication, as follows: Research and systematic observation. The SBSTA noted the robust findings, the key uncertainties and priorities for future research and systematic observation reported in the TAR. The SBSTA further noted the need for enhanced interaction with international research programmes on the scientific questions related to the work of the Convention and the importance of retaining the close linkage with the ongoing SBSTA consideration of the Global Climate Observing System. The SBSTA also noted the importance of enhancing research and observational activities in developing countries and urged developing and developed country Parties to increase their cooperation on climate change research and systematic observation. The SBSTA noted that possible items for consideration by the scientific community could be, inter alia, assessment of the effects of the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, quantification and reduction of uncertainty, climate sensitivity, and improved climate and economic modelling. The SBSTA further noted a need for more scientific research on greenhouse gas atmospheric concentration and forcing agents which may influence the climate system; Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change. The SBSTA noted that vulnerability and adaptation to climate change is covered in volume 2 of the TAR and is of general relevance to the Parties. The SBSTA agreed to consider further the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change, incorporating the ongoing work on methods and tools to evaluate impacts and adaptation; Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. The SBSTA noted that mitigation of climate change is covered in volume 3 of the TAR and is of general relevance to the Parties. The SBSTA agreed to consider further the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. The SBSTA noted that the synthesis report of the TAR covers the broad aspects of the TAR and wider cross-cutting and integration issues of general relevance to the Parties. It noted the significant progress achieved by the TAR in comparison to the Second Assessment Report in addressing scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects related to the ultimate objective, principles and relevant provisions of the Convention, but noted that there were many uncertainties related to these aspects and that further research was required. The SBSTA further noted that there were many different aspects to the issues pertaining to the objective and relevant provisions of the Convention, and that there was a wide range of opinions. The SBSTA further noted that some exploration of an integrated approach to mitigation and adaptation could be useful; The SBSTA noted that consideration of the TAR may lead to specific proposals for further work to address issues or problems identified therein. The SBSTA invited the SBI to take note of, and consider at future sessions, possible budgetary or financial implications that may arise from further development of the issues identified in these conclusions, including in its guidance to the financial mechanism of the Convention; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to facilitate the consideration by the SBSTA of the research recommendations proposed in the TAR. It requested the secretariat to invite representatives of the IPCC and international research programmes and bodies, including the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), and the International Human Dimensions Programme (IHDP), to attend the seventeenth session of the SBSTA, being prepared to provide their views on the research recommendations identified in the TAR. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize, at the same session, a question-and-answer special side event to enable Parties to have a substantive dialogue with the invited representatives; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 20 August 2002, their views, for compilation into a miscellaneous document, on priority areas of research and questions for the scientific community relevant to the Convention, as referred to in paragraph 15 (d)(i). The SBSTA decided to consider the submissions, and requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis of the submissions to facilitate further consideration of these issues, at its seventeenth session; The SBSTA also invited Parties to submit, by 31 January 2003, their views, for compilation into a miscellaneous document, on issues covered in these conclusions and on the aspects of the TAR that could help facilitate further consideration of the agenda items of the COP and its subsidiary bodies. The SBSTA decided to consider the submissions, and requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis of the submissions to facilitate further consideration of these issues, at its eighteenth session, with a view to recommending a draft decision on these matters to the Conference of the Parties for adoption at its ninth session. Methodological issues (Agenda item 4) Guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5) (Agenda item 4 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 7th meetings, on 5 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/2 and Corr.1 and Add.1 - 3, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/5 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.11 and Add.1 - 2. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 2nd meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on the expert meeting held from 4 to 6 December 2001 in Bonn. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Newton Paciornik (Brazil) and Mr. Audun Rosland (Norway). At the 7th meeting, Mr. Paciornik, on behalf of the co-chairs, reported on these consultations. At the 7th meeting, the representative of Switzerland noted that annual inventories should be published on the web sites of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) and of the secretariat, beginning with the submissions due by 15 April 2003. The representative also noted that the SBSTA should consider how activities related to carbon storage should be reported under the Convention and Kyoto Protocol and, in particular, how they should be taken into account in the assigned amount of Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. At its 7th meeting, on 13 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA recommended to the COP two draft decisions on revisions to the guidelines for the: preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories; technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, for adoption by the COP at its eighth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.5/Add.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.5/Add.2); The SBSTA noted the increasing number of Annex I Parties that had submitted complete annual inventories during the trial period established by decision 3/CP.5. The SBSTA urged those Annex I Parties that had not submitted complete inventories, including the national inventory report and the common reporting format (CRF), in accordance with the guidelines, to do so as soon as possible; The SBSTA noted that, for the review from 2003 onward of the national inventories of all Annex I Parties, more experts would be required to participate in the review process. It urged Parties to ensure that experts were made available for the review process, and that nominations to the roster of experts were made where necessary. The SBSTA also urged the secretariat, subject to the availability of supplementary funding in the current biennium, to continue the development of the greenhouse gas inventory database, related software and web site, in order to further improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the technical review process; The SBSTA noted the need to ensure the necessary expertise of experts participating in greenhouse gas inventory review teams under the Convention and decided to consider this issue, including the elaboration of the characteristics of the relevant training, at its seventeenth session, jointly with the similar item concerning Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol, as requested in decision 23/CP.7; The SBSTA decided to consider the treatment of confidential data during the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories under the Convention, at its seventeenth session, jointly with the similar item concerning Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol, as requested in decision 23/CP.7. Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 4 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 7th meetings, on 5 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.2, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.3, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.5, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.8 and FCCC/TP/2002/2. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Issues related to guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 At the 2nd meeting, Mr. Audun Rosland (Norway) reported on the workshop held from 3 to 5 April 2002 in Athens, Greece, to elaborate draft technical guidance on adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol which he had co-chaired with Mr. Newton Paciornik (Brazil) at the request of the Chair of the SBSTA. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Mr. Festus Luboyera (South Africa). At the 7th meeting, Mr. Luboyera, on behalf of the co-chairs, reported on the contact group's consultations. Issues related to registries under Article 7, paragraph 4 At the 2nd meeting, Mr. Murray Ward (New Zealand) reported on the intersessional consultations held on 2 and 3 June 2002, which he had chaired at the request of the Chair of the SBSTA. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Ward. At the 7th meeting, Mr. Ward reported on these consultations. The SBSTA decided to forward to the COP at its eighth session a draft decision relating to how the information on demonstrable progress under Article 3, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol should be presented and evaluated (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.6/Add.1); The SBSTA agreed upon a draft decision on the expedited procedure for the review for reinstatement of eligibility to use mechanisms (see FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.6, annex) and decided to forward it to its seventeenth session, with the aim of finalizing the timing referred to in paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of the annex to that draft decision, and forwarding a draft decision on this matter to the COP for adoption at its eighth session; The SBSTA agreed to consider further, at its seventeenth session, document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.3 on the pending parts of the guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol relating to reporting and review of information on assigned amounts and national registries, with a view to recommending a decision on this matter for adoption by the COP at its eighth session; With regard to its continuing work under decision 17/CP.7, paragraph 10 (b), the SBSTA agreed that it may be necessary to consider the implications, if any, of the decision scheduled to be taken by the COP at its ninth session on this issue, for the results of the work referred to in paragraph 24 (c) above; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 1 August 2002, their views on the pending parts of the guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol mentioned in paragraph 24 above; The SBSTA took note of the report on the first workshop on adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.5), including the draft technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol contained in the annex to that report; The SBSTA noted that the outcome of the workshop was a considerable advancement of the methodological work on adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol. It requested the secretariat to draw up, for consideration at its seventeenth session, a proposal for the development of case studies for simulating the calculation of adjustments using the methods contained in the draft technical guidance mentioned in paragraph 24 above. The results of these case studies should be communicated to Parties by 15 February 2003; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 15 March 2003, their views on the draft technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, taking into account the results of the case studies mentioned in paragraph 24 above; The SBSTA encouraged Parties to undertake work on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, taking into account the recommendations of the workshop (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.5), and to share the outcome of any such work with other Parties and the secretariat by 15 March 2003; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize a second workshop, in accordance with the mandate of decision 21/CP.7, in April 2003. The aim of the second workshop would be to assess the results of the case studies, taking into account any information submitted by Parties in accordance with paragraphs 24 and above, and to refine the draft technical guidance mentioned in paragraph 24 above with a view to ensuring consistent application of adjustments by the different expert review teams; The SBSTA decided to aim at completing the technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol at its eighteenth session, and forwarding it for consideration by the COP at its ninth session, in accordance with decision 21/CP.7; The SBSTA took note of the secretariat's technical paper on the treatment of confidential information by international treaty bodies and organizations (FCCC/TP/2002/2); The SBSTA reminded Parties that, in accordance with decision 23/CP.7, Parties were invited to submit views on the characteristics of the relevant training, the assessment after completion of the training, and/or any other means needed to ensure the necessary competence of experts for participation in expert review teams under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. The SBSTA encouraged Parties to provide their views on this matter by 1 August 2002 in order to facilitate consideration at its seventeenth session; The SBSTA took note of the report on the intersessional consultations on registries held from 2 to 3 June in Bonn, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.2, including modalities for continuing the work on technical standards for national registries, the clean development mechanism (CDM) registry and the transaction log. It noted that a paper had been prepared on possible technical standards, under the authority of the Chair of the SBSTA, for comments by Parties by 16 August 2002. It also noted that the secretariat, on the basis of these comments and drawing on the assistance of technical experts, is to prepare a paper to be discussed during further consultations prior to the seventeenth session of the SBSTA in order to prepare draft technical standards for consideration by the SBSTA at that session. Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: uniform reporting format (Agenda item 4 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 7th meetings, on 5 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.9 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.2. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 2nd meeting, Ms. Sushma Gera (Canada) reported on the workshop held from 2 to 3 June 2002 in Bonn, which she had co-chaired with Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso) at the request of the Chair of the SBSTA. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Gera and Mr. Honadia. At the 7th meeting, Mr. Honadia, on behalf of the co-chairs, reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBSTA took note of documents FCCC/SBSTA/2000/6/Add.1, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.2 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.9 containing the draft revised uniform reporting format, submissions from Parties on their experience with the pilot phase and the report by the co-chairs on the above-mentioned workshop on the draft revised uniform reporting format for activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase; The SBSTA agreed on a revised uniform reporting format contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.2/Add.1; The SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.2/Add.1) on this subject for adoption by the COP at its eighth session. Development of good practice guidance and other information for land use, land-use change and forestry (Agenda item 4 (d)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 7th meetings, on 6 and 13 June, respectively. No new document was produced for this sub-item. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Statements were also made by representatives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the IPCC. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statement made by the representative of the IPCC in relation to its programme on land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF), and welcomed the progress made by the IPCC in the development of good practice guidance for LULUCF. The SBSTA highlighted the importance of timely completion of this work by COP 9, in accordance with decision 11/CP.7; The SBSTA also noted with appreciation the statement made by the representative of the FAO in relation to the process of harmonizing forest-related definitions, and acknowledged the importance of this initiative for the UNFCCC. The SBSTA welcomed the involvement of the IPCC in this process. It encouraged the IPCC to continue to work with FAO, and invited the IPCC to take into account the output from this process when developing definitions for forest degradation and devegetation of other vegetation types. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 4 (e)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 7th meetings, on 5 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.1 and Add.1 - 2. Statements were made by representatives of 18 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 3rd meeting, the secretariat reported on the workshop held from 7 to 9 April 2002 in Orvieto, Italy, which had been chaired by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Thelma Krug (Brazil) and Mr. Karsten Sach (Germany). At the 7th meeting, Mr. Sach, on behalf of the co-chairs, reported on the contact group's consultations. At the 7th meeting, the SBSTA noted that the fact that the text in footnote 2 to paragraph 2 (b) of annex I to the present report appears in a footnote rather than in the body of the text does not change the status or the intention of the text. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the report on the workshop on the terms of reference and an agenda for work relating to afforestation and reforestation activities under the CDM in the first commitment period (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/4) and expressed its appreciation to the Government of Italy for its support in hosting this workshop and to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for providing funds for the participation of experts; The SBSTA agreed on the terms of reference and an agenda, as contained in annex I to the present report, to develop definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period, taking into account the issues of non-permanence, additionality, leakage, uncertainties and socio-economic and environmental impacts, including impacts on biodiversity and natural ecosystems, and being guided by the principles stated in the preamble to draft decision - /CMP.1 (Land use, land-use change and forestry), with the aim of recommending for adoption by the COP, at its ninth session, a draft decision on these definitions and modalities, to be forwarded to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session; The SBSTA started discussions regarding definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period, and agreed to continue its work on these issues at its seventeenth session. Development and transfer of technologies (Agenda item 5) The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd, 6th and 7th meetings, on 6, 11 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.6, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.7 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.12, and a conference room paper (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.1) containing the proposed work programme of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT). Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 3rd meeting, Mr. Jukka Uosukainen (Finland), Chair of the EGTT, reported on the results of the preparatory meeting of the EGTT held on 23 April 2002 in Seoul, Republic of Korea, and the interim results of the first meeting of the EGTT held on 3 June 2002 on the preparation of its programme of work. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Terry Carrington (United Kingdom) and Mr. Philip Gwage (Uganda). At the 6th meeting, Mr. William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana), Vice-Chair of the EGTT, introduced the proposed work programme of the EGTT. At the 7th meeting, Mr. Carrington, speaking on behalf of himself and Mr. Gwage, reported on the informal consultations. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the reports by its Chair and the secretariat on the expert workshop on technology information held from 18 to 19 April 2002 in Beijing, China (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.6) and on the expert meeting on methodologies for technology needs assessments held from 23 to 25 April 2002 in Seoul, Republic of Korea (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.7). It expressed its appreciation for the kind assistance provided by the Government of China and the Government of the Republic of Korea in hosting the expert workshop and expert meeting respectively; The SBSTA took note of the oral reports provided by the Chair and Vice-Chair of the EGTT and adopted its programme of work for the biennium 2002−2003 as contained in annex II to the present report. It requested the EGTT, when implementing its programme of work, to take into account the views submitted by Parties during the session and to provide a brief report on the progress of its work to the SBSTA at its seventeenth session. The SBSTA noted the additional demands placed on the secretariat in supporting the work of the EGTT. It further noted that, subject to the availability of supplementary funding in the current biennium, the secretariat would be able to provide sufficient support to the work of the EGTT; The SBSTA requested the EGTT to continue to take into account the IPCC Special Report on Technological and Methodological Issues in Technology Transfer and the relevant parts of the IPCC Third Assessment Report and other relevant initiatives in implementing its work programme; The SBSTA invited the Parties and relevant international organizations in a position to do so, to provide support to the work of the EGTT as proposed in its work programme; The SBSTA requested the Global Environment Facility (GEF), through the SBI, to provide information to the SBSTA at its eighteenth session on the status of the financial support requested in decision 4/CP.7, paragraph 3; The SBSTA requested the secretariat, resources permitting: To initiate an outreach programme with the objective of making the technology information system developed by the secretariat available to the public and making the system more widely known to potential interested users, including the private sector and practitioners; To update the information from, and maintain, the existing technology information system; To assess the effectiveness of use of the technology information system, including the identification of any information gaps, make recommendations for improvement, and provide a report to the SBSTA at its nineteenth session; To cooperate with the Global Environment Facility, the United Nations Development Programme, and other relevant organizations and initiatives such as the Climate Technology Initiative, in their planned activities to develop a simplified and user-friendly handbook on methodologies for technology needs assessments and to report findings to the SBSTA at its eighteenth session. Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons (Agenda item 6) The SBSTA considered this item at its 5th meeting on 7 June and at its 7th and 8th meetings on 13 June. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.6 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. A statement was also made by one non-governmental organization. At the 5th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Richard Bradley (United States of America). At the 7th meeting, Mr. Bradley reported on these consultations. At its 8th meeting, on 13 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA took note of the submissions by Parties contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.6 and Add.1 and the submissions from non-governmental organizations provided on the UNFCCC web site, as well as the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.1; The SBSTA recalled that the UNFCCC provides flexibility for Annex I Parties to optimize their approaches in minimizing the overall carbon dioxide equivalent emissions of greenhouse gases in their actions to address climate change; The SBSTA recognized the role of the use of hydrofluorocarbons, hydrocarbons, ammonia, carbon dioxide and other options, in the phase-out of ozone-depleting substances under the Montreal Protocol, and encouraged Parties to ensure that their actions to address ozone depletion were undertaken in a manner that also contributes to the objective of the UNFCCC; The SBSTA encouraged governments to engage in or continue dialogues with relevant industries and stakeholders to advance information regarding replacement options for ozone-depleting substances in a manner that contributes to the objectives of the Montreal Protocol and the UNFCCC; The SBSTA considered the wide dissemination of policy-neutral information to be vital in allowing enterprises and governments to make fully informed choices regarding replacement options for ozone-depleting substances. It encouraged relevant organizations to continue to make such information available, particularly to developing countries, including through the UNFCCC web site; The SBSTA noted the importance of developing a balanced scientific, technical and policy-relevant information package. The objective of developing such an information package would be to make policy-neutral, user-friendly information available to all Parties and stakeholders to assist them in making informed decisions when evaluating alternatives to ozone-depleting substances while at the same time contributing to the objectives of the Montreal Protocol and the UNFCCC; The above-mentioned information package should be concise and cover three broad areas: A summary of up-to-date scientific information on the relation between ozone-layer depletion and global warming, including concentrations of ozone-depleting and greenhouse gases; Technical information on practices and technologies for phasing out ozone-depleting substances and at the same time contributing to the objectives of the Montreal Protocol and the UNFCCC. It should cover the relevant sectors, including heating, refrigeration and air-conditioning, foams, aerosols, solvents, and fire-fighting applications. It should include the technical options, inter alia, of improved containment, use of fluids, gases or aerosols with negligible or lower global warming potential, use of not-in-kind technology, process improvement, and end-of-life-cycle recovery, recycling and disposal. It should present technical information relevant to evaluation, including cost, availability, health, medical, environmental and safety issues, technical performance, energy and resource efficiency, and all associated greenhouse gas emissions using life-cycle climate performance. Where appropriate, reference should be made to relevant policies and measures; The future demand and supply of HFCs and the implication for developing countries, drawing upon relevant reports. The SBSTA noted that many developing countries use HFCs in applications and depend on imports of these substances. To facilitate the development of such information, the SBSTA invited the IPCC and the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP) of the Montreal Protocol, in consultation with other organizations such as the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), to consider the modalities, feasibility, resource implications and timing of providing the balanced scientific and technical information described in paragraph 41 above. The SBSTA further invited them to communicate their replies to the secretariat before the seventeenth session of the SBSTA. The SBSTA will consider these replies at its seventeenth session with a view to deciding at the time of COP 8 whether to make a further request on this issue to these bodies. In considering such a draft decision, the SBSTA should ensure that the information package: Does not duplicate current efforts by those organizations; Is within the mandate of those organizations; Builds also upon the information provided, as referred to in paragraph 41 ; Is cost-efficient; Does not lead to the creation of any new reporting requirements for Parties. The SBSTA noted the importance of continuing research and development on technologies that safeguard the ozone layer while at the same time contributing to the objectives of the Montreal Protocol and the UNFCCC, and encouraged Parties to work towards that end; The SBSTA noted that the Multilateral Fund (MLF) under the Montreal Protocol is funding the replacement of ozone-depleting substances in developing countries by alternatives, some of which are also greenhouse gases. The SBSTA invited Parties to consider project funding in addition to MLF funding, in particular through the GEF and CDM; The SBSTA requested the UNFCCC secretariat to bring these conclusions to the attention of the Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol through its secretariat; The SBSTA welcomed the input provided by Parties on information aspects of hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons, and agreed to recommend a draft decision at its seventeenth session for consideration by the COP at its eighth session. It also agreed to consider, at its seventeenth session, the question of concluding the agenda item, "Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons". "Good practices" in policies and measures (Agenda item 7) The SBSTA considered this item at its 4th meeting on 6 June and at its 7th and 8th meetings on 13 June. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.7. Statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of a contact group, co-chaired by Mr. Pierre Giroux (Canada) and Mr. Suk-Hoon Woo (Republic of Korea). At the 7th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. At the 8th meeting, the representative of Venezuela, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, stated that two principles must be respected in addressing policies and measures of Annex I Parties. These two principles, which were inseparable and needed to be simultaneously satisfied, were that: The policies and measures should reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance the individual and combined effectiveness of policies and measures, such as those referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1 (a) of the Kyoto Protocol, in particular by sharing experience and exchanging information at a technical level, and taking into account national circumstances; Adverse effects, including the adverse effects of climate change, effects on international trade, and social, environmental and economic impacts on developing country Parties, should be minimized. The SBSTA, as agreed at its fifteenth session, considered further the Chair's report on the workshop on "good practices" in policies and measures (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/INF.5). It also considered views submitted by Parties on possible further action to be undertaken in advancing the work on "good practices" in policies and measures (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.7); The SBSTA concluded that consideration of further action on this agenda item shall be based on the approaches outlined in decision 13/CP.7; The SBSTA concluded that, to consider further action, additional views from the Parties are needed on the initial results obtained from the activities undertaken on "good and best practices" in policies and measures of Annex I Parties in implementing the relevant elements of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action and decision 13/CP.7. This should include views on the following elements: Reports prepared by the secretariat on policies and measures of Annex I Parties, including compilation and synthesis reports on the national communications of Annex I Parties; Content and scope of presentations at the workshops; Activities undertaken as compared with the relevant decisions of the COP and conclusions of the SBSTA; Means and tools to share information and experiences; The SBSTA requested the Chair of the SBSTA to organize intersessional consultations to exchange views on the issues identified in paragraph 45 (c) above back to back with the seventeenth session of the SBSTA. It also requested the Chair of the SBSTA to report on the results of this exchange of views at its seventeenth session; The SBSTA agreed on a frame for defining what further steps should be taken in advancing the work on "good practices" in policies and measures of Annex I Parties in implementing decision 13/CP.7. The frame consists of three elements: General information sharing; Information sharing in specific areas encompassing all relevant sectors and cross-cutting and methodological issues; Information from relevant international and intergovernmental organizations active in the area of policies and measures relevant to the Convention; General information sharing encompasses the ongoing work by the secretariat on compiling information on policies and measures of Annex I Parties reported by Annex I Parties in their third national communications, performed pursuant to the conclusion of the SBSTA at its fifteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, para. 35 (c)), and future work by the secretariat on the national communications following the third national communication. It also encompasses elaboration of innovative information-sharing tools such as web-based tools; The SBSTA invited the relevant international and intergovernmental organizations, including the IPCC, pursuant to decision 13/CP.7, to present a status report on their activities to the SBSTA at its seventeenth session and also to its subsequent sessions; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit, by 18 August 2002, their views on the elements identified in paragraphs 45 (c) and (e) above; The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its seventeenth session, the further steps to be taken in advancing the work on "good practices" in policies and measures of Annex I Parties in implementing decision 13/CP.7 in the frame for action referred to in paragraph 45 (e) above, considering the input from the exchange of views on the initial results, submissions by the Parties on the frame, and the information received from the relevant international and intergovernmental organizations. Cooperation with relevant international organizations (Agenda item 8) The SBSTA considered this item at its 4th meeting on 6 June, at its 5th meeting on 7 June, at its 7th and 8th meetings on 13 June and at its 9th meeting on 14 June. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/3, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.9 and Add.1, and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.10. Statements were made by representatives of 31 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Statements were also made by representatives of Global Climate Observing System (GCOS), the World Conservation Union (IUCN), the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the IPCC, the Ramsar Convention, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the FAO. Cooperation with scientific organizations At its 4th meeting, on 6 June, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Ms. Sue Barrell (Australia) and Mr. David Lesolle (Botswana). At the 7th meeting, Ms. Barrell, speaking on behalf of herself and Mr. Lesolle, reported on these consultations. The SBSTA took note of the interim report by the GCOS secretariat on the synthesis and analysis of national reports on global climate observing systems from Parties, and other information relevant to the implementation of decision 5/CP.5 provided in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.10; The SBSTA urged Annex I Parties and invited non-Annex I Parties that have not yet done so to submit their detailed reports on systematic observation. The initial analysis of national reports drew attention to several themes such as the importance of establishing national coordination mechanisms for systematic observations across all climate regimes, including for terrestrial observing systems. The SBSTA also noted that many Parties had found the process of preparing the national reports to be a useful means of drawing attention to both the deficiencies in observing systems in key areas and the diversity of data and systems that do exist, many established for research purposes. The SBSTA encouraged Parties to give continuing operational support to relevant research systems; The SBSTA welcomed the involvement of a broader range of experts, particularly from developing countries, including those associated with the IPCC, in the preparation by GCOS of the second report on the adequacy of the global climate observing systems. The SBSTA stressed the importance of achieving an integrated global climate observing system that would facilitate identification of observed trends and changes in the global climate system and inform key policy decisions; The SBSTA noted the information submitted by the GCOS secretariat on the progress made in the implementation of the programme of regional workshops to address priority capacity-building needs of developing countries in relation to their participation in systematic observation and the follow-up regional action plans. The SBSTA urged the GCOS secretariat to complete the remaining programme of regional workshops as early as possible; The SBSTA welcomed the submission of action plans emanating from the regional workshops and noted the urgency of moving these plans forward into implementation. It encouraged Parties in cooperation with the GCOS secretariat to explore the full range of funding options that might assist the implementation of the plans, including the GEF, donor support such as through partnership arrangements, and international aid programmes directed at capacity-building, technology transfer, education and training, and recommended the involvement of representatives of potential funding bodies in the development of the implementation plans. The SBSTA invited the GEF to report on its progress and/or plans in this regard, including on the provision of financial support, in the context of its report to the Conference of Parties at its eighth and subsequent sessions; The SBSTA noted, on the basis of the preliminary analysis of national reports, the outcomes of the regional workshops and the information provided by the GCOS Science Panels, that serious deficiencies continue to exist in global observing systems for climate. The SBSTA urged Parties to give priority to: Remedying first the deficiencies in traditional monitoring systems, and also taking advantage of the increasing contribution of new and emerging technologies, such as space-based systems, as a complementary source of climate data; Adhering to the climate monitoring principles provided in the UNFCCC guidelines for reporting; Exchanging data, providing data to international data centres and securing access to data and products from international data centres; Enhancing capacity to access, communicate and use data to inform decision-making processes; The SBSTA urged Annex I Parties to contribute support for addressing the priority requirements to improve the deficiencies in global observing systems for climate. In this context, the SBSTA welcomed the announcement by the Government of the United States of America of a contribution of US$ 4 million to improving climate observing systems in developing countries. Cooperation with other conventions At its 5th meeting, on 7 June, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Ms. Clare Breidenich (United States of America) and Ms. Yvette Munguia de Aguilar (El Salvador). At the 7th meeting, Ms. Breidenich, speaking on behalf of herself and Ms. Aguilar, reported on these consultations. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the statements made by the representatives of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) and the Ramsar Convention; The SBSTA welcomed the technical paper by the IPCC on the interlinkages between biological diversity and climate change, and the ongoing work of the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on Biological Diversity and Climate Change under the CBD. The SBSTA noted the potential relevance of this work to ongoing activities under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, with a view to addressing the impacts of climate change in a synergetic manner, particularly with regard to coral reefs, forests, wetlands, dry-land ecosystems and degraded land. The SBSTA noted that this also applies to areas of mutual interest identified by Working Group II of the IPCC Third Assessment Report, "Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability"; The SBSTA took note of information provided by the secretariat in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.9 and Add.1 on the collaboration between UNFCCC and other intergovernmental bodies, in particular UNCCD and CBD. It also took note of a progress report of the Joint Liaison Group (JLG) of the three conventions as contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/3; The SBSTA, recognizing that the task of the JLG is to enhance practical cooperation and that it is the role of the convention Parties to take decisions on matters relating to collaboration with other conventions, reconfirmed the mandate of the JLG (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/2, para. 42 (d)); The SBSTA welcomed the activities of the JLG, including the development of a joint calendar of events relevant to the three conventions and the exchange of experts. The SBSTA, noting potential synergies with the Ramsar Convention, encouraged the JLG to invite the secretariat of the Ramsar Convention to share information and to participate in the meetings of the JLG, as appropriate; The SBSTA welcomed the ongoing cooperation between UNFCCC and other conventions and agreements, in particular UNCCD and CBD, and reaffirmed previous SBSTA conclusions on this matter. The SBSTA noted that collaboration should recognize the different mandates of the three conventions and should facilitate synergies in the implementation of the three conventions, in particular at the national level, especially taking into account needs of developing countries; The SBSTA requested the secretariat, through the JLG, to prepare a scoping paper to identify cross-cutting thematic areas and activities under the UNFCCC, the CBD and the UNCCD, such as technology development and transfer, education, systematic observation, research, impacts and adaptation, capacity-building, terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems, and reporting, taking into consideration both the request of the SBSTA contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, paragraph 41 (n), and the priority areas already identified in national workshops on synergies implemented under a UNCCD initiative, for consideration by the SBSTA at its seventeenth session; The SBSTA noted the relationship of work under this agenda item to the workshop mandated by the COP in decision 5/CP.7, paragraph 36. In order to make efficient use of available resources, the SBSTA proposed that the workshop identified in decision 5/CP.7 and that proposed in document FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, paragraph 41 (o), be combined. The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its seventeenth session, thematic areas identified in the scoping paper and in submissions from Parties as contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.9 and Add.1, with a view to providing recommendations to the SBI on the terms of reference for the workshop; In order to facilitate consideration of these matters at its eighteenth session, the SBSTA invited the SBI to consider holding the above-mentioned workshop before that session; The SBSTA noted the interest indicated by CBD in pursuing issues related to forests. The SBSTA agreed to further consider possible cooperation with CBD and other organizations on issues related to forests and forest ecosystem, at its seventeenth session; The SBSTA agreed to further consider these matters at its seventeenth session, with the aim of forwarding a decision to the Conference of the Parties for adoption at its eighth session. Cooperation with other United Nations bodies At its 5th meeting, on 7 June, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. At its 8th meeting, the draft conclusions were presented by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the 9th meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on these consultations. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information provided by UNEP and FAO on their activities relating to climate change; The SBSTA took note of the information provided by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) secretariat on the outcome of the 47th meeting of the Marine Environment Protection Committee, held in London from 4 to 8 March 2002; The SBSTA recalled its invitation, at its fifteenth session, to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and IMO, in consultation with the secretariat, to explore opportunities for examining and improving the quality of data reporting and comparability under the relevant provisions of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, and under ICAO and IMO (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, para. 19 (f). Noting the relevant provisions of the Convention and of the Kyoto Protocol, in particular Article 2, paragraph 2 of the Kyoto Protocol, it decided to consider the methodological aspects related to the reporting of emissions based upon fuel sold to ships and aircraft engaged in international transport at its eighteenth session. It invited ICAO and IMO to report on their activities in this regard at that session. Article 6 of the Convention: education, training AND PUBLIC AWARENESS (Agenda item 9) The SBSTA considered this item at its 5th and 7th meetings, on 7 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.10 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.13. Statements were made by representatives of 18 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. A statement was also made by a representative of the IPCC. At the 5th meeting, Mr. Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) reported on the workshop held from 2 to 3 June 2002 in Bonn, which he had co-chaired with Mr. Jean-Pascal Van Ypersele (Belgium) together with the Chair of the SBSTA. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item by way of a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Sok Appadu (Mauritius) and Mr. Van Ypersele. At the 7th meeting, Mr. Van Ypersele, on behalf of the co-chairs, reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBSTA took note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.13 containing submissions from Parties on the draft terms of reference of the workshop to develop a work programme on Article 6 of the Convention, and of the report of the pre-sessional workshop held on 2 and 3 June 2002 (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.10); The SBSTA expressed appreciation to the Governments of Belgium, the Netherlands, and the United States of America for their financial support for the workshop and for the activities of the secretariat related to Article 6; The SBSTA took note of the oral reports by one of the co-chairs on the pre-sessional workshop and by the secretariat on this agenda item, and welcomed progress made in connection with the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention; The SBSTA noted with appreciation the report made by the Secretary of the IPCC on the status of the translation process for the Third Assessment Report and its synthesis report, and urged the IPCC to ensure timely translation of core documents in the future; The SBSTA noted that climate change could not be selected as the theme of World Environment Day in 2003, as another theme had already been selected; it invited the secretariat: To explore further with UNEP the extent to which this option could be taken up in a future year; To conduct further consultations with relevant international organizations with a view to providing information to the SBSTA at its seventeenth session on the procedures and resource requirements for designating a climate change day; Recalling one of the conclusions it had adopted at its fifteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, para. 45 (d)), the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, for consideration at its eighteenth session, a report on the possible structure and content of an information clearing house on Article 6, building on the technology information system (TT:CLEAR), and identifying institutions that could host and provide regular support for such a clearing house; The SBSTA reaffirmed the need for a work programme that would promote cooperation and facilitate the implementation of Article 6 by Parties and, taking into account national circumstances and the availability of financial resources, acknowledged the possible scope of activities of a work programme, which could include: Education, which occurs in formal and non-formal settings and aims at facilitating and orienting personal learning processes, imparting the knowledge needed to comprehend, inter alia, the interrelated nature of climate change issues, and influencing attitudes and behaviours within the overall context of sustainable development; Training, which is directed towards selected target audiences and seeks to impart specific technical skills and knowledge that have a practical application. Examples include the ability to gather, model and interpret climate data, to conduct inventories of national emissions, and to formulate and implement national programmes; Public awareness activities, which can be conducted through a variety of modalities and aim at creating interest and concern for certain issues that in turn translate into changes in attitude and behaviour; Public participation in climate change issues, which can be defined as the involvement of all people, in particular stakeholders with a direct interest or concern, in understanding and addressing climate change; Public access to information, which can be enhanced, inter alia, by wider circulation and availability of relevant documentation and other materials, in appropriate languages, and by using a variety of mechanisms, such as the mass media and the Internet; Subregional, regional and international cooperation in the above activities, which can enhance the collective ability of Parties to implement the Convention, as well as the efforts of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute to its implementation. Such cooperation can enhance synergies between different conventions, and improve the effectiveness of all sustainable development efforts. In the light of the evolving work programme, and to facilitate reporting by Parties, the SBSTA took note of the need to consider reviewing, at a future session, the guidelines for national communications from Annex I Parties as they relate to Article 6 activities; The SBSTA invited the SBI to consider, at its seventeenth session, the issue of the financial and technical support in the implementation of a work programme on Article 6, taking into account decision 6/CP.7, paragraph 1 (h); The SBSTA noted the need for the secretariat to continue work in this area, subject to the availability of supplementary funding in the current biennium, and recalled the relevant conclusion adopted at its fifteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, para. 45 (a)). It invited Parties, particularly those included in Annex I to the Convention, to contribute generously for this purpose; The SBSTA took note of a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.11/Add.1/Rev.1) for possible adoption by the COP at its eighth session, and agreed to consider this draft decision for further consideration at its seventeenth session; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit their views to the secretariat by 20 August 2002 on the draft decision for compilation into a miscellaneous document. Other matters (Agenda item 10) Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention (Agenda item 10 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 5th and 7th meetings, on 7 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.4 and FCCC/IDR.1/HRV and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the Central Group 11. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Jim Penman (United Kingdom). At the 7th meeting, Mr. Penman reported on these consultations. The SBSTA has considered the request of Croatia relating to the estimates of its 1990 base year greenhouse gas emissions with reference to Article 4.6 of the Convention (FCCC/SBI/2001/MISC.3); The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the Government of Croatia and to the secretariat for coordinating the in-depth review of the first national communication of Croatia as requested at its fifteenth session and for the prompt publication of the in-depth review report (FCCC/IDR.1/HRV and Add.1); The SBSTA concluded that methodological aspects of the request of Croatia invoking flexibility under Article 4.6 of the Convention should be further considered at its next session, to the extent possible, with a view to advising the SBI at its seventeenth session. Issues related to cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy (Agenda item 10 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 6th and 7th meetings, on 11 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.8 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3 and Add.1 - 2. Statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the Central Group 11. At the 6th meeting, Mr. Harald Dovland (Norway) reported on a workshop which he had chaired at the request of the Chair of the SBSTA, held from 7 to 8 May 2002 in Whistler, Canada. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of informal consultations to be convened by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the 7th meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on these consultations. The SBSTA took note of proposed approaches to issues related to cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3 and of submissions by Canada and by Venezuela on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3/Add.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3/Add.2, respectively; The SBSTA also took note of the report on the UNFCCC workshop on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy: exchange of information and views, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.8; The SBSTA did not complete its consideration of issues under sub-item 10 (b). It agreed to continue the consideration of these issues at its seventeenth session under the agenda sub-item, "Other matters: issues related to cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy". Issues related to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 10 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 6th and 8th meetings, on 11 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 6th meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. At the 8th meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on these consultations. The SBSTA, at its sixteenth session, had an exchange of views on issues related to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol; The SBSTA agreed to continue the consideration of this item at its seventeenth session under the agenda sub-item "Other matters: issues related to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol", including the need for, timing of and elements for possible workshops and the possibility of holding an initial workshop before its nineteenth session; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to consider Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol in the compilation of information on policies and measures of Annex I Parties reported by Annex I Parties in their third national communications, performed pursuant to the conclusion of the SBSTA at its fifteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, para. 35 (c)). Matters referred to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (Agenda item 10 (d)) No matters were referred to the SBSTA by the SBI for consideration at its sixteenth session. REPORT ON THE SESSION (Agenda item 11) At its 9th meeting, on 14 June, the SBSTA considered the draft report on its sixteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.1). On a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report on the session, under the guidance of the Chair. Annex I DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE AND AN AGENDA FOR WORK TO DEVELOP DEFINITIONS AND MODALITIES FOR INCLUDING AFFORESTATION AND REFORESTATION ACTIVITIES UNDER ARTICLE 12 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL IN THE FIRST COMMITMENT PERIOD Objective In accordance with decision 17/CP.7, and being guided by the principles in the preamble to decision -/CMP.1 (land use, land-use change and forestry), the SBSTA will: Develop definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism (CDM) in the first commitment period, taking into account the issues of: Non-permanence; Additionality; Leakage; Uncertainties; Socio-economic and environmental impacts, including impacts on biodiversity and natural ecosystems; Recommend to the Conference of the Parties (COP), at its ninth session, a draft decision on definitions and modalities, in the form of an annex on modalities and procedures for afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM reflecting, mutatis mutandis, the annex to decision 17/CP.7; When elaborating the annex referred to above, take into consideration related accounting, reporting and review aspects (decisions 11/CP.7, 15/CP.7, 17/CP.7, 19/CP.7, 20/CP.7, 21/CP.7, 22/CP.7, 23/CP.7), as applicable. Input The following sources of information will be used in achieving the objective: Existing documents: Decisions 11/CP.7, 15/CP.7, 17/CP.7, 19/CP.7, 20/CP.7, 21/CP.7, 22/CP.7, 23/CP.7; The IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry; Submissions from Parties contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.1; Additional information to be compiled: Submissions from Parties and organizations on their views on issues related to modalities for the inclusion of afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period; Submissions from Parties on draft text for modalities for the inclusion of afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period; An options paper on modalities for addressing non-permanence; An options paper on modalities for addressing baselines, additionality and leakage; An options paper on modalities for addressing socio-economic and environmental impacts, including impacts on biodiversity and natural ecosystems; An overview and compilation paper prepared by the secretariat under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, on the relationship of decisions 11/CP.7, 15/CP.7, 17/CP.7, 19/CP.7, 20/CP.7, 21/CP.7, 22/CP.7 and 23/CP.7 to the issues identified in paragraph 1 (a) and (c) above; Other relevant information: Reports prepared by FAO on forest-related definitions; Reports prepared by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice (SBSTTA) of the CBD based on the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on Biological Diversity and Climate Change of the CBD; Reports prepared by the IPCC, including good practice guidance and uncertainty management for land use, land-use change and forestry and the technical report on the linkages between biodiversity and climate change; Other relevant scientific and technical reports and the outcome of relevant workshops. Process The SBSTA, at its sixteenth session, should establish a contact group on afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM and prepare conclusions regarding definitions for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period. The SBSTA, at its seventeenth session, should consider issues related to modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period, taking account of the inputs identified in paragraph 2 above which are available at that time. A workshop will be organized, subject to the availability of supplementary funding in the current biennium, by the secretariat before the eighteenth session of the SBSTA with the aim of facilitating an exchange of views on the modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period. The SBSTA, at its eighteenth session, should consider a draft consolidated text for the annex referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, to be prepared by the secretariat under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, taking into account submissions by Parties, and elaborate a draft negotiating text. Intersessional consultations will be convened, subject to the availability of supplementary funding in the current biennium, by the SBSTA Chair, as appropriate, before the nineteenth session of the SBSTA, with the aim of further considering issues contained in the draft text for the annex referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above. The SBSTA, at its nineteenth session, should consider the draft text for the annex referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above and should recommend a draft decision, containing the annex referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, for consideration by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its ninth session with the aim of adopting a draft decision to be forwarded to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session. In undertaking this work, the SBSTA should take into account relevant work by the CDM executive board. An agenda for work is contained in the appendix. AGENDA FOR WORK Date Description Activity 1 February 2002 Due date for submissions Submissions from Parties sent to the secretariat. 15 February 2002 MISC document available to Parties MISC document containing Parties' submissions. 7 - 9 April 2002 Workshop Recommended terms of reference and agenda for the work to include afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM in the first commitment period. 5 - 14 June 2002 SBSTA 16 SBSTA agrees on the terms of reference and agenda for the work and prepares conclusions regarding definitions. 1 July 2002 Overview note by the secretariat The secretariat to prepare a note cross-referencing decisions 11/CP.7, 17/CP.7, 19/CP.7, 22/CP.7 and 23/CP.7 to the issues identified in paragraph 1 (a) and (c) of the terms of reference. 20 August 2002 Due date for submissions by Parties and other organizations Submissions by Parties and other organizations on their views on issues related to modalities. 23 October - 1 November 2002 SBSTA 17 Consideration of issues related to modalities. December 2002 Papers referred to in paragraph 2 (b) (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi). The secretariat, under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, to prepare these options, overview and compilation papers based on submissions from Parties and inputs from Parties at SBSTA 17, including conclusions by SBSTA. Early February 2003 To facilitate an exchange of views on issues related to modalities. 15 March 2003 Submissions by Parties on draft text for modalities. March - April 2003 Draft consolidated text for the annex The secretariat, under the guidance of the SBSTA Chair, to prepare a draft consolidated text for the annex, indicating the origin of the proposals. 9 - 20 June 2003 SBSTA 18 Consideration of a draft consolidated text for the annex and elaboration of a draft negotiating text. A date to be decided between June and November 2003 Intersessional consultations, as appropriate. Further consideration of issues contained in the draft negotiating text for the annex. 1 - 12 December 2003 SBSTA 19 The SBSTA to recommend a draft decision containing an annex, for consideration by COP 9. COP 9 The COP to consider the draft decision with the aim of adopting a draft decision at COP 9 to be forwarded to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session. Once the Kyoto Protocol has entered into force, the draft decision could be transmitted directly from the SBSTA to the COP/MOP. Annex II EXPERT GROUP ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER Programme of work, 2002 - 2003 INTRODUCTION Mandate By its decision 4/CP.7, the Conference of the Parties decided to establish an Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) to be nominated by the Parties. One of the stated objectives of the Expert Group was to enhance the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 5, of the Convention, inter alia, by analysing and identifying ways to facilitate and advance technology transfer activities and making recommendations to the SBSTA. The decision also indicated that the EGTT would report on its work each year and propose a programme of work for the following year for decision by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (FCCC/CP/2001/13/Add.1). The SBSTA, at its fifteenth session, took note of the experts who had been nominated by the Parties to serve on the Expert Group (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8, para. 33(e)). At the same session, the SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize a preparatory meeting of the Expert Group to enable it to develop a programme of work for further consideration by the SBSTA at its sixteenth session. The preparatory meeting of the Expert Group was held on 22 April 2002 at the office of the Korea Energy Management Corporation (KEMCO) in Seoul, Republic of Korea, and its first meeting was held on 3 and 8 June 2002 in Bonn, Germany, in conjunction with the sixteenth session of the SBSTA. Scope of the programme of work This document presents the programme of work for the biennium 2002 - 2003 of the Expert Group. The programme of work proposed in this document includes activities which the Expert Group believes can contribute to the successful implementation of the framework for meaningful and effective actions to enhance the implementation of Article 4.5 of the Convention contained in the annex to decision 4/CP.7 and to the advancement of technology transfer activities under the Convention. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE EXPERT GROUP The Conference of the Parties, by its decision 4/CP.7, adopted the framework for meaningful and effective actions to enhance the implementation of Article 4.5 of the Convention contained in the annex to that decision. The framework sets out the terms of reference of the Expert Group. Definition The mechanisms for technology transfer are intended to facilitate the support of financial, institutional and methodological activities: To enhance the coordination of the full range of stakeholders in different countries and regions; To engage them in cooperative efforts to accelerate the development and diffusion, including transfer, of environmentally sound technologies, know-how and practices to and between Parties other than developed country Parties and other developed Parties not included in Annex II, particularly developing country Parties, through technology cooperation and partnerships (public/public, private/public, private/private); To facilitate the development of projects and programmes to support such ends. Purpose The purpose of the mechanisms is to develop meaningful and effective actions to enhance the implementation of Article 4.5 of the Convention by increasing the transfer of and access to environmentally sound technologies and know-how. Functions The functions are to provide scientific and technical advice on the advancement of the development and transfer of environmentally sound technologies and know-how under the Convention, including the preparation of an action plan to enhance the implementation of Article 4.5 of the Convention. The terms of reference of the EGTT appear in appendix I to this document. PROGRAMME OF WORK, 2002 - 2003 The programme of work in appendix II to this document includes six main areas: technology needs assessments, technology information system, enabling environments, capacity-building, mechanisms and cross-cutting activities. The work programme of the EGTT will require additional support activities by the secretariat, which are not budgeted for in the present programme budget. The indicative additional resources required from supplementary funds to implement the EGTT work programme amount to about US$ 400,000 (US$ 200,000 on technical papers, US$ 100,000 on a workshop and US$ 100,000 for maintaining TT:CLEAR) over two years, excluding the organization of regional workshops to be implemented by other organizations. Appendix I TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE EXPERT GROUP ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER The Expert Group on Technology Transfer shall have the objectives of enhancing the implementation of Article 4.5 of the Convention and advancing the technology transfer activities under the Convention. The Expert Group shall analyse and identify ways to facilitate and advance technology transfer activities, including those identified in the annex to the decision 4/CP.7 on development and transfer of technologies and make recommendations to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice. The Expert Group shall report on its work each year and propose a programme of work for the following year for decision by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice. The members of the Expert Group shall be nominated by Parties for a period of two years and be eligible to serve two consecutive terms. The SBSTA shall ensure that half of the members of the Expert Group nominated initially shall serve for a period of three years, taking into account the need to maintain the overall balance of the group. Every year thereafter, half of the members shall be nominated for a period of two years. Appointment pursuant to paragraph 5 shall count as one term. The members shall remain in office until their successors are nominated. The members from three relevant international organizations shall serve on an issue-oriented basis. If a member of the Expert Group resigns or is otherwise unable to complete the assigned term of office or to perform the functions of that office, the expert group may decide, bearing in mind the proximity of the next session of the COP, to request the group that had nominated the member to nominate another member to replace the said member for the remainder of that member's mandate. In such a case, the Expert Group shall take into account any views expressed by the group that had nominated the member. The Expert Group on Technology Transfer shall elect annually a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from amongst its members, with one being a member from a Party included in Annex I and the other being a member from a Party not included in Annex I. The positions of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall alternate annually between a member from a Party included in Annex I and a member from a Party not included in Annex I. The members of the Expert Group shall serve in their personal capacities and shall have expertise in any of the following areas, inter alia, greenhouse gas mitigation and adaptation technologies, technology assessments, information technology, resource economics and social development. Appendix II PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE EXPERT GROUP ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER Area Proposed activities Expected outcome Time frame/ Completion date A. Technology needs assessments Initiate collaboration with the Global Environment Facility, Climate Technology Initiative, other interested organizations, and any interested Parties, on expediting technical assistance to developing and transition countries for technology needs assessments. Review the progress of the technical assistance for technology needs assessment. Recommendation to the SBSTA to encourage international organizations to develop a procedure to expedite technical assistance to developing and transition countries for technology needs assessments. Recommendation to the SBSTA. Support the preparation of a methodology document on technology needs assessment. Recommendation to the SBSTA to encourage the United Nations Development Programme/Global Environment Facility support programme to complete the handbook for assessing technology needs, including dissemination to national climate change coordinators, in collaboration with countries and other organizations, e.g., CTI. B. Technology information system Design and implement an outreach programme for TT:CLEAR, and identify and analyse ways to facilitate access to technology information by intended users. Assess options to deliver technology information to intended users, including through the Internet (e.g. development of very small aperture terminal (VSAT) technology as a means of providing access to the Internet) and/or other means and opportunities. Enhancing the role of the existing national climate change focal points to include the role of technology information to ensure that TT:CLEAR is known to business and finance communities and technology transfer practitioners. Presentation of the system at workshops, seminars and other events related to technology transfer. October 2002 Ongoing Conduct client surveys and assessments on the effectiveness of the use of TT:CLEAR. FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.12, FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.6 Compilation of clients' interests and identification of gaps. Working paper on users' needs, information gaps and recommendations for improvements. Paper with recommendations to the SBSTA. October 2003 Draft June 2003 Final August 2003 Study the needs, logistical implications and institutional arrangements associated with networking international technology clearing houses and networks of regional and national technology centres. Recommendations to the SBSTA on enhancing coordination on sharing technology information. Update the information and maintain the existing TT:CLEAR system. Updated information available to users. C. Enabling environments Prepare terms of reference for a technical paper on enabling environments. Organize a workshop on enabling environments for technology transfer to seek inputs for the technical paper prepared by the EGTT. Prepare a technical paper drawing on FCCC/TP/1998/1, the IPCC Special Report on Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer, the Third Assessment Report and other relevant reports. Agreed terms of reference. Workshop. Technical paper. 2nd EGTT meeting in conjunction with SBSTA 17 March/April 2003 3rd EGTT meeting in conjunction with SBSTA 18 Organize side events/round table discussions during the sessions of the COP and the subsidiary bodies. Improved understanding of these issues by participants at UNFCCC meetings. D. Capacity-building Further investigate the relationship with all capacity-building activities under the UNFCCC. Informal paper prepared by the secretariat to facilitate the work of the EGTT. Identify possible prioritized capacity-building activities on technology transfer. Recommendations to the SBSTA on specific capacity-building activities and possible capacity-building programme. E. Mechanisms Assess current initiatives on technology transfer related to subregional, regional and international climate change related mechanisms and institutions. Identify linkages and possible collaboration with other groups within the Convention (e.g., Least Developed Countries Expert Group, Consultative Group of Experts, clean development mechanism executive board) and other conventions, as appropriate. Technical paper and recommendations to the SBSTA. Recommendations to the SBSTA. Identify ways to facilitate development of regional and subregional projects on research and development, including national systems of innovation and innovative options for development and transfer of technologies. Analyse ways to strengthen institutional capacities and promote networking of national focal points. F. Cross-cutting activities Analyse the technology transfer component in the guidelines of the national communications and the national adaptation programmes of action in relation to adaptation technologies. Analyse the types of international networks of stakeholders including business and financial communities that need to be established or strengthened to support effective technology transfer. SBSTA19 Compile and synthesize information on capacity-building needs, enabling environments and technology information contained in national communications, in needs assessments reports and under the technology transfer consultative process. Technical paper and possible recommendations to the SBSTA on enhancing reporting on enabling environments in both Annex I and non-Annex I Party national communications. Respond to needs for technology information, capacity-building, and programmes to create enabling environments identified during technology needs assessments. Recommendations to the SBSTA on organizing regional workshops (Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean and Eastern Europe/former Soviet Union) to assess the use of the handbook for assessing technology needs and to improve access to information in existing global and regional/thematic networks and clearing houses. Recommendations for enhancing existing technology information centres and networks. Annex III LIST OF DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE AT ITS SIXTEENTH SESSION FCCC/SBSTA/2001/8 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its fifteenth session, held at Marrakesh, from 29 October to 6 November 2001 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBSTA/2002/1/Add.1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary. Addendum. Supplementary provisional agenda FCCC/SBSTA/2002/2 Methodological issues. Guidelines on reporting and and Corr.1 review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5). Report of an expert meeting to assess experiences in the use of the UNFCCC reporting and review guidelines FCCC/SBSTA/2002/2/Add.1 Addendum. Proposal for revision of the UNFCCC guidelines for the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBSTA/2002/2/Add.2 Addendum. Proposal for revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories FCCC/SBSTA/2002/2/Add.3 Addendum. Proposal for revision of the guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories. Tables of the common reporting format FCCC/SBSTA/2002/3 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. Cooperation with other conventions: progress report on the work of the Joint Liaison Group between the secretariats of the UNFCCC, the UNCCD and the CBD FCCC/SBSTA/2002/4 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Workshop on the terms of reference and an agenda for work relating to afforestation and reforestation activities under the clean development mechanism in the first commitment period FCCC/SBSTA/2002/5 Methodological issues. Guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5). Report on experience with the technical review process (implementation of decision 6/CP.5) FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.1 Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues related to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons. Synthesis of information submitted by Parties and organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.2 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Article 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Report on intersessional consultations on registries FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.3 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Article 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Pending parts of the guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.4 Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Report of the workshop on the Third Assessment Report FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.5 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Article 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Report of a workshop to elaborate draft technical guidance on adjustments under Article 5.2 of the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.6 Development and transfer of technologies. Report on the technology information expert workshop, Beijing, China, 18 - 19 April 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.7 Development and transfer of technologies. Report of the expert meeting on methodologies for technology needs assessments, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 23 - 25 April 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.8 Proposal on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy. Report on the UNFCCC workshop on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy: exchange of information and views, Whistler, Canada, 7 - 8 May 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.9 Methodological issues. Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: uniform reporting format. Report on the pre-sessional workshop on the revised uniform reporting format for activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase, Bonn, 2 - 3 June 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.10 Article 6 of the Convention: education, training and public awareness. Report of the workshop on the development of a work programme on Article 6 of the Convention FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.1 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: and Add.1 - 2 definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol in the first commitment period. Views from Parties on the organization of a workshop, terms of reference and an agenda for work relating to afforestation and reforestation activities under the clean development mechanism FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.2 Methodological issues. Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: uniform reporting format. Submissions from Parties on their experience with the pilot phase FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3 Proposal on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy. and Add.1 - 2 Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.4 Other matters. Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4.6 of the Convention. Submission from a Party FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.5 Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.6 Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone and Add.1 layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: Issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.7 "Good practices" in policies and measures. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.8 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Views from Parties on the expedited procedure for the review for reinstatement of eligibility of a Party included in Annex I to the Convention to use the mechanisms established under Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.9 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. and Add.1 Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.10 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. Interim report to the sixteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice of the UNFCCC by the Global Climate Observing System FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.11 Methodological issues. Guidelines on reporting and review and Add.1 - 2 of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5). Views from Parties on the proposals for revision of the guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.12 Development and transfer of technologies. Technology information system. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.13 Article 6 of the Convention: education, training and public awareness. Submissions from Parties FCCC/TP/2002/2 Treatment of confidential information by international treaty bodies and organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.1 Report on the session. Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its sixteenth session FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.2 Methodological issues. Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: uniform reporting format FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.2/Add.1 Methodological issues. Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase: uniform reporting format. Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.3 Cooperation with relevant international organizations (Cooperation with scientific organizations) FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.4 Cooperation with relevant international organizations (Cooperation with other conventions) FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.5 Methodological issues. Guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5) FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.5/Add.1 Methodological issues. Guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5). Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.5/Add.2 Methodological issues. Guidelines on reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in annex I to the Convention (implementing decisions 3/CP.5 and 6/CP.5). Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.6 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.6/Add.1 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.7 Other matters. Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.8 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.9 Development and transfer of technologies FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.10 "Good practices" in policies and measures FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.11 Article 6 of the Convention: education, training and public and Rev.1 awareness FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.11/Add.1 Article 6 of the Convention: education, training and public and Rev.1 awareness. Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.12 Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.1 Development and transfer of technologies. Expert group on technology transfer. Draft programme of work, 2002 - 2003 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.2 Methodological issues. Development of good practice guidance and other information for land-use, land-use change and forestry FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.3 Third assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on and Rev.1 Climate Change FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.4 Cooperation with relevant international organizations and Rev.1 (Cooperation with United Nations bodies) FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.5 Issues related to cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy FCCC/SBSTA/2002/CRP.6 Issues related to the implementation of article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/2001/2 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its fourteenth session Bonn, 24 - 27 July 2001 FCCC/SBSTA/2001/INF.5 "Good practices" in policies and measures. Workshop on "good practices" in policies and measures FCCC/TP/2002/1 Biome-specific forest definitions FCCC/SBI/2001/MISC.3 National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Third national communications: review and the roster of experts FCCC/IDR.1/HRV and Add.1 Report on the in-depth review of the first national communication of Croatia 