%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|CENTRAL ASIA|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|

First session New York, 8-19 April 2002 Block II: Article VII Proposed elements for inclusion in the report of the Preparatory Committee on the work of its first session Working paper submitted by the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan 1. Since the holding of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the issue of the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the world on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States concerned, has become firmly established on the international disarmament agenda. In the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" agreed on at the 1995 Conference of the Parties to the Treaty it was stated that the development of nuclear-weapon-free zones should be encouraged as a matter of priority. In the period since 1995, two new nuclear-weapon-free zones have been created, in South-East Asia and Africa. The treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba are continuing to make a significant contribution to the establishment of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, which is an important step towards the attainment of the ultimate goal of eliminating all types of nuclear weapons under strict and effective international control. Following the entry into force of the Pelindaba Treaty upon accession of 114 States parties, nuclear-weapon-free zones will cover almost the entire southern hemisphere in addition to Antarctica, the seabed and outer space. 2. Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are unanimous in their view that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the world contributes significantly to nuclear disarmament. Recent events in the world have confirmed yet again the urgent need to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, as reflected in the work of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. They also demonstrate the importance of regional approaches to disarmament and non-proliferation, which can strengthen the global non-proliferation regime. 3. Proceeding from their common conviction that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones contributes significantly to the maintenance and consolidation of peace and security at the global and regional levels, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan launched an initiative for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of Central Asia, as reflected in the relevant provisions of the Almaty Declaration of 28 February 1997, the statement issued at Tashkent on 15 September 1997 by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan and the Communiqué issued on 10 July 1998 by the Bishkek Consultative Meeting. 4. The Preparatory Committee notes with satisfaction the adoption by consensus by the United Nations General Assembly of resolution 52/38 S, of 9 December 1997, resolution 53/77 A, of 9 December 1998 and resolution 55/33 W, of 20 November 2000, entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia", in which the Assembly calls upon all States to support the initiative aimed at the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia, commends the concrete steps taken by the States of the region in preparing the legal groundwork for their initiative and requests the Secretary-General to provide assistance to the Central Asian States in the preparation of the form and elements of an agreement on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. 5. The Preparatory Committee also welcomes the practical steps taken by the Central Asian States towards the implementation of their initiative. These steps have included the holding, on 15 and 16 September 1997, of the Tashkent International Conference on Central Asia as a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, in which official delegations from the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and 54 Member States, including the permanent members of the Security Council, took part, and also meetings of experts in Geneva, Bishkek, Tashkent, and Sapporo, Japan. Experts from nuclear-weapon States, the United Nations and IAEA took part in the Bishkek meeting, which was held on 9 and 10 July 1998. These meetings were of great importance in achieving substantial progress in the preparation of a draft treaty on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. The Central Asian States welcome the continuing assistance of the international organizations and States concerned in connection with the advancement of this process. 6. The Preparatory Committee also refers to the report of Main Committee III of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which notes that there have been exceptional instances in which serious environmental consequences have resulted from uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel-cycle activities in the production and testing of nuclear weapons. The Preparatory Committee reiterates the appeal of the 1995 Conference to all Governments and international organizations that have expertise in the field of cleanup and disposal of radioactive contaminants to consider giving appropriate assistance as may be requested for remedial purposes in these affected areas. 7. The Preparatory Committee notes that in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II), the Conference expresses support for the intention and commitment of the five Central Asian States to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in their region, welcomes the practical steps they have taken towards implementation of their initiative, and also notes with satisfaction the substantial progress made by the Central Asian States in drawing up and agreeing on a draft treaty on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. The Preparatory Committee also refers to the working paper of the 2000 Review Conference (NPT/CONF.2000/MC.II/WP.15), submitted by the five Central Asian States regarding the advancement of the initiative to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in their region. 8. The Preparatory Committee notes the substantial progress which has been made by the Central Asian States with the direct support of the United Nations, in particular the Secretary-General, the Department for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, and IAEA in the process of drawing up and agreeing on a draft treaty on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. The Central Asian States appeal to the Preparatory Committee to reflect this progress in the report on the work of its first session. 9. The Central Asian States remain firmly committed to the continuation of the work to implement the initiative for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia and, in this connection, intend to make every effort to bring to a successful conclusion the process of drawing up an agreed text for a treaty on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. 