%%%JUDGES|ELECTION OF MEMBERS|

Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Working Group on the Assembly of States Parties Preparatory Documents New York, 1-12 July 2002 Election of judges Proposal submitted as a basis for discussion by the Assembly of States Parties by Cambodia, China, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Malaysia, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Solomon Islands, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand and Viet Nam Insert the following text under section B, "Election of judges", in document PCNICC/2002/WGASP-PD/L.6 and Corr.1: 1. The persons elected to the Court shall be the 18 candidates who obtain the highest number of votes and a two-thirds majority of the States Parties present and voting. However, no more than 13 candidates from list A and no more than 9 candidates from list B shall be considered elected. 2. States Parties shall, in the election of judges, take into account the need for the representation of the principal legal systems of the world. They shall take into account the need to include judges with legal expertise on specific issues, including but not limited to, violence against women and children. 3. Each State Party shall vote for a maximum number of 18 candidates, whereby it shall observe the following minimum voting requirements: (a) Each State Party shall vote for at least 9 candidates from list A and at least 5 candidates from list B; (b) Each State Party shall vote for at least: - 2 candidates from the African Group, - 2 candidates from the Latin American and Caribbean Group, - 2 candidates from the Western European and Other States Group, - 2 candidates from the Asian Group, and - 2 candidates from the Eastern European Group. If the number of candidates from a regional group is not at least one more than the respective minimum voting requirement, this requirement shall be equal to one less than the number of candidates from that region; (c) Each State Party shall vote for at least six candidates from each gender. If the number of candidates from one gender is less than eight, the minimum voting requirement for that gender shall be equal to two less than the number of candidates for that gender. 3 bis. If, after the first ballot, fewer than 18 candidates are elected, the maximum number of votes by a State Party, which is 18 for the first ballot, shall be reduced, for each subsequent ballot, by subtracting the number of elected candidates. 4. If, after the first ballot, fewer than 18 candidates are elected, the following adjustments shall apply to subsequent ballots: (a) The minimum voting requirement referred to in lists A and B shall be adjusted, list by list, by subtracting the number of elected candidates; (b) The minimum regional voting requirement shall be adjusted, group by group, by subtracting the number of elected candidates; (c) The minimum gender voting requirement shall be adjusted, gender by gender, by subtracting the number of elected candidates. 5. Each minimum voting requirement shall be adjusted until that requirement can no longer be met, whereupon the use of that requirement shall be discontinued. If an adjusted voting requirement can be met individually, but not jointly, the use of all regional and gender voting requirements shall be discontinued. If following four ballots 18 judges still have not yet been elected, these minimum voting requirements shall be discontinued. 6. Ballot papers shall be organized in a manner facilitating such an election process, and minimum voting requirements, adjusted requirements, as well as the discontinuation of any requirements shall be clearly indicated on the ballot papers. Clear instructions and sufficient time shall be given for each ballot. 7. The President of the Assembly of States Parties shall be responsible for the election procedure, including the determination, adjustment or discontinuation of the minimum voting requirements. Explanatory note (1) The proposal seeks to implement, to the extent possible, the requirements of the Rome Statute set forth in article 36 (8) (a). (2) An important goal of the proposal is to ensure that the principle of geographical representation is recognized in the election of the judges to the Court beginning in its first election. It ensures that all regional groups will have an equitable minimum number of judges in the Court. States Parties must adhere to these minimum voting requirements to safeguard the equitable regional representation of judges in the Court. 