%%%CEASEFIRES|BURUNDI|BURUNDI SITUATION|PEACEBUILDING|

Letter dated 11 October 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to draw your attention to the statement issued on 10 October 2002 by the Presidency of the European Union on behalf of the European Union on the outcome of the regional summit on Burundi held in Dar es Salaam on 7 October 2002 (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of this letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Ellen Margrethe Løj Permanent Representative [Original: English, French and Spanish] Statement on the outcome of the Regional Summit on Burundi, held in Dar es Salaam on 7 October 2002, issued on 10 October 2002 by the Presidency of the European Union on behalf of the European Union The European Union welcomes the outcome of the Regional Summit on Burundi held in Dar es Salaam on 7 October 2002, which it considers a step in the right direction, towards an all-inclusive ceasefire and the implementation of the Arusha Agreement. The European Union welcomes the signing of a ceasefire agreement between CNDD-FDD (Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye) and PALIPEHUTU-FNL (Alain Mugabarabona) respectively and the Government of Burundi. The European Union supports the time schedule set up by the Regional Summit for concluding a ceasefire agreement between CNDD-FDD (Pierre Nkurunziza) and FNL (Agathon Rwasa) respectively and the Government of Burundi. The European Union calls on all partners to seize this opportunity for peace and strongly urges all the above-mentioned parties to take on the responsibility, at the highest level, of concluding ceasefire agreements within 30 days. The European Union supports the Regional Summit's call on all the signatories to the Arusha Agreement to facilitate the integration into the transitional institutions, including the army and other security forces, of the signatories to the ceasefire agreements. The European Union calls on the Burundian parties to cease immediately all military activities, to respect human rights and to protect the civilian population. The European Union urges all countries in the region to cease all support for the military activities of the armed groups involved in the Burundi conflict. The European Union encourages the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi to enter into an agreement to normalize their relations, building on their Agreement signed in January 2002. The European Union, finally, repeats its continued support for the regional efforts, including those of the facilitators, to bring an end to the violence in Burundi with the view to creating peace, stability and development for the benefit of all the people of Burundi. The Central and Eastern European countries associated with the European Union, the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the EFTA countries members of the European Economic Area align themselves with this statement. 