%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|VERIFICATION|IRAQ|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Letter dated 11 December 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the daily report for 11 December 2002 on the activities of the inspection teams of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq. I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed A. Al-Douri Permanent Representative Daily report on the activities of the UNMOVIC and IAEA inspection teams in Iraq Daily activity report for 11 December 2002 The activities of the UNMOVIC and IAEA inspection teams on Wednesday, 11 December 2002, were as follows: I. UNMOVIC inspection team I The team set out from its base at the Canal Hotel in Baghdad at 8.27 a.m. The team, which consisted of 10 inspectors and was headed by Ms. Kay Mereish, arrived at 9.10 a.m. at the Al-Razi Centre for Research and the Production of Diagnostic Kits, which belongs to the Ministry of Industry and Mining. The Al-Razi Centre is located in the Abu Ghraib area north of Baghdad, near the Veterinary Faculty. The Centre, one of the medical sites subject to the ongoing monitoring regime, specializes in research on diagnostic equipment and produces patches for diagnosing allergic reactions to antibiotics, chemical solutions and pigments. On arrival at the site, the team was divided into two groups: Group I: The members of group I had a meeting with the director of the Centre and sought clarifications on the work of the Centre and on the half-yearly declarations on the Centre. They asked whether there had been any new developments and sought clarifications on the nature of research at the Centre, its products and product end-users. Group II: The members of group II inspected all the Centre's facilities, especially the laboratories, the planning and monitoring section, the animal pavilions and stores, and asked questions about the activities conducted in those facilities. The team completed its task at 2.45 p.m. and arrived back at the Canal Hotel at 3.20 p.m. II. UNMOVIC inspection team II UNMOVIC inspection team II set out from the Canal Hotel at 8.35 a.m. The team, which included 15 inspectors and was headed by Mr. William Jolley, set out for the Fatah Company, which belongs to the Karamah State Establishment located in the Tajiyat area, 10 kilometres north of Baghdad. The inspection team arrived at the factory at 9.15 a.m. and split up into two groups: Group I: The members of group I held a meeting with the director of the company and sought clarifications on the various sections and units of the company, its products, the bodies that provide assistance to it and the end-users of its products. The group leader requested plans of the site and its different sections; they were made available to him. Members of the group examined the production machinery and the components produced in the production workshop and compared their observations with the six-monthly statements they had received previously. They then visited the machine shop. Group II: The members of group II visited the turnery, photographed the machines and noted their characteristics. They examined the computer containing the software programmes that provides coordinates to the machines during the turning process. The inspection team completed its visit at 12.45 p.m. and returned to the Canal Hotel at 1.10 p.m. III. IAEA inspection team I The following three groups of inspectors set out from the Canal Hotel: Group I: Group I, led by Nicolai Lazariev, was composed of four inspectors. It set out from the Canal Hotel at 8.25 a.m. and reached the Iraq Atomic Energy Agency site at Tuwaitha at 8.50 a.m. The group's task was to replace the tags of the two nuclear materials stores that had been inspected the day before and two days previously. The seals on the main and side doors were replaced as well as the tag on one of the containers, which was filled with uranium dioxide. All in all, 21 tags were changed. The members of the group completed their task at 12.20 p.m. and arrived at the Canal Hotel at 12.45 p.m. Group II: Group II, which included three inspectors, was led by Mr. Craig Lavender. It set out from the Canal Hotel at 8.25 a.m. and reached the Saddam Public Establishment in Amiriyah, in the Fallujah area north of Baghdad. The Saddam Public Establishment is one of the companies of the Military Industrialization Commission and was subject to the ongoing monitoring regime. Inspection teams from the former Special Commission had carried out several unannounced inspections of the site. The Saddam Public Establishment specializes in mechanical engineering and manufactures components for conventional military equipment. Members of group II examined the buildings and workshops of the Saddam Establishment and checked all the machinery subject to the ongoing monitoring regime and the new machines, in order to confirm that they were not subject to that regime. They then checked the tags placed by IAEA on the machines covered by the monitoring regime. They took measurements of one of the computer numerical controlled (CNC) machines and also took samples of iron shards. Members of group II sought clarifications on the nature of the work the Company was currently doing. They completed their visit at 11.50 a.m. and arrived five minutes later at the Amir factory, which is adjacent to the Saddam Public Enterprise and in fact belongs to that Enterprise. The Amir Company was one of the sites included in the ongoing monitoring regime and was inspected regularly by teams of the former Special Commission. It specializes in heavy mechanical engineering for major public works and does not engage in any activity related to missiles with authorized ranges that are covered by the ongoing monitoring regime. However, this in fact came under the regime at the time because, according to the former Special Commission, it had the capacity to manufacture missile components. The members of group II visited all the technical workshops, inspected the machines and equipment, checked the tags that had been placed on the machines and equipment and sought clarifications on the nature of the work conducted at the factory from 1998 to date. They completed their visit at 12.50 p.m. and arrived at the Canal Hotel at 2.17 p.m. Group III: The group included four inspectors and was headed by Mr. Robert Kelly. It set out from the Canal Hotel at 8.25 a.m. and arrived at the Ibn Sina Company, located 35 kilometres north of Baghdad, at 9.18 a.m. The Company specializes in research on industrial chemicals and the manufacture of the organic and inorganic raw materials required by Iraq's civilian industries. It provides services to all faculties and scientific centres. The Company also undertakes various chemical analyses. Immediately upon their arrival at the Ibn Sina Company, members of group III held a long meeting with its director-general and asked him questions on the Company's work and its plans for the future, to which he gave adequate responses. They then visited the company's stores in order to check the tags placed by IAEA on the subject to the ongoing monitoring regime. They also visited the silicon industries research unit and the building housing the analysis laboratories, and examined and photographed its equipment. Members of group III completed their tour at 1 p.m. and set out for the Amal factory, a laboratory that specializes in the manufacture of liquid nitrogen, which belongs to the same Company. They inspected the laboratory, inquired about its production capacity and took a number of photographs. They completed their visit at 1.25 p.m. and arrived at the Canal Hotel at 2.17 p.m. IV. IAEA inspection team II IAEA inspection team II spent the night of 10 to 11 December 2002 in the housing complex belonging to the National Phosphates Company, which is located in Akashat in western Iraq. The team started work at 8.40 a.m. on 11 December 2002, and was divided into three groups: Group I: composed of three inspectors, was led by Mr. Phillip Caulfield. It arrived at the site of the National Phosphates Company at 8.45 a.m. and held a long meeting with its director-general, who was asked to explain the means of production of concentrated and diluted phosphoric acid and the production of different types and quantities of fertilizer. Clarifications were also sought on the Freon gas project, which was suspended in 1990. The group examined the plans on the project and kept a copy thereof. It also inspected the unit for the maintenance of the thermal alternators and boilers. Using hand-held devices, the group conducted radiometric measurements and took samples of raw calcium phosphate, samples from the calcium phosphate concentrate department and a sample of triple super phosphate fertilizer. Group II: comprising three inspectors and led by David Hayes, arrived at the site of the National Phosphate Company at 8.45 a.m. It took water, soil, plant and steel samples from different areas of the site. Using hand-held devices, the group conducted a radiometric survey of all the facilities at the site in order to detect any alleged nuclear activity or undeclared radiation sources. Group III: toured the exterior of the site and conducted a radiometric survey of stores belonging to other industrial enterprises and inspected the contents of such stores. The group visited the main water station that supplies the site and all the buildings and inspected the residual water tanks. The inspection team completed its tasks at 12.55 p.m. and returned to Baghdad. It arrived at the Canal Hotel at 1.40 p.m. V. Communications group A member of the communications group set out for Rashid airport at 9 a.m. accompanied by two vehicles carrying sections of the communications tower. Iraqi officials erected the tower on the airport control tower building. The erection of the tower was completed at 2.50 p.m., at which time the UNMOVIC official returned to the Canal Hotel. VI. Remarks The Ibn Sina enterprise, which specializes in research on industrial chemicals, and which the inspection teams inspected for the first time this year, was accused in the report of United Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair of conducting proscribed activities relating to the production of chemical weapons. 