%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|INTERNAL SECURITY|BORDER TRAFFIC|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|YUGOSLAVIA|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

Letter dated 20 December 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to convey the report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering the period from 1 to 31 October 2002 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the Kosovo Force 1. Over the reporting period (1-31 October 2002), there were just over 31,500 troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre. 2. The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of October remained generally stable. Security 3. On 27 October, KFOR assisted the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police when Mr. Uke Bytyci, the Mayor of Suva Reka, was shot dead, following the voting in the second municipal elections in Kosovo. 4. On 10 October, KFOR troops equipped with anti-riot gear were asked to support UNMIK police and the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) during violent demonstrations between Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs in Pec. During the confrontations, UNMIK police responded to the violence with tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse the crowds. One soldier, one KPS policeman and two UNMIK police officers suffered minor injuries. 5. KFOR continued to carry out search operations throughout Kosovo in its campaign against weapons smuggling and any activity of ethnic Albanian armed groups. Items confiscated for the month included 66 assorted weapons, 127 grenades and mines, and 9,341 rounds of ammunition. 6. On 14 October, the KFOR Commander released his general directive setting out his intentions and operational priorities for the period from October 2002 to March 2003. Efforts will be focused on supporting the UNMIK campaign against extremism and organized crime. Border/Boundary security 7. KFOR continued to monitor border and boundary security during the reporting period and prevented illegal crossings. The number of incidents involving attempts to cross borders increased slightly compared to the previous month. 8. On 19 October, KFOR signed a Memorandum of Understanding with UNMIK border police covering the transfer of responsibilities and development of joint operations at the border crossing points at Prusit and Morines. Cooperation and compliance by the parties 9. The security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continue to remain in compliance with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical Agreement. 10. There were five cases of non-compliance reported within the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) during the month of October. One case involved the arrest by UNMIK police of a KPC member on an international warrant for murder. Forty-two cases involving KPC were still open at the end of October. 11. The KPC Infrastructure Working Group submitted its final report to the UNMIK KPC Coordinator in early October. The final agreement reached between UNMIK, KPC and KFOR is to maintain 41 active sites out of the current total of 60. Cooperation with international organizations 12. KFOR and UNMIK are working together on a draft resolution on Pristina Airport setting out a framework for the transition of airport operations to UNMIK/civilian control as soon as practicable. 13. KFOR assisted the Kosovo Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning in organizing a meeting on radioactive risks in Mitrovica. Concerns centred on small quantities of low-grade radioactive substances from old lighting rods and radiation-measuring devices (dosimeter). The materials were collected by KFOR secured in concrete containers and eventually transported by KPC to the Prvi tunnel in the Trepca compound. Outlook 14. The elections in Kosovo did not significantly disturb the security situation, which is assessed as improving overall. 