%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|ARMED INCIDENTS|BORDER INCIDENTS|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|UGANDA|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|

Letter dated 1 February 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council On instructions of my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you a copy of a letter dated 31 January 2002 from the Minister of Defence of Uganda, Hon. Amama Mbabazi, addressed to H.E. Amos Ngongi Namanga, Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, expressing concern at the continued deteriorating security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (see annex). I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka, Ph.D. Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations Continued deteriorating security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo Reference is made to my earlier communication to you dated 14 January 2002 on the deteriorating security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Firstly, I would like to inform you that there is continued fighting in areas of Bafwasende, Njania, Poko and Butembo. We understand that, in fact, some towns have changed hands. Mr. Bemba denies his force is involved in these unfortunate occurrences. We are further informed that Roger Lumbala is involved in some of the fighting but we do not have good contact with him to substantiate these allegations. Secondly, in the Bunia area, as you know, we have withdrawn our forces from the countryside and concentrated them at the airport. There are reports of killings of civilians and of combatants in the hinterland since that withdrawal of our forces. In the two weeks since I last wrote to you, there have been many incidents of attacks by one group against others and ambushes against road users to the extent that travel by public roads has ceased. For example on 14 January 2002 in Mokambo (Djugu), along the Lake Albert shores, 35 civilians of the Alur tribe were killed and 70 houses burnt down. On 15 January 2002 three localities of Molabo (Djugu), 28 kilometres to the north of Bunia, were set ablaze and an unspecified number of people killed. On 16 January 2002 in Kilo (Djugu), about 45 kilometres north-west of Bunia, two localities were set ablaze and an unspecified number of people killed. In Bambu, about 30 kilometres north-west of Bunia, the road to Mongbwalo has been cut off by armed tribesmen who still patrol the road armed with automatic rifles. On 26 January 2002, three motor vehicles travelling to Mongbwalo were stopped, property was looted and the occupants feared killed. In Loga, Lendu combatants are reorganizing to attack Katoto, Inga barrier and Niizi. As a result of these and many other similar incidents reportedly mainly perpetuated by Lendu tribesmen, the civilian population of other groups are running to Bunia Town or towards the Uganda border. It appears to us that some elements are arming these groups to commit genocide on others. This state of affairs is obviously not acceptable to Uganda, the local Congolese or the international community. The security situation in these areas is threatening our border security and this has far reaching implications on the stability and future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish, on behalf of the Uganda Government, to invite the United Nations (United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)) to come in and work with us to find a solution to this problem. In the meantime Uganda may have to redeploy the Uganda military, the UPDF, in the areas affected to stop the carnage. What do you advise? We need your clear opinion on this proposal before we decide what to do. (Signed) Amama Mbabazi Minister of Defence CC: Force Commander -- MONUC 