%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|PARTICIPANTS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL TD/B/EX(15)/3 11 April 1997 Original: ENGLISH TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BOARD Fifteenth executive session Geneva, 20 June 1997 Item 4(b) of the provisional agenda NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS PARTICIPATING IN THE ACTIVITIES OF UNCTAD Note by the UNCTAD secretariat CONTENTS Paragraphs I. Mandate 1 - 2 II. The Economic and Social Council and non-governmental organizations 3 - 11 III. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and non-governmental organizations 12 - 17 IV. Decisions of the Conference 18 V. Re-classification of non-governmental organizations in the special category in consultative status with UNCTAD 19 - 22 VI. Proposed action by the Board 23 - 25 Annexes Pages I. Arrangements for the participation of non-governmental organizations in the activities of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 12 - 18 II. Non-governmental organizations in status with UNCTAD 19 - 38 GE.97-50718 page I. MANDATE The Trade and Development Board at its forty-third session noted that the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) had adopted resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996 entitled "Consultative relationship between the United Nations and non-governmental organizations", which updates the arrangements on consultative relations with non-governmental organizations set out in Economic and Social Council resolution 1296(XLIV) of 23 May 1968. In view of this development, the Board noted also that the UNCTAD secretariat would review the arrangements for the participation of non-governmental organizations in the activities of UNCTAD, as contained in Board decision 43(VII) of 20 September 1968, and would report to the Board at an executive session.TD/B/43/12 (Vol.I), Chapter II, para. 20. This note has been prepared by the secretariat as a result of its review of the arrangements for the participation of non-governmental organizations in the activities of UNCTAD. The note: (i) reviews briefly the rules and procedures of ECOSOC and of UNCTAD on consultative relations with non-governmental organizations; (ii) recommends changes in the UNCTAD rules and procedure on consultative relations with non-governmental organizations; and (iii) recommends a reclassification of special category non-governmental organizations in consultative status with UNCTAD. II. THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS The Charter of the United Nations, in article 71, mandates the Economic and Social Council to make suitable arrangements with non-governmental organizations concerned with economic and social matters. Arrangements for consultations are made for the purpose of enabling the Council and its subsidiary bodies to secure expert information or advice from organizations having special competence in subjects of interest, and to enable organizations that represent important elements of public opinion to express their views. At the time of writing, the Council had granted consultative status to 1,215 non-governmental organizations (General category: 79; Special category: 489; Roster: 647). Since 1968, Council resolution 1296(XLIV) has provided rules and procedures concerning consultative status with ECOSOC and its subsidiary bodies. The resolution establishes the conditions to be fulfilled by non-governmental organizations applying for consultative status, the rights and obligations of organizations in consultative status, the categories of non-governmental organizations, procedures for suspension or withdrawal of consultative status, the role and functions of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, and the responsibilities of the United Nations Secretariat in supporting the consultative relationship. To be eligible for consultative status, a non-governmental organization must have an established headquarters, a democratically adopted constitution, authority to speak for its members, an international structure, appropriate mechanisms of accountability, and democratic and transparent decision-making processes. A non-governmental organization applying for status should be international in nature. The organization should have a representative character and a recognized international standing. It should represent a substantial proportion, and express the views, of major sections of the population or of the organized persons within the particular field of its competence, covering, where possible, a substantial number of countries in different regions of the world. National non-governmental organizations, until recently, had only limited rights of participation in the activities of ECOSOC and its subsidiary bodies. If invited, they were authorized to present written statements to ECOSOC and its subsidiary bodies. If invited, they were authorized to address the subsidiary bodies of ECOSOC. National non-governmental organizations, after consultation with the Member State concerned, were placed on a roster. The Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1993/80 of 30 July 1993, decided to undertake a general review of arrangements for consultation with non-governmental organizations, with a view to updating resolution 1296 (XLIV) of 23 May 1968, as well as introducing coherence in the rules governing the participation of non-governmental organizations in international conferences convened by the United Nations. The task of the Council was to bring the provisions concerning consultative status into line with the recent changes in the relationship between the United Nations and non-governmental organizations. These changes have been most visible in the series of United Nations Conferences held in the 1990s. At these conferences, many non-governmental organizations, although national, demonstrated an international perspective and programme of work. Their direct experience of conditions within their country or region gave depth and reality to discussions on global issues. On 25 July 1996, the Council adopted by consensus resolution 1996/31 which contains revised rules on consultative relations with non-governmental organizations. An important outcome of the Council's review is that national, regional and subregional non-governmental organizations, as well as the national affiliates of international non-governmental organizations, are now eligible for consultative status with the Economic and Social Council. The resolution provides that consultative relations may be established with international, regional, subregional and national organizations, and that the Council, in considering applications for consultative status, should ensure, to the extent possible, participation of non-governmental organizations from all regions, and particularly from developing countries, in order to help achieve a just, balanced, effective and genuine involvement of non-governmental organizations from all regions and areas of the world (para. 5). The resolution provides also that regional, subregional and national organizations, including those affiliated to an international organization already in status may be admitted provided that they can demonstrate that their programme of work is of direct relevance to the aims and purposes of the United Nations and, in the case of national organizations, after consultation with the Member State concerned (para. 9). The resolution makes a distinction between non-governmental organizations. General consultative status is reserved for non-governmental organizations whose area of work covers most of the issues on the agenda of the Council (para. 22). Non-governmental organizations that have competence in only a few of the fields of activity of the Council are eligible for special consultative status (para. 23). Non-governmental organizations that do not qualify for consultative status can be included in a roster, which lists organizations that can make occasional and useful contributions to the work of the Council or its subsidiary bodies (para. 24). Other significant changes introduced by ECOSOC resolution 1993/80 of 25 July 1996 are: (a) The introduction of rules on the participation of non-governmental organizations in international conferences convened by the United Nations, and their preparatory process (paragraphs 41 to 54 of the resolution); (b) The improvement of Secretariat support arrangements for non-governmental organizations (paragraph 68 to 70 of the resolution); (c) The Secretary-General may request a non-governmental organization to carry out a study, subject to the financial regulations and rules of the United Nations (paragraph 66 of the resolution). III. THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS The General Assembly, in its resolution 1995 (XIX), as amended, entitled "Establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as an organ of the General Assembly" decided, in paragraph 11, that the Board may make arrangements for representatives of non-governmental organizations concerned with matters of trade and trade as related to development to participate, without vote, in the deliberations of the Board and in those of the subsidiary bodies and working groups established by it. The Board, at its second session, in decision 14 (II) of 7 September 1965, approved arrangements for the participation of non-governmental organizations in the activities of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. The arrangements were revised by decision 43 (VII) of 20 September 1968 adopted by the Board at its seventh session. The text of the latter decision is reproduced in annex I to this note. The Board establishes consultative relations with non-governmental organizations for the purpose of enabling the Conference, the Board and its subsidiary bodies to secure information or advice from organizations having special competence in the subjects for which relationship arrangements are made, and to enable organizations which represent important elements of public opinion to express their views. The participation of a non-governmental organization in the activities of UNCTAD therefore concerns those subjects for which that organization has a special competence or in which it has a special interest. Consultative status is normally granted to non-governmental organizations that meet the conditions set out in paragraph 1 to 11 of the Board decision 43 (VII), namely the aims and the purposes of the organization should be in conformity with the spirit, purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations; the organization should be concerned with matters of trade and of trade as related to development, and with matters falling within the terms of the functions which devolve upon UNCTAD; the organization should undertake to support the work of UNCTAD and to promote knowledge of its principles and activities, in accordance with its own aims and purposes and the nature and scope of its competence and activities; the organization should be of recognized standing and should represent a substantial proportion of the organized persons within the particular field in which it operates; the organization should have an established headquarters with an executive officer, and it should have a conference, convention or other policy-making body; the organization should have authority to speak for its members through its authorized representatives; the organization should be international in its structure, with members who exercise voting rights in relation to policies or action of international organizations; and the organization should not be a member of a group of organizations that has consultative status already. Non-governmental organizations in status receive notifications of and documentation for conferences and meetings convened by UNCTAD. Their representatives are entitled to participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the public meetings of the intergovernmental bodies. They may make oral or written statements on matters related to an item of the agenda on which they have a special competence or interest. National non-governmental organizations, in the past, have been placed on a Register in accordance with Section III of Board decision 43(VII). There are seven national organizations in the Register. IV. DECISIONS OF THE CONFERENCE The Conference has repeatedly called for greater collaboration between UNCTAD and non-governmental organizations. At its eighth session, the Conference called for closer cooperation with non-governmental organizations."The Cartagena Commitment" (TD/364/Rev.1), para. 84. At its ninth session, the Conference reaffirmed the importance of involving non-governmental actors in the activities of UNCTAD."A Partnership for Growth and Development" (TD/378), para. 117. V. RECLASSIFICATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE SPECIAL CATEGORY IN CONSULTATIVE STATUS WITH UNCTAD Applications for consultative status by non-governmental organizations are received by the Secretary-General of UNCTAD. They are approved by the Board on the recommendation of the Bureau. At the time of writing, consultative status had been granted to 173 non-governmental organizations. Non-governmental organizations in consultative status are classified for the purpose of their participation in the activities of UNCTAD. Board decision 43 (VII) of 20 September 1968 makes a distinction between general and special category organizations. General category organizations (87 at present) are concerned with most of the activities of UNCTAD. Their representatives are entitled to participate in the public meetings of all the intergovernmental bodies of UNCTAD. Special category organizations (86 at present) are concerned with only a few of the activities of UNCTAD. Their representatives are entitled to participate in public meetings in discussions on specific matters falling within the terms of reference of the Board or of one or two Commissions. Each special category organization is classified against a named intergovernmental body. The names of the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with UNCTAD are given in annex II to this note. The Conference, at its ninth session, restructured the institutional machinery of UNCTAD and invited the Board to establish three Commissions which are authorized to convene 10 meetings of experts per year. The resulting structure is three-tiered and consists of the Trade and Development Board, the Commissions, which report to the Board, and the meetings of experts, which report to the Commissions. The simplified intergovernmental structure calls for a review and revision by the Board of the classification of the non-governmental organizations in the special category, namely a determination of the Commissions in which they will be entitled to participate. A non-governmental organization, once it is authorized to participate in the work of a particular Commission, should be entitled to participate also in the meetings of experts convened by that Commission. In order to bring the classification of non-governmental organizations in the special category into line with the new intergovernmental machinery of UNCTAD, the Secretary-General of UNCTAD has carried out consultations with the non-governmental organizations concerned in order to ascertain their wishes with regard to their participation in the new bodies. The Secretary-General addressed a communication dated 1 October 1996 to non-governmental organizations in the special category, informing them of the changes which had taken place in the intergovernmental machinery and referring to the terms of reference of the three new Commissions established in May 1996 by the Conference. Non-governmental organizations in the special category were requested to reply and give their preferences on reclassification by 15 November 1996, failing which the secretariat would make its own proposal to the Board based on the organization's past classification and its likely areas of interest in the work of the new Commissions. The secretariat has prepared a list, as set out in annex II, reflecting the outcome of the consultations carried out and containing its recommendations on the reclassification of these non-governmental organizations in the special category. VI. PROPOSED ACTION BY THE BOARD The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, from its inception, has recognized that non-governmental organizations have an important and constructive role in furthering the purpose and principles of UNCTAD and in contributing to and supporting the institution's work. Non-governmental organizations have made a valuable contribution to the work of the United Nations by drawing attention to issues, suggesting ideas, and disseminating information to promote an informed understanding about its aims and activities. The practice of UNCTAD regarding consultative relations with non-governmental organizations is patterned on that of the Economic and Social Council. UNCTAD may wish to adopt the practice introduced recently by ECOSOC and decide that, in addition to international non-governmental organizations, consultative relationships may be established with regional, subregional and national non-governmental organizations. The UNCTAD secretariat believes that regional, subregional and national non-governmental organizations active in the field of trade and development could make a valuable contribution to the work of UNCTAD. The Board may therefore wish to amend its decision 43(VII) of 20 September 1968 entitled "Arrangements for the participation of non-governmental organizations in the activities of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" with a view to providing for the participation of international, regional, subregional and national non-governmental organizations in the activities of UNCTAD. A proposal revising Board decision 43(VII) is contained in annex I to this note. The Board may also wish to consider the reclassification of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with UNCTAD in the light of the revised intergovernmental structure of UNCTAD. The Board is invited to approve the classification of non-governmental organizations - general category and special category - contained in annex II to this note. Endnotes Annex I Explanatory note by the secretariat: Reproduced below is the text of Trade and Development Board decision 43 (VII) of 20 September 1968. The secretariat has added its proposed amendments to the text. Proposals for new text are underlined. Text proposed to be deleted is crossed out. Notes explaining the proposed amendments appear at the end of annex I. ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE PARTICIPATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT I. Criteria to be applied in the establishment of the list of non-governmental organizations provided for in rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure of the Trade and Development Board 1. The organization shall be concerned with matters of trade and of trade as related to development. In this connection the organization shall provide the necessary evidence that it is concerned with matters falling within the terms of the functions which devolve upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) under General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964. 2. In considering an application from a non-governmental organization under rule 77 of the rules of procedure, the Secretary-General of the Conference and the Bureau of the Board shall be guided by the principle that relationship arrangements are to be made, on the one hand, for the purpose of enabling the Board and/or its subsidiary bodies to secure information or advice from organizations having special competence in the subjects for which relationship arrangements are made, and, on the other hand, to enable organizations which represent important elements of public opinion to express their views. Therefore, the participation of each organization in the activities of UNCTAD should involve only the subjects for which that organization has a special competence or in which it has special interest. Consultative relationships may be established with international, regional, subregional and national organizations. The Bureau, in considering applications for consultative status, should ensure, to the extent possible, participation of non-governmental organizations from all regions, and particularly from developing countries and from countries with economies in transition, in order to help achieve a just, balanced, effective and genuine involvement of non-governmental organizations from all regions and areas of the world.The text takes into account paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of ECOSOC resolution 1996/31. 3. The aims and purposes of the organization shall be in conformity with the spirit, purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. 4. The organization shall undertake to support the work of UNCTAD and to promote knowledge of its principles and activities, in accordance with its own aims and purposes and the nature and scope of its competence and activities. 5. The organization shall be of recognized standing and shall represent a substantial proportion of the organized persons within the particular field in which it operates. To meet this requirement, a group of organizations may be represented by a joint committee or other body authorized to carry on consultations for the group as a whole. It is understood that when a minority opinion develops on a particular point within such a liaison committee, it will be presented to UNCTAD along with the opinion of the majority. 6. The organization shall have an established headquarters with an executive officer. It shall have a conference, convention or other policy-making body. In submitting its application under rule 77, the organization shall indicate the name of the executive officer, or of its authorized representative who shall be in charge of maintaining liaison with the Secretary-General of UNCTAD. 7. The organization shall have authority to speak for its members through its authorized representatives. Evidence of this authority shall be presented, if requested. 8. The Organization shall be international in its have a representativeThe word "international" should be deleted if national organizations are to be admitted. The word "representative" is taken from paragraph 12, first line, of ECOSOC resolution 1996/31. structure, with members who exercise voting rights in relation to the policies or action of the international organizations. Any international organization which is not established by intergovernmental agreement shall be considered as a non-governmental organization for the purposes of rule 77. 9. An international organization which is a member of a committee or of a group composed of international organizations which has already been included in the list provided for in rule 77 shall not normally be included in the list.This text should be deleted if it is decided to admit an affiliate of an international organization. A national organization, including one affiliated with an international organization already in status, may be admitted after consultation with the Member State concerned. The views expressed by the Member State, if any, shall be communicated to the non-governmental organization concerned, which shall have the opportunity to respond.The text takes into account paragraph 8 of ECOSOC resolution 1996/31. 10. In considering the inclusion of a non-governmental organization in the list provided for under rule 77, the Secretary-General of UNCTAD and the Bureau of the Board will take into account whether or not the field of activity of the organization is wholly or mainly within the field of a specialized agency or an intergovernmental organization of those referred to in paragraph 18 of General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX). 11. In including a non-governmental organization in the list provided for in rule 77, regard shall be had to the nature and scope of its activities and to the assistance that may be expected by UNCTAD in carrying out the functions set out in General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX). 12. In establishing the list provided for in rule 77, the Board shall distinguish between: (a) Organizations which exercise functions, and have a basic interest, in most of the activities of the Board and which would, therefore, be entitled to the rights provided for in rule 77 of the Board at meetings of the Board, and under rule 75 of the Committees at meetings of all the Committees (to be known as organizations in the General Category); and (b) Organizations which have a special competence in, and are concerned with, specific matters falling within the terms of reference of one or two Committees or of the Board itself and which would, therefore, be entitled to the rights provided for in rule 75 of the rules of procedure of the Committees concerned, and, when the Board has these specific matters under consideration, the rights provided under rule 77 of the Board (to be known as organizations in the Special Category). II. Procedures to be applied by the Bureau in discharging its functions under rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure of the Board 1. The Bureau shall meet upon the recommendation of the Secretary-General of UNCTAD whenever matters falling within the terms of rule 77 must be considered. Whenever possible, the Secretary-General of UNCTAD shall also consult the members of the Bureau by mail. 2. The Bureau shall consider the applications which have been submitted to the Secretary-General of UNCTAD by non-governmental organizations as well as the explanatory memoranda and other documentation that the organizations may have attached to their applications. In this connection, due account shall be taken of the recommendations and explanatory notes submitted by the Secretary-General regarding each application. 3. Upon the basis of the documentation submitted under paragraph 2 above and of the criteria for the establishment of relationship arrangements with non-governmental organizations, the Bureau shall then give advice to the Secretary-General of UNCTAD as to which non-governmental organizations should be included in the list provided for in rule 77. If required, the matter shall be put to the vote and decided by majority vote of the members of the Bureau present and voting. Any recommendation of the Bureau against the inclusion of a non-governmental organization in the list shall be considered as final. III. Arrangements for the association of national other non-governmental organizations with the activities of UNCTAD (the Register Roster) National Other non-governmental organizations of recognized standing which are deemed to have a significant contribution to make to the work of UNCTAD may be entered by the Secretary-General of UNCTAD in a Register Roster established for that purpose. Entry in the Register of a national organization shall be subject to prior consultation with the member State concerned. These organizations shall be available for consultation at the request of the Board or its subsidisary bodies.This corresponds to paragraph 24 of ECOSOC resolution 1996/31. IV. Secretariat relations with non-governmental organizations The Secretary-General of UNCTAD shall be authorized, within the means at his disposal, to offer to non-governmental organizations which are included in the list provided for in rule 77 (i.e. non-governmental organizations in the General and Special Categories) and to non-governmental organizations entered in the Register Roster referred to in part III above, the following facilities: 1. Distribution of such documents of the Board and its subsidiary organs as shall in the judgement of the Secretary-General of UNCTAD be appropriate. 2. Access to the press documentation of UNCTAD, and, periodically, to such other public information material relating to the activities of UNCTAD as may be considered appropriate. 3. Arrangements for informal discussions of matters of special interest to groups or organizations. V. Application of rule 77 of the Board and rule 75 of the Committees of the Board For the purposes of applying rule 77 of the Board and rule 75 of the Committees of the Board, only non-governmental organizations admitted to either the General or the Special Category provided for in part I, paragraph 12, above, shall be deemed to be included in the list referred to in those rules and, consequently, to be entitled to the rights set out therein. Explanatory notes by the secretariat: Annex II NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN STATUS WITH UNCTAD General Category Session of Board at which designated */ AIO African Insurance Organization XXXIX(II) [XVI(I); XVII(I)] AAPSO Afro-Asian Peoples' Solidarity Organization XVI(I) AFEI Arab Federation for Engineering Industries XXXIX(II) [XXI] ASATRADE Association of African Trading Enterprises XXXIX(I) EUROCHAMBERS Association of European Chambers of Commerce and Industry VII AEALC Association of Latin American and Caribbean Economists (Asociación de Economistas de América Latina y el Caribe) XXXVI(I) APRODEV Association of World Council of Churches related Development Organisations in Europe. TDB/EX(12) CETIM Centre Europe-Tiers Monde (No English equivalent exists) XXIII(I) IDC Christian Democrat International (Internationale démocrate chrétienne) XVIII CLUBDAK Club of Dakar (Club de Dakar) XXIX CCIA Commission of the Churches on International Affairs (of the World Council of Churches) XII(I) CITHA Confederation of International Trading Houses Associations XVIII */ Where more than one session is indicated, the organization concerned was originally classified in the Special Category and subsequently reclassified in the General Category. General Category Session of Board at which designated CALAI Conference of Latin American Data-Processing Authorities (Conferencia de Autoridades Latinoamericanas de Informática) XXXVI(I) ENDA Environmental Development Action XLI(II) in the Third World [XLI(I)] CEFIC European Chemical Industry Council XXXIX(II) (Conseil européen de l'Industrie chimique) [XII(I)] FWCC Friends World Committee for Consultation (Quakers) XVI(I) GUCCIAAC General Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture for Arab Countries XIX GTC Global Traders Conference XLIII AICO Ibero-American Association of Chambers of Commerce (Asociación Iberoamericana de Cámaras de Comercio) XXXVI(I) ISICODEC Institute for Scientific Cooperation with Developing Countries XLIII IACCP Inter-American Council of Commerce and Production II INARI International Agency for Rural XXXIX(II) Industrialization [XXXIV(I)] IAW International Alliance of Women XVI(I) IAAE International Association of Agricultural Economists XIX IACME International Association of Crafts and XXXIX(II) Small and Medium-sized Enterprises [XXXIII(II)] ASTRO International Association of Trading Organizations for a Developing World XXXIII(II) IBA International Bar Association II ICC International Chamber of Commerce II UNIAPAC International Christian Union of Business Executives (Union internationale chrétienne des dirigeants d'entreprise) VII ICDA International Coalition for Development Action XXXIII(II) ICTF International Cocoa Trades Federation XXXIII [VII] ICFTU International Confederation of Free Trade Unions II CIDSE International Co-operation for Development and Solidarity (Coopération internationale pour le développement et la solidarité) XVI(I) ICA International Co-operative Alliance II ICEL International Council of Environmental Law XLII(I) ICVA International Council of Voluntary Agencies XII(I) ICW International Council of Women XXIII(I) ICSW International Council on Social Welfare XLIII IDEA International Data Exchange Association XXXIV(I) IEFG International Enterprise Foundation of Geneva XXXIV(I) IECC International Express Carriers Conference XXXVIII(I) IFAP International Federation of Agricultural Producers II IFBPW International Federation of Business and Professional Women XXXVII(I) IFORS International Federation of Operational Research Societies XII(I) IFPMA International Federation of Pharmaceutical XXXIX(II) Manufacturers Associations [XVII(I)] IFPMM International Federation of Purchasing and Materials Management VII IFA International Fertilizer Industry XVII(I) Association [XII(I)] IISD International Institute for Sustainable Development TDB/EX(12) ILA International Law Association VII ISO International Organization for XIV(II) Standardization [II] IOE International Organization of Employers II IPRA International Peace Research Association XX IRU International Road Transport Union XVII(I) [XIV(I)] ITMF International Textile Manufacturers XXXIX(II) Federation [II] IUMI International Union of Marine Insurance XIX [II] IPU Inter-Parliamentary Union XXVII JCI Junior Chamber International VIII AZOLCA Latin American and Caribbean Free Zone Association (Asociación de Zonas Francas de Latinoamerica y el Caribe) XL(I) ALIDE Latin American Association of Development Finance Institutions (Asociación Latinoamericana de Instituciones XVII(I) Financieras de Desarrollo) [XII(I)] ALIFAR Latin American Association of Pharmaceutical Industries (Asociación Latinoamericana de Industrias Farmacéuticas) XXV(I) AILA Latin American Industrialists Association (Asociación de Industriales XXXIX(II) Latinoamericanos [XXXIV(I)] ILAFA Latin American Iron and Steel Institute (Instituto Latinoamericano del Fierro y el XIV(II) Acero) [XII(I)] PARLATINO Latin American Parliament (Parlamento Latinoamericano) XL(II) NGDO-EC Liaison Committee of Development LIAISON Non-Governmental Organizations to the COMMITTEE European Communities XXXVIII(I) LWF Lutheran World Federation XXXII(I) OATUU Organization of African Trade Union Unity XVI(I) PSI Public Services International XLI(I) [XL(I)] SID Society for International Development XXI TWF Third World Foundation XXIII(I) TWN Third World Network XL(I) UAB Union of Arab Banks XVIII UNICE Union of Industrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe (Union des confédérations de l'industrie et des employeurs d'Europe) VII UIF Union of International Fairs II UTO United Towns Organization XXVIII WILPF Women's International League for Peace and Freedom XVIII WASME World Association for Small and Medium Enterprises XXX WAFUNIF World Association of Former United Nations Interns and Fellows XXVII WCL World Confederation of Labour II WFTU World Federation of Trade Unions II WFUNA World Federation of United Nations Associations II WPC World Peace Council XIV(I) WSBI World Savings Banks Institute XLII(I) [XIII WTCA World Trade Centers Association XLIII WVF World Veterans Federation VII WVI World Vision International XLIII WWF World Wide Fund for Nature International XLIII YDC Youth for Development and Cooperation XXXV(I) Special Category Guide to abbreviations used: Former Standing Committees CN 1 Standing Committee on Commodities CN 2 Standing Committee on Poverty Alleviation CN 3 Standing Committee on Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries CN 4 Standing Committee on Developing Services Sectors: Fostering Competitive Services Sectors in Developing Countries CIITC Commission on International Investment and Transnational Corporations Former ad hoc working groups: WG 6 Ad Hoc Working Group on Trade, Environment and Development WG 7 Ad Hoc Working Group on the Role of Enterprises in Development WG 8 Ad Hoc Working Group on Trading Opportunities in the New International Trading Context New Commissions: C 1 Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities; C 2 Commission on Investment, Technology and Related Financial Issues; C 3 Commission on Enterprise, Business Facilitation and Development. TDB session at which designated as NGO in status with UNCTAD Acronym Organization Former classi-fication Proposed reclassi-fication XX ACMS African Centre for Monetary Studies CN3/CN4/WG7 CATEGORY XXIX SITA Airlines' Worldwide Telecommunications and Information Services CN4 C.3 XXXIX(I) DAKAR UNION Association of Export Credit Insurance Organizations CN3/CN4 XXX AISADC Association of Insurance Supervisory Authorities Countries XXII(I) AFCASOLE Association of Soluble Coffee Manufacturers of the Countries of the EEC CN1/WG8 C.1 XXV(I) CAOBISCO Association of the Chocolate-, Biscuit- and Confectionary Industries of the EEC XXXIV(I) AWES Association of European Shipbuilders and Shiprepairers Baltic Exchange Limited IX(I) BIMCO Baltic and International Maritime Council XVIII BIR Bureau International de la Récupération CN1/WG6/WG8 XXXVII(I) CSA Caribbean Shipping Association XIX ACAMAR Central American Shipowners' Association CEMLA Centre for Latin American Monetary Studies CN3/WG7 GENERAL CATEGORY CICCA Committee for International Cooperation between Cotton Associations XII(I) CENSA Council of European and Japanese National Shipowners' Associations CN4/WG6 XXXIX(II) IRED Development Innovations and Networks CN2/WG6 XL(I) EDI World Institute CN4/WG8 EURATEX European Apparel and Textile Organization XXIV(I) EACT European Advisory Council for Technology Trade C.2 X(I) EAJP European Association for the Trade in Jute and related products XIII CEFS European Committee of Sugar Manufacturers CN1/WG6 VII CEA European Insurance Committee SACAR European Secretariat of the United Agricultural Trade Associations CN1 XI ESC European Shippers' Councils XXVI FANAF Federation of African National Insurance Companies XVII(I) FAIR Federation of Afro-Asian Insurers and Reinsurers FCA Federation of Commodity Associations XXXVI(I) ALACAT Federation of National Associations of Forwarding Agents of Latin America and the Caribbean FONASBA Federation of National Associations of Ship Brokers and Agents EUROCORD Federation of European Rope, Twine and Netting Industries XLII(I) FFLA Fundación Futuro Latinoamericano GAIF General Arab Insurance Federation IIDM Ibero-American Institute of Maritime Law XXXIII AIPYC Ibero-American Ports and Coasts Association XXXVIII(I) Institute of Chartered Shipbrokers IICL Institute of International Container Lessors FIDES Interamerican Federation of Insurance Companies XIV(I) IATA International Air Transport Association CN4/WG7 IACP International Association Cities and Ports IAPIP International Association for the Protection of Industrial Property WG6/WG8 XXIII(II) IACS International Association of Classification Societies XXIII(I) INTERCARGO International Association of Dry Cargo Shipowners XXVII AIDE International Association of European General Average Adjusters INTERTANKO International Association of Independent Tanker Owners XV(I) BIPAR International Association of Insurance and Reinsurance Intermediaries XXVIII IAIB International Association of Islamic Banks AISAM International Association of Mutual Insurance Companies CN3/CN4/ CIITC IAPH International Association of Ports and Harbours IASC International Association of Seed Crushers ICHCA International Cargo Handling Co-ordination Association CN3/CN4/WG6 II ICS International Chamber of Shipping CIBE International Confederation of European Beet Growers ICB International Container Bureau ICME International Council on Metals and the Environment APIMONDIA International Federation of Beekeepers' Associations CN1/CN3 ICEM International Federation of Chemical, Energy, Mine and General Workers' Union CN1/WG6/WG7 FIATA International Federation of Freight Forwarders Associations XVI(I) IFIA International Federation of Inventors' Associations TDB FICPI International Federation of Patent Agents IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute IHA International Hotel Association CN4/WG7/ CMI International Maritime Committee IOI International Ocean Institute IOCU International Organization of Consumers' Unions WG6/WG8/ IPAI International Primary Aluminium Institute IRSFC International Rayon and Synthetic Fibres Committee CN1/CN3/WG6/ WG8 ISF International Shipping Federation XXXIII(II) ISSA International Ship Suppliers Association XLI(II) ISSC International Social Science Council CN2 ITIA International Tungsten Industry Association IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources UIC International Union of Railways IWCC International Wrought Copper Council XXXV(I) ISA Islamic Shipowners Association ALDENAVE Latin American Association of Navigational Law and Law of the Sea XXI FELACUTI Latin American Federation of International Transport Users' Councils ALAMAR Latin American Shipowners' Association BLIC Liaison Office of the Rubber Industries of the European Economic Community LES The Licensing Executives Society International MULTIPORT Multiport Ship Agencies Network PIANC Permanent International Association of Navigation Congresses ANRA Professional Association of Natural Rubber in Africa RAFI Rural Advancement Foundation International USTA United States Trademark Association WAITRO World Association of Industrial and Technological Research Organizations WG7 WBMS World Bureau of Metal Statistics 