%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|IRAQ|STAFFING|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|EXPERTS|DATABASES|OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the Security Council the eighth quarterly report of the Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), which is submitted in accordance with paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) of 17 December 1999 (see annex). Eighth quarterly report of the Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission under paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) Introduction a The Commission's seven previous reports were issued as documents S/2000/516, S/2000/835, S/2000/1134, S/2001/177, S/2001/515, S/2001/833 and S/2001/1126. 1. The present report, which is the eightha submitted in accordance with paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 1284 (1999), covers the activities of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) during the period from 1 December 2001 to 28 February 2002. Briefings and consultations by the Executive Chairman 2. In the period under review, the Executive Chairman has continued his practice of providing monthly briefings to the Presidents of the Security Council. He has also kept the Secretary-General and his senior staff informed of the activities of UNMOVIC and its preparations for inspections. In addition, he has visited Washington, D.C., for consultations with senior members of the United States administration. In New York, he has also provided briefings to visiting ministers, parliamentarians and government officials and given interviews to representatives of the media. Staffing 3. As at the end of February 2002, the UNMOVIC core staff, in the Professional grades at Headquarters, comprises 50 persons of 26 nationalities, of which 9 are women. In addition, there are 180 experts of 36 nationalities on the roster of trained experts to be available to serve the Commission in Iraq. 4. UNMOVIC has continued to engage the services of short-term consultants when particular expertise is not required through in-house staff on an ongoing basis. The activities of the consultants have included the consolidation of background information on sites previously inspected and subject to monitoring to better assist inspection planning; the further analysis of Iraq's declarations on its biological weapon activities; the refinement of the formats for Iraq's monitoring declarations required under resolution 715 (1991) and support for the Commission's training activities. Training 5. As part of its readiness for the conduct of work in Iraq, the Commission continues to attach high priority to the training of its staff and those on the roster. The fifth month-long general training course opened at Geneva on 18 February and will end on 22 March. There are 54 participants, encompassing some 28 nationalities. As with previous courses, the current training course covers general lectures on the mandate of UNMOVIC, its rights, Iraq's corresponding obligations, the proscribed weapons programmes of Iraq and discipline-specific training. Health and safety issues are also covered. In addition, in conformity with paragraph 6 of resolution 1284 (1999), participants have been provided with training regarding the history, politics, religion and culture of Iraq. With the completion of the fifth training course, UNMOVIC will have a roster of some 230 persons trained for work in Iraq. 6. In addition, UNMOVIC has continued with more specialized training for both existing staff and persons from the roster of trained experts. A second advanced missile training course was conducted from 3 to 13 December. Twenty-two experts from 13 countries attended. The course focused on practical inspection exercises. A first advanced chemical course involving 22 experts from 15 countries was held from 14 to 25 January. Like the missile course, the purpose of this advanced training was to develop or upgrade practical inspection skills. 7. A further training course on specialized chemical laboratory equipment was held from 4 to 8 February. Thirteen experts from 11 countries took part. This particular course was a first step in the preparation and training of personnel to operate the chemical analytical laboratory at the Commission's Baghdad Ongoing Monitoring and Verification Centre. The Commission's training for future Chief Inspectors (from among the Headquarters core staff) continues. Several sessions have been held in the period under review. UNMOVIC has also provided its instructors and lecturers involved in training with an opportunity to attend training courses designed to enhance presentation skills. 8. The Commission stands in gratitude to those Member States that have supported training activities. Other activities 9. As mandated by the Security Council in paragraph 2 of its resolution 1284 (1999), UNMOVIC continues to plan for the establishment of a system of reinforced ongoing monitoring and verification which will implement the plan approved by resolution 715 (1991) and address unresolved disarmament issues. With respect to the latter, UNMOVIC continues to review and refine its assessment of unresolved disarmament issues and to define possible remedies. At the same time, work is proceeding to group the unresolved disarmament issues into clusters to improve the understanding of their interrelationship and potential significance. This work -- refinement and clustering -- occupies considerable staff resources, especially from within the Division of Analysis and Assessment, and should provide part of the basis both for the future work programme envisaged in paragraph 7 of resolution 1284 (1999) and for the planning of future monitoring, verification and inspection. 10. Preparatory work is continuing in the area of inspection planning. The central site database has been constructed and data are being entered. This site database has been harmonized with that used by the Action Team of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). In addition, further work on the format and contents continues with respect to monitoring declarations required of Iraq under resolution 715 (1991). Export/import 11. Under the provisions of Security Council resolution 1051 (1996), the UNMOVIC/IAEA joint unit continues to receive notifications from Member States of supplies to Iraq of dual-use items. Iraq has, however, not provided its corresponding declarations. 12. The joint unit has also continued to review all contracts concluded with the Government of Iraq under the provisions of resolution 986 (1995) and to provide technical assistance to the Office of the Iraq Programme and to Member States. 13. The distribution plan for phase XI of the "oil-for-food" programme was reviewed by UNMOVIC experts for prohibited items. No such items were found. Office for outside information 14. A substantial external review of open source information from the period from December 1998 to 2001 was delivered by the Monterey Institute of International Studies in January. The data, covering approximately 2,300 published items relating to Iraq and weapons of mass destruction, were uploaded into the UNMOVIC central database and are being studied by the Commission's analysts. The Commission continues its discussions with the Monterey Institute and other potential providers of such information to ensure further coverage of that period and for the possible provision of relevant material on an ongoing basis. It has also sought the advice of IAEA, which has considerable experience in this respect. Overhead imagery 15. In the period under review, Member States have provided briefings on activities and infrastructure changes at sites subject to monitoring in Iraq. UNMOVIC will continue to seek to receive presentations and products from supporting Governments with access to satellite imagery. UNMOVIC will also continue to investigate alternate sources for commercial satellite imagery in addition to the contract already in place. Work to scan aerial images into the archive and link them to the central site database will continue. Archive and database 16. Documents continue to be scanned electronically and entered into the central database. Health and safety; administrative manual 17. The Commission's experts have completed internal guidelines on occupational health and safety during inspection operations in Iraq. They comprise arrangements for the safe conduct of inspections in Iraq and deal with specific hazards, such as unexploded ordnance, chemical and biological warfare agents and general industrial contaminants and hazards. The guidelines will continue to be updated in the light of the availability of new equipment and sensors and developments in the health and safety sector. An administrative manual has been completed and issued to staff. It supplements and in some parts incorporates applicable United Nations rules. College of Commissioners 18. The eighth plenary session of the College of Commissioners was held at Geneva on 18 and 19 February 2002. As on previous occasions, in addition to the members of the College, observers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons attended. 19. The Executive Chairman gave the Commissioners an oral report on the work of UNMOVIC since the last session of the College in November 2001. He noted that he had been with the Secretary-General of the United Nations when the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Amr Moussa, conveyed a message that Iraq was ready to resume without any preconditions the dialogue with the United Nations. It is understood that the Secretary-General will take up the issue of implementation of Security Council resolutions relevant to Iraq and that the Executive Chairman will be available to join the Secretary-General in such a dialogue. 20. In addition, the members of the College received a briefing by the Director of the Division of Planning and Operations on ongoing work and preparations for inspection by that Division. Another briefing related to the open source collection of documents the Commission received pursuant to its contract with the Monterey Institute of International Studies. 21. The College also received a report on the ongoing work to cluster unresolved disarmament issues. A paper providing examples of clustered issues from the various weapons disciplines was given to the Commissioners. 22. Another issue before the College was the implications for UNMOVIC in the event that the Security Council adopts in 2002 the goods review list and the procedures for its application annexed to Security Council resolution 1382 (2001). 23. With respect to the Chairman's opening statement, several matters were discussed. The College noted the emerging consensus in the Security Council as evidenced by its resolution 1382 (2001). It was stressed that, just as unity in the Council would be important to facilitate the resumption of inspections, so unity will be necessary, once inspections resume, for the effective implementation of the mandate of UNMOVIC in accordance with the Council's resolutions. The College was also of the view that the lifting of sanctions on Iraq could only be achieved through the implementation by Iraq of the relevant United Nations resolutions. 24. The College welcomed the briefing on preparations for inspections. The College noted with satisfaction the level of preparatory work achieved so far. It stressed that it was important that this work identify the clear sequence of actions to be taken and be sufficiently flexible to accommodate various contingencies. 25. The College noted that the implementation of the goods review list and the procedures for its application annexed to resolution 1382 (2001) would require additional staff and space. UNMOVIC was urged to continue with its preparations so that it would be ready to play its part in the implementation of the new procedures as soon as the Security Council adopted the goods review list and the new procedures. 26. With respect to the report on the ongoing work to identify and cluster unresolved disarmament issues, the College welcomed the document and the oral presentation of it, stressed the urgency of the work and made suggestions for the improvement of the methodology adopted in the clustering. 27. The College decided to hold its next session on 29 and 30 May 2002 at United Nations Headquarters. 28. In accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1284 (1999), the Commissioners were consulted on the contents of the present report. 