%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|PALAU|TERRORISM|

Letter dated 31 May 2002 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council The Counter-Terrorism Committee has received the attached report from the Republic of Palau, submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001) (see annex). I should be grateful if you could arrange for the present letter and its annex to be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Jeremy Greenstock Chairman Counter-Terrorism Committee Letter dated 13 May 2002 from the Minister of State of the Republic of Palau addressed to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism With reference to your communication of 7 February 2002, regarding reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on steps taken to implement Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), I am pleased to submit the attached communication from the Minister of Justice of the Republic of Palau, outlining all measures already taken by Palau to counter terrorism (see enclosure). (Signed) Temmy L. Shmull Minister of State Attachment Letter dated 8 May 2002 from the Minister of Justice of the Republic of Palau addressed to the Minister of State of the Republic of Palau I am in receipt of a memorandum dated 16 April 2002 from the Director of the Bureau of Foreign Affairs regarding the annual report on the implementation of the declaration on measures to eliminate international terrorism. I hereby respond to the inquiries in the letter from the United Nations (Reference: LA/COD/11/1) as follows: In 2001, the Republic of Palau enacted the following acts: Money Laundering Act, Mutual Assistance Act, Transnational Extradition Act, Foreign Evidence Act and Financial Institutions Act. In part, these laws regulate and supervise banks and financial institutions and criminalize money-laundering. The Money Laundering Act of 2001 provides for freezing and forfeiture of the proceeds of a crime, in addition to which a Financial Intelligence Unit has been established to detect money-laundering and other financial crimes. The Republic has notified local banks and other financial institutions of the names of suspected terrorist individuals and organizations and has asked that any assets or accounts found belonging to such be immediately reported to Government authorities and seized. No such assets have been reported as found as of this date within Palau or its banks and financial institutions. The President of the Republic of Palau has signed a number of international treaties and United Nations conventions concerning anti-terrorism. It is anticipated that the President will shortly introduce comprehensive anti-terrorism legislation into the Palau National Congress. This legislation, which was drafted with the assistance of the Pacific Islands Forum, would implement the United Nations treaties to which Palau is a member. Additionally, the President of the Republic has created a Task Force on Anti-Terrorism and Homeland Security, which is reviewing efforts to detect and prevent terrorism in Palau. The Divisions of Customs and Immigration are on heightened alert to detect suspect incidents. Palau has been cooperative with other jurisdictions, most notably the United States of America, in responding to international efforts to combat terrorism. There have been no terrorist acts in Palau and no prosecutions related to terrorist activity. (Signed) Michael J. Rosenthal Minister of Justice 