%%%INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|

Letter dated 12 June 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Norway to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Please find enclosed the assessment of the work of the Security Council during the Norwegian presidency in March 2002 (see annex). I would be grateful if you could arrange to have this letter and the attached assessment circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Ole Peter Kolby Ambassador Permanent Representative Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Norway (March 2002) During Norway's presidency of the Security Council in March, the Council held 9 public meetings, 6 private meetings and 3 meetings with troop-contributing countries, and its members met on 17 occasions for informal consultations and 4 times under the "Arria formula". The Council adopted seven resolutions and three presidential statements, and the President was authorized on nine occasions to make statements to the press on behalf of Council members. Norway's Foreign Minister, Jan Petersen, presided over meetings on the issues of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ethiopia and Eritrea, and Afghanistan. Africa Angola In consultations on 20 March the Council was briefed by Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Ibrahim Gambari, Special Adviser for Special Assignments in Africa, on the latest developments in Angola, including the death of UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi on 22 February and the Government's subsequent launch of a 15-point peace plan. Under-Secretary-General Gambari also informed the Council that he had been requested by the Secretary-General to travel to the country to seek clarification from the Government and other stakeholders on the continued role of the United Nations in the peace process, an initiative that was welcomed by Council members. On 28 March the Council adopted S/PRST/2002/7, in which it declared support for the peace plan implemented under the Lusaka Protocol. The Council stated that it stood ready to consider appropriate exemptions from and amendments to the measures imposed by paragraph 4 (a) of resolution 1127 (1997), in consultation with the Government of Angola and with a view to facilitating the peace negotiations. The Council also acknowledged the need to renew and possibly redefine the mandate of the United Nations Office in Angola. Burundi In informal consultations on 20 March, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Kieran Prendergast, briefed the Council on developments in Burundi. In a statement to the press the Council called for an immediate stop to the fighting and urged the donor community to provide and increase economic and humanitarian assistance. It also commended the efforts of the South African protection unit and welcomed the positive contributions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania to the peace process. The Democratic Republic of the Congo In response to reports of resumed fighting in the area around and in the village of Moliro on the west bank of Lake Tanganyika in eastern Congo, the Council discussed the situation on 4, 14, 19 and 27 March. The Council was briefed on the tense situation in the area by Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on 4 and 27 March, and by Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Jean-Marie Guéhenno on 14 and 19 March. In press statements issued after the first two consultations, the Council members demanded that all fighting cease. In resolution 1399 (2002) adopted on 19 March, the Council condemned the violation of the ceasefire and demanded that RCD-Goma withdraw from Moliro and Pweto and that all other parties withdraw from the locations they were occupying in contravention of disengagement plans. The Council also called on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to resume its participation in the Inter-Congolese Dialogue. Following subsequent confirmation by the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that rebel troops had pulled out, the Council members expressed their satisfaction, in a press statement on 27 March, that the parties had begun implementing resolution 1399 (2002) and affirmed that they were encouraged by the partnership between the Council and the Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement. The Council also reached agreement on sending a Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region from 27 April to 7 May in order to give new impetus to the peace process. Ethiopia-Eritrea The Council met in public on 6 March to hear the head of the Security Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea (21-25 February 2002), Ambassador Kolby of Norway, introduce the mission's report, and exchanged views with Ethiopian and Eritrean representatives and other Member States on the implementation of the Algiers Agreements. On 15 March, the Council adopted resolution 1398 (2002), which extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) until 15 September 2002. The resolution commended the parties on the progress made thus far in the implementation of the Algiers Agreements and emphasized the importance of ensuring an expeditious and orderly implementation of the decision by the Boundary Commission in close cooperation with UNMEE. The resolution further emphasized the Council's resolve to support the parties in the implementation of the decision by the Boundary Commission and invited the Secretary-General to submit, as soon as possible, recommendations to the Council on how UNMEE can play an appropriate role in the border demarcation process. Liberia On 19 March the Council was briefed by the Chairman of the Liberia Sanctions Committee, Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of Singapore, on the Committee's deliberations on the report of the Panel of Experts. Sierra Leone The Council was briefed on the situation in Sierra Leone on 4 March by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi, and on 21 March, on the basis of the Secretary-General's thirteenth report on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), by Special Representative of the Secretary-General and head of UNAMSIL, Oluyemi Adeniji. They both focused on the successful completion of the disarmament of the rebel groups and on the preparations for the 14 May elections. On 28 March the Council extended UNAMSIL's mandate by six months by unanimously adopting resolution 1400 (2002). On 19 March the United Nations Legal Counsel, Under-Secretary-General Hans Corell, introduced the report of the Planning Mission on the Establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Resolution 1400 (2002) also dealt with the cooperation between UNAMSIL and the Special Court. Somalia On 7 March, Council members discussed the situation in Somalia. On 11 March, the Council held a meeting with Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Transitional National Government of Somalia, followed by a meeting open to all Member States regarding the peace process in Somalia. On 25 March, Council members discussed certain elements under consideration for a PRST on the situation in Somalia. On 28 March, the Council adopted S/PRST/2002/8, a wide-ranging statement that expressed strong support for the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the frontline States to convene a National Reconciliation Conference in Nairobi to complete the peace process in Somalia, and set out a number of steps to be taken by the United Nations in support of the peace efforts in Somalia. The statement expressed the Council's determination to put in place concrete arrangements and/or mechanisms by 30 April 2002 for the generation of independent information on violations of the arms embargo established by resolution 733 (1992) and for improving its enforcement. Furthermore, it requested the Secretary-General to coordinate ongoing peace-building activities in Somalia and provide for their incremental expansion in accordance with the security arrangements, including through preparatory activities on the ground for a comprehensive peace-building mission. Western Sahara On the basis of resolution 1394 (2002), the Council met at the expert level separately with the Permanent Representatives of Algeria, Mauritania and Morocco and the representative of the POLISARIO Front, as part of the Council's consideration of the options described in the Secretary-General's report of 19 February 2002 (S/2002/178) on the situation concerning Western Sahara. Asia Afghanistan The Council met in public on 13 March to hear a briefing by Under-Secretary-General Prendergast on the political, military and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. He underlined the need for support for the Afghan Interim Authority and the Emergency Loya Jirga process. Council members held informal consultations following the open briefing. On 26 March, the Foreign Minister of Norway, Jan Petersen, presided over a public debate on the situation in Afghanistan and the Secretary-General's report, including the proposal to establish a United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Council members and several non-Council members participated in the debate, which showed that there is broad support for the establishment of UNAMA and the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lakhdar Brahimi. Following informal consultations on 27 March, the President made a statement to the press in which Council members expressed their intention to extend the mandate of the International Security Assistance Force after its expiry on 20 June 2002. On 28 March the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1401 (2002), in which it endorsed the establishment of UNAMA and the full authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General over all United Nations activities in Afghanistan, and urged donors to coordinate their activities closely with the Special Representative, in particular through the Afghanistan Support Group and the Implementation Group. Europe Bosnia and Herzegovina The Council held a public meeting on 5 March on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was presided over by the Foreign Minister of Norway, Jan Petersen, and in which the Secretary-General participated. The Council heard briefings by High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jacques Klein. In the debate, Council members expressed appreciation for the contributions of Mr. Petritsch and Mr. Klein to the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union/High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, and several non-Council member States also made statements in the debate. At the end of this public meeting, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1396 (2002), which, inter alia, welcomed the designation of Lord Ashdown as High Representative to succeed Mr. Petritsch, as well as the acceptance by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council of the offer made by the European Union to provide a European Union Police Mission from 1 January 2003 to follow the end of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Kosovo (United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo) At a public meeting on 27 March, the Council was given a briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi on the situation in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It was emphasized that the formation of a Government in Kosovo was a significant development. Non-Council member States participated in the debate. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was represented by Mr. Nebojša Čović, Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia and President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Coordination Centre for Kosovo. The Middle East The Council received its monthly briefing on developments in the Middle East on 12 March. The Secretary-General gave the briefing at a public meeting, which was followed by consultations, after which the Council adopted resolution 1397 (2002). In the resolution the Council affirmed a vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side within secure and recognized borders; demanded the immediate cessation of all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction; called on the parties to cooperation on the implementation of the Tenet work plan and Mitchell report recommendations, with the aim of resuming negotiations on a political settlement; and expressed support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and others to assist the parties to halt the violence and to resume the peace process. The resolution was adopted by 14 votes in favour, with one abstention. The Council convened a public meeting on 29 March to discuss the further escalation of violence in the Middle East. The Council also met for informal consultations to consider possible action. Subsequently, resolution 1402 (2002) was adopted on 30 March, in which the Security Council called for an immediate ceasefire, the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian cities and the implementation of the Tenet work plan and Mitchell report recommendations. Furthermore, it reiterated the demand it had made in resolution 1397 (2002) for an immediate cessation of all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction, and expressed support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the special envoys to the Middle East to assist the parties to halt the violence and to resume the peace process. The resolution was adopted by 14 votes in favour. One member did not participate in the voting. Iraq The Council held consultations on 8 March on the latest quarterly report of the Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). The Council was informed that UNMOVIC's internal preparatory work would continue in accordance with its mandate. The members of the Council reiterated their support for the Executive Chairman and his activities to implement resolution 1284 (1999) and called on Iraq to cooperate with UNMOVIC. The Council was also briefed on the meetings between the Secretary-General and Iraqi Foreign Minister Naji Sabri, which had been held the previous day. The Secretary-General reported that the discussions had been "useful and frank" and predicted that a new round of talks would be held shortly. Protection of civilians in armed conflict The Council held an open meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflict on 15 March. Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Kenzo Oshima briefed the Council on the situation of civilians in several ongoing armed conflicts. He also provided an update on work being undertaken to follow up and implement the recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's two reports on the subject, as addressed in previous resolutions and meetings of the Security Council. The Council adopted S/PRST/2002/6, to which was annexed an Aide Memoire for the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians during the Council's deliberations on peacekeeping mandates. The Aide Memoire was a result of an interactive consultation between the Council and the Secretariat, and comprised the experiences of a wide range of agencies within the United Nations. It listed issues related to the protection of civilians that are relevant, in particular, for the Council's deliberations on the establishment, change or termination of peacekeeping operations. It set out primary objectives for Security Council action, offered specific issues for consideration in meeting these objectives and listed previous Security Council resolutions and presidential statements that refer to such concerns. The Council decided to review and update the Aide Memoire as appropriate, and to remain actively seized of the matter. International Women's Day On behalf of the Council, the President issued a press statement on 8 March, International Women's Day, which emphasized the need to include women in peace negotiations, post-conflict reconstruction and United Nations peacekeeping operations. Members of the Council called for the early and full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the strengthening of the Best Practices Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to achieve these aims, and also advocated that United Nations peacekeeping missions should include gender-equality experts. The press statement also mentioned the difficult situation of women in Afghanistan. Meetings of the Security Council with troop-contributing countries There were three such meetings during March, concerning MONUC, UNAMSIL and UNMEE. Procedural issues Following deliberations by the working group on documentation and procedure, a note by the President of the Security Council was issued on 26 March 2002. The note stipulates concrete steps for improving the clarity and transparency of the work of the Council, including circulation by the Secretariat of printed fact sheets, whenever possible, prior to consultations. "Arria formula" meetings An "Arria formula" meeting of Council members was convened by Singapore on 5 March to address the difficulty of getting humanitarian assistance to the people of Angola. Apart from Council members, participants included representatives of Human Rights Watch, Médecins Sans Frontières, Save the Children and Oxfam. On 8 March an "Arria formula" meeting was convened by the United Kingdom to hear a report from a visit to Sierra Leone by the Special Rapporteur on violence against women. An "Arria formula" meeting to address issues relating to abuses of women and children in Mano River countries (Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea) was held on 19 March, convened by Singapore. Apart from Council members, participants included two independent experts from United Nations Development Fund for Women, Elisabeth Rehn of Finland and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia. On 22 March Ireland convened an "Arria formula" meeting to hear a presentation by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Centre for Transitional Justice on the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission in Sierra Leone. 