%%%POLITICAL STATUS|WESTERN SAHARA|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|DECOLONIZATION|WESTERN SAHARA QUESTION|MOROCCO|

Letter dated 22 July 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Without prior consultation, either with the members of the Security Council or with the parties and the observers, three permanent members of the Security Council initiated today a draft resolution on Western Sahara in which they arbitrarily chose one of the four options suggested by the Secretary-General in his 19 February 2002 report (S/2002/178) and decided to make every effort to impose that option, which had been categorically rejected by the Frente POLISARIO and Algeria and is supported only by a minority within the Council, on the whole Council and on the parties and observers. Algeria regrets that, in spite of the clear and detailed explanations it gave repeatedly, the latest being in a letter dated 18 July 2002 (S/2002/782) to the President of the Security Council, about its firm rejection of the second option, and of its appeals to the three permanent members co-sponsoring the draft resolution, to duly take into consideration its viewpoint and its declared hostility to any arbitrarily chosen and imposed option because of the risks that such an arbitrary choice carries for the very existence of the political solution mutually acceptable to the parties that the Council has been actively seeking, the three said permanent members preferred to ignore our position as well as the position of the Frente POLISARIO and the strong views of the majority of the members of the Council opposing any imposed solution. Algeria, which rejects this one-sided and unbalanced draft resolution, would like to reaffirm that: 1. The Settlement Plan is the only framework agreed by the two parties and endorsed by the Security Council and remains the most appropriate tool in providing a just and lasting solution to the issue of Western Sahara, through the holding of a fair and impartial referendum of self-determination by the people of Western Sahara. Any attempt to undermine or ignore the Settlement Plan would be unacceptable for it would represent a violation of the very principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the right of self-determination and the United Nations doctrine on decolonization. 2. The so-called autonomy contained in the draft Framework Agreement on the Status of Western Sahara, proposed by the Kingdom of Morocco, can neither provide for self-determination, nor offer a just and lasting solution to a conflict of colonial nature opposing a people struggling for its self-determination and a State illegally occupying by force since 1975 the land of that people. In fact, the so-called autonomy aims only at conferring recognition by the international community of the fait accompli of the Moroccan occupation and the sovereignty of Morocco over a non-Self-Governing Territory. 3. The autonomy option championed by the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and France does not enjoy the support of the majority of the members of the Security Council, and carries the risk of further dividing the Council and undermining its unity. 4. No solution can or should be imposed on the parties for it would only create more tension in the region and has no chance whatsoever of being implemented. 5. It remains ready to consider Mr. Baker's proposal on a possible partition of Western Sahara between the Sahrawi people and the Kingdom of Morocco. Therefore, Algeria calls for the rejection of the proposed draft resolution and expresses its hope that common sense and wisdom will prevail in the end, and that the Security Council will, this time again, and until the conditions for real progress are met, adopt a technical resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), until the end of this year. I would be grateful if you could take the necessary measures to have the present letter distributed to the members of the Security Council, and circulated as a document of the Council. (Signed) Abdallah Baali Ambassador 