%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|SOLOMON ISLANDS|TERRORISM|

Letter dated 23 August 2002 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council The Counter-Terrorism Committee has received the attached report from Solomon Islands, submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001) (see annex). I should be grateful if you could arrange for this letter and its annex to be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Jeremy Greenstock Chairman Counter-Terrorism Committee Note verbale dated 23 August 2002 from the Permanent Mission of Solomon Islands to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism The Permanent Mission of Solomon Islands presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee and, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001, has the honour to submit herewith a brief report by Solomon Islands on measures it has taken to counter international terrorism (see enclosure). Report of Solomon Islands on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) on counter-terrorism Introduction 1. Following the September 11 terrorist attacks in the United States of America, the UN Security Council invited all member states of the UN through its Resolution 1373 inter alia, to conduct a high level review of their security and counter-terrorism arrangements. 2. The US statistics revealed that there has been a significant increase in terrorist activities during the past years. For instance, 273 international terrorist incidents were recorded in 1998, 392 in 1999 and 423 in 2000. The increase in terrorist activities is largely due to conflict of interests, religious beliefs, ideological differences, ethnic oriented conflicts and many other causes in many parts of the world. The trend has been that international terrorists are employing more violent means of carrying out terrorist acts. And there is growing fear that perpetrators will choose to use weapons of mass destruction in future to achieve their objectives. 3. Although Solomon Islands does not regard itself as the target of international terrorism, it has taken some measures, partly, in response to the UN Security Council Resolution 1373. Measures taken by Solomon Islands to counter International Terrorism. 4. Solomon Islands has taken the following measures to counter international terrorism: Participation of senior officials involved in national security in annual workshops and seminars relating to international terrorism. The conduct of public relations campaign to make people aware of the dangers of international terrorism and the need to inform government and security officials when they witness suspicious acts. Co-operate with regional allies in the exchange of information, intelligence and opinions on the subject of international terrorism and other transnational criminal acts. Develop a separate legislation relating to prevention of terrorism in addition to other legislations that are in drafting stages on transnational crimes such as illicit drugs and money laundering. 5. In addition to the above and in specific references to Operative Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of UNSC Resolution 1373, Solomon Islands has the additional information to provide: Solomon Islands now has a draft Bill on Money Laundering, which will be put to the next session of the National Parliament. The Bill when enacted will provide inter alia, a mechanism that prevents movement of funds for terrorist purposes. It will ensure that the law enforcement authorities are able to detect and prevent transactions relating to terrorist activities. The Bill will also enhance the exchange of financial transaction reports and information with other countries. Under the proposed Bill, it is an offence for a person or persons who provide or receive questionable funds regardless of whether such funds will be used to facilitate terrorist acts or not. Provisions governing privacy of persons disclosing information and the use of information strictly and solely for the purpose are also enshrined in the draft Bill. In addition, it is an offence for person or persons utilizing the assets of persons or entities involved in terrorist activities, likewise, availing his or her own assets and establishments to be used by individual terrorists or organizations. A maximum penalty is yet to be determined for all terrorist-related offences under the proposed Bill. (ii) Solomon Islands shares a common border with Papua New Guinea. There are in place, a number of border-related Agreements between the two countries, including the Basic Agreement on Border Arrangements, signed in 1997. The Agreement serves to control movement of people and goods from both sides of the border. Provided under the Agreement is the Joint Border Committee, which consists of senior officials of both parties, entrusted with the task of formulating guidelines and procedures for the effective implementation of customs, immigration and quarantine matters pertaining to national and international legal requirements. However, due to domestic problems affecting both parties, the Committee is yet to meet to deal with its work. And in view of the changing international environment and new challenges which include transnational crimes in all its forms, there is a real need to review the Treaty to take into account these issues. (iii) In March 2002, Solomon Islands established a Combined Law Agency Group -- a similar agency to those established in Fiji and New Zealand. CLAG's mission is to facilitate the sharing of information and resources among the different agencies in combating crimes in Solomon Islands. Its objectives are to provide timely exchange and sharing of information, enhance communication and co-ordination efforts, develop strategies and develop common training and human resources development. The Agency is focusing on certain crime related activities which impact on other agencies. It is composed of members from the Government, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and Law Enforcement Authorities. It holds regular meetings, where specific law and order problems and concerns and solutions to them are addressed. (iv) Solomon Islands has not adopted any of the international instruments relating to international terrorism into its domestic laws. However, steps are now being taken to accede to two international Conventions, namely, the Convention for Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Conclusion 6. Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace and security. Solomon Islands remains committed to its obligation to co-operate with civilized nations to counter terrorism. It will take further actions to strengthen its domestic legislations as well as acceding to international conventions as its modest contribution towards countering international terrorism and to create a secure and peaceful world for everyone. 