%%%FINANCIAL REGULATIONS|

Meeting of States Parties Twelfth Meeting New York, 16-26 April 2002 Financial Regulations of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea * Compilation and analysis of the information required for the preparation of the working paper, as well as the advancement of the dates for the Twelfth Meeting of States Parties from May to April 2002, resulted in the delay of its submission. Working paper prepared by the Secretariat, presenting a comparative table of the Financial Regulations of the Tribunal, the relevant financial rules and regulations of the United Nations and those of the International Seabed Authority* Contents Page Introduction Regulation 1. Applicability Regulation 2. Financial period Regulation 3. The budget Regulation 4. Appropriations Regulation 5. Provision of funds Regulation 6. Funds Regulation 7. Other income Regulation 8. Custody of funds Regulation 9. Investment of funds Regulation 10. Internal control Regulation 11. The accounts Regulation 12. Audit Regulation 13. Decisions involving expenditures Regulation 14. General provisions Annex to the Financial Regulations Additional terms of reference governing the audit of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea The present document was prepared by the Secretariat at the request of the Eleventh Meeting of States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. At that Meeting, and during the discussion of the Financial Regulations of the Tribunal (SPLOS/WP.14), it was suggested that the preparation of a comparative table among the Financial Regulations of the Tribunal as contained in document SPLOS/WP.14, the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the Financial Regulations of the International Seabed Authority would greatly facilitate the work of the Meeting of States Parties in this regard. The Financial Regulations of the Tribunal had originally been submitted to the Ninth Meeting of States Parties for consideration (see SPLOS/36). It may be recalled that document SPLOS/WP.14 had been prepared in response to the request of the Tenth Meeting of States Parties to the Secretariat and the Registry of the Tribunal to take into account the various proposals and the outcome of the discussions during the Ninth and Tenth Meetings in respect of document SPLOS/36. SPLOS/WP.14 also incorporated changes that were necessitated by proposals of delegations at the Ninth and Tenth Meetings. The present document, while comparing the Financial Regulations of the Tribunal as contained in SPLOS/WP.14, retains all the above-mentioned changes to SPLOS/36. For the sake of convenience, the following markings that denote the changes have also been maintained: Agreed additions to the text are indicated in bold; Agreed deletions to the text are crossed out; Proposals to insert or replace text are indicated in [bold in square brackets]. Proposals to replace text are positioned after text in [square brackets]; Proposals to delete text are indicated by [italics strikethrough in square brackets]; Proposals to delete text within another proposal are indicated in [bold strikethrough in square brackets]; Dots "..." have been inserted, where appropriate, to avoid repetition of text. Financial Regulations of the Tribunal The Meeting of States Parties, Recalling the adoption by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of its Financial Regulations on 8 October 1998, Approves the following amended Financial Regulations to govern the financial administration of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. 