%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DEPORTATION|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|ARMED INCIDENTS|KISANGANI (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO)|HUMAN RIGHTS IN ARMED CONFLICTS|CIVILIAN PERSONS|NEGOTIATION|RWANDA|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 4548th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 June 2002, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the acts of intimidation and unfounded public statements against the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), in particular attempts by the Rassemblement Congolais pour la Démocratie-Goma (RCD-Goma) to "ban" the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the "expulsion" of several MONUC and other United Nations personnel from areas under its control. It reaffirms its full support for the Special Representative and for the dedicated staff of MONUC. "The Security Council stresses that these unjustifiable attacks are directly contrary to the process of peace and national reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to RCD-Goma's interest. "The Security Council reiterates its condemnation of the killings and attacks against civilians and soldiers that followed the events that took place on 14 May and thereafter in Kisangani and looks forward to receiving the joint MONUC/UNOHCHR report and recommendations on the violence in Kisangani. The Council holds RCD-Goma, as de facto authority, responsible to bring to an end all extrajudicial executions, human rights violations and arbitrary harassment of civilians in Kisangani and all other areas under RCD-Goma's control. "The Security Council demands that RCD-Goma immediately: - cease its harassment of United Nations officials and assist with the deployment and operations of MONUC; - fully cooperate with all investigations of violence in Kisangani and the surrounding areas; - comply with all relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular by demilitarizing Kisangani. "The Security Council calls upon Rwanda to exert its influence to have RCD-Goma meet without delay all its obligations under the resolutions of the Council and this presidential statement. "The Security Council encourages the Government of the DRC, Mouvement pour la Libération du Congo (MLC) and RCD-Goma to hold new discussions as soon as possible and in good faith, taking into account the progress in the inter-Congolese dialogue achieved in Sun City, in order to reach an all-inclusive agreement on the political transition. In this respect, the Council supports the efforts of the newly appointed Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Inter-Congolese dialogue, Mr. Mustapha Niasse." 