%%%ANGOLA SITUATION|

President: Mr. Cunningham (United States of America) Members: Bulgaria Mr. Tafrov Cameroon Mr. Tidjani China Mr. Zhang Yishan Colombia Mr. Valdivieso France Mr. Doutriaux Guinea Mr. Camara Ireland Mr. Corr Mauritius Mr. Koonjul Mexico Ms. Lajous Norway Mr. Larsen Russian Federation Mr. Konuzin Singapore Ms. Lee Syrian Arab Republic Mr. Mekdad United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Mr. Eldon Agenda The situation in Angola The meeting was called to order at 12.05 p.m. Adoption of the agenda The agenda was adopted. The President: I should like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure. There being no objection, it is so decided. At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) took a seat at the Council table. The President: The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have before them document S/2002/934, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior consultations. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now. A vote was taken by a show of hands. In favour: Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France, Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway, Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 1432 (2002). The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter. The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m. 