%%%ANNIVERSARIES|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|GUATEMALA|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/52/765 13 January 1998 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: FRENCH Fifty-second session Agenda item 45 THE SITUATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA Letter dated 31 December 1997 from the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to draw your attention to the text of the statement issued on 29 December 1997 by the Presidency of the European Union on the first anniversary of the signing of the Peace Agreements in Guatemala (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 45. (Signed) Jean-Louis WOLZFELD Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations English Page ANNEX [Original: English and French] Statement issued on 29 December 1997 by the Presidency of the European Union on the first anniversary of the signing of the Peace Agreements in Guatemala On the occasion of the first anniversary of the signing of the Peace Agreements, the European Union congratulates the people of Guatemala, its authorities and the various components of civil society, on the efforts made hitherto in implementing the peace process. Furthermore, it firmly supports the current action aimed at establishing a lasting peace and the well-being of the people of Guatemala. The Union hopes that the authorities and civil society will work together to achieve the objective of a reconciled society based on mutual respect. In this connection, it notes with satisfaction the demobilization of the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca and welcomes the creation of the National Civil Police and the setting up of the Historical Clarification Commission. It appeals to all the parties concerned to allow the Clarification Commission to complete its task under the best conditions. The Union considers that Guatemala is on the right course and pays homage to the efforts made by all parties to implement the Peace Agreements. It trusts that the people of Guatemala as a whole will be able to meet the historic challenge presented by the process set in motion one year ago. 