%%%FINANCIAL REGULATIONS|TRUST FUNDS|COSTS|

UNITED NATIONS EP Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme Distr. GENERAL UNEP/GC.22/7 26 November 2002 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Twenty-second session of the Governing Council/ Global Ministerial Environment Forum Nairobi, 3-7 February 2003 Item 9 of the provisional agenda Programme, the Environment Fund and administrative and other budgetary matters ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER BUDGETARY MATTERS Report of the Executive Director CONTENTS Page REVISION OF THE FINANCIAL RULES OF THE FUND OF THEENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, OF THE GENERAL PROCEDURE GOVERNING THE OPERATIONS OF THE FUND OF THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, OF THE GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR THE EXECUTION OF PROJECTS AND THE INSTITUTIONAL AND OF THE FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT COOPERATION MANAGEMENT OF TRUST FUNDS AND COUNTERPART (EARMARKED) CONTRIBUTIONS LOAN FROM THE ENVIRONMENT FUND FINANCIAL RESERVE MERCURE SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM SUGGESTED ACTION BY THE GOVERNING COUNCIL I. REVISION OF THE FINANCIAL RULES OF THE FUND OF THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, OF THE GENERAL PROCEDURES GOVERNING THE OPERATIONS OF THE FUND OF THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, OF THE GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR THE EXECUTION OF PROJECTS AND OF THE INSTITUTIONAL AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT COOPERATION 2. By its decision 19/25, the Governing Council approved various revisions to the financial rules of the Environment Fund of the UNEPUnited Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the general procedures governing the operations of the Environment Fund, including replacement of the expression "programme and programme support costs" by the expression "management and administrative support cost" and replacement of "Environment Coordination Board" by "Administrative Committee on Coordination". Since then, a number of developments have taken place which require further revisions to the revised legislative and financial texts regarding the United Nations Environment Programme and the Environment Fund. 3. The UNEP budget, in line with the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) and decision 20/31 of 4 February 1999, is prepared according to the harmonized budget format. It is proposed that, in line with the nomenclature of the harmonized budget format, the expression "management and administrative support cost" should be replaced with the expression "Environment Fund biennial support budget". It is proposed that this change be reflected in rules 209.1, 210.1, 211.2, 211.5 and 212.1 of the financial rules of the Environment Fund, as well as, in paragraph 3 of article VI of the general procedures governing the operations of the Environment Fund. 4. Governing Council decision 20/31, part 1, paragraph 11, authorized the Executive Director to approve costed work plans for direct implementation of specific subprogrammes and activities. This decision has implications for the general procedures and for the general guidelines for the execution of projects, in particular projects carried out by direct contracting. Accordingly, the following amendments (in bold type) are proposed to, first, the general procedures governing the operations of the Environment Fund: Article I, paragraph 1 (l): "l. Project document" or "costed work plan" means a formal document covering a project, as defined in paragraph (k) above, which includes the objectives, a work plan, a budget, pertinent background and supporting data and any special arrangements applicable to the execution of the said project"; Article VIII, paragraph 2: "2. The objectives which a project is designed to achieve shall be identified by the Executive Director and included in the project document or costed work plan, as shall be the follow-up action expected to be taken consequently on the completion of the project. The establishment of a basis for such follow-up action may in appropriate cases be a suitable objective for a project"; (c) Article VIII, paragraph 3: "3. In the project document or costed work plan, the Executive Director shall describe all financial, technical, managerial and other resources required for the successful implementation of the project"; Article VIII, paragraph 5: "5. Detailed arrangements for the execution of each project, including a budget estimate showing the financial implications of the project in its entirety, shall be specified in the project document or costed work plan". 5. Second, the following amendments are proposed to the general guidelines for the execution of projects: Article A, paragraph 6: "The project document or costed work plan, as defined in article I (l) of the General Procedures, contains a work plan and a project budget. In the light of the experience gained during the first 18 months of UNEP's collaboration by UNEP with the agencies, the Executive Director has proposed, and the agencies have welcomed, the introduction for each budget line of a 20 per cent expenditure flexibility for the agencies within each project, together with an authority to overspend by up to 5 per cent on the total cost of each project, provided such flexibility is exercised within the framework of the aims and objectives of the project and does not represent a significant amendment to the work plan agreed upon"; Article A, paragraph 13: "Project documents are required by the Ggeneral Pprocedures gGoverning the oOperations of the Fund for all projects and projects, carried out by direct contracting are also the object of such a project document or costed work plan. In this case, however, the project document or costed work plan is marked -internal- and upon approval of the project it is signed by the Director of the Fund alone. The actual implementation of the project is regulated by the contract referred to in paragraph 11 above, the elements of which are made to conform fully with the project document or costed work plan". 6. In 2001, the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) conducted a review of UNEP programme support costs and, by its recommendation AA2001/02/01/003, suggested that, for greater clarity, the term "counterpart contributions" should be changed to "earmarked contributions". In line with this recommendation, rules 204.1, 204.2 and 205.1 of the financial rules of the Environment Fund should be amended accordingly, to reflect this change. 7. At its session in 2001, the Economic and Social Council concurred with the proposal to change the name of the Administrative Committee on Coordination to the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB). Accordingly, it is proposed that, in paragraph 1 of article IV of the institutional and financial arrangements for international environment cooperation and in paragraph 6 of article VIII of the general procedures governing the operations of the Environment Fund, the phrase "Administrative Committee on Coordination" be replaced by the phrase "United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination". II. MANAGEMENT OF TRUST FUNDS AND COUNTERPART (EARMARKED) CONTRIBUTIONS 8. This section describes the various actions that the Executive Director has taken and intends to take with regard to the trust funds managed by UNEP. It also sets out, in line with the UNEP subprogrammes, the actual expenditures of the trust funds for the biennium 2000-2001, the revised estimates for the biennium 2002-2003 and the projected expenditures for the biennium 2004-2005. A. Background 9. The United Nations system has two types of trust funds, namely, technical cooperation trust funds and general trust funds. Technical cooperation trust funds are those that provide economic and social development assistance to developing countries. In UNEP this category includes the trust funds that finance the employment of Junior Professional Officers and Senior Programme Officers. General trust funds support activities other than those of an exclusively technical cooperation nature. B. Trust funds 10. In addition, UNEP distinguishes between the following categories of trust funds: Those that provide direct support to the UNEP programme of work; Those that provide support to UNEP-administered conventions, protocols and regional seas programmes; and Those belonging to the special category of activities supported by UNEP. 11. As on 15 November 2002, there were 98 active trust funds, distributed as shown in the following table: Table 1: Active trust funds as on 15 November 2002 Description General trust funds Technical cooperation trust funds (general) (personnel) Special trust TOTAL Direct support to UNEP Support to conventions, regional seas programmes and protocols Special category of trust funds A. SUBTOTAL 12. The special trust funds category includes the Trust Fund for the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. UNEP acts as the treasurer to the Multilateral Fund and accounts for the receipts and disbursement of resources (which include promissory notes). UNEP is also one of the implementing agencies of the Multilateral Fund programme and has established a separate trust fund, the Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for UNEP's Implementation of the Multilateral Fund Activities. Trust funds funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF),, for which UNEP is an implementing agency, also fall under this category. These are the Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Global Environment Facility, which is the main trust fund for implementation by UNEP of the GEF programme, and the Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for Strategic Partnership Projects, which funds implementation by UNEP of special initiatives approved by GEF. The Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Fee Based Programme of the Global Environment Facility is for the provision of administrative support for implementation by UNEP of the GEF programme. The last in this category is the Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Provision of an Executive Assistant to the Office of the Executive Director, which falls into neither the category of direct support to the UNEP Environment Fund Programme nor that of UNEP-supported conventions, protocols and regional seas programmes. 13. Over the period between the twenty-first session of the Governing Council and 15 November 2002, the Executive Director established 11 new trust funds, which are distributed as shown in tTable 2 below: Table 2: New trust funds established since the twenty-first session of the Governing Council 14. A complete listing as on 15 November 2002 of all the trust funds active during part or all of the bienniums 2000-2001, 2002-2003 and 2004-2005, including a brief descriptions of their programmatic objectives and details of their dates of establishment and expiry, may be found in document UNEP/GC.22/INF/8, annex I. 15. It should be noted that UNEP establishes trust funds with programmes and objectives that fall within the UNEP programme of work. C. Trust fund expenditure 16. A break-down of trust fund expenditure by subprogrammes, as set out in the UNEP programme of work, is provided below in order to give a comprehensive view of how they relate to the overall programme of UNEP. The actual expenditures for 2000-2001 and the estimates for 2002-2003 and 2004-2005 are given in tables 3, 4 and 5 below, respectively, broken down by subprogramme, type and category of trust fund. Annexes II, section B, III, section B, and IV, section B, to document UNEP/GC.22/INF/8/?? provide the same information as the tables mentioned above but, in addition, give the expenditure for each individual trust fund. 17. 2000-2001: The actual expenditure for the biennium is presented in table 3 below. It amounted to $485.2 million, of which $53.2 million related to trust funds directly supporting the UNEP programme of work, while $60.5 million and $371.5 million were for conventions, protocols and regional seas programmes and special accounts and trust funds, respectively. Table 3: Actual trust fund expenditure for the biennium 2000-2001 UNEP subprogramme Cooperation A. Direct support to UNEP: Subprogramme 1 Subprogramme 2 Subprogramme 3 Subprogramme 4 Subprogramme 5 Subprogramme 6 Subprogramme 7 B. Conventions, protocols and regional seas programmes: B. SUBTOTAL C. Special accounts and trust funds: Multilateral Fund GEF Executive Assistant (JPO) GRAND TOTAL Note: Subprogramme 1: Environmental assessment and early warning; Subprogramme 2: Environmental policy development and law; Subprogramme 3: Environmental policy implementation; Subprogramme 4: Technology, industry and economics; Subprogramme 5: Regional cooperation and representation; Subprogramme 6: Environmental conventions; Subprogramme 7: Communications and public information. 18. 2002-2003: Table 4 below shows that the total estimated expenditure of $444.3 million for the biennium may be further broken down into $59.3 million for trust funds directly supporting the UNEP programme of work, $71.8 million for trust funds for conventions, protocols and regional seas programmes and $313.2 million for special accounts and trust funds. Table 4: Estimates of 2002-2003 trust fund expenditure Ffunds Executive Assistant JPO D. SUBTOTAL 19. 2004-2005: Expenditure for the biennium is projected to amount to $483.2 million, of which $78.1 million will relate to trust funds directly supporting the UNEP programme of work, $67.9 to conventions and regional seas programmes and $337.2 to special accounts and trust funds, as shown in tTable 5 below. Table 5: Projected 2004-2005 trust fund expenditure fFunds Subprogramme 4: Industry, technology and economics; Subprogramme 6: Environmental conventions; and C. Counterpart (earmarked) contributions 20. In accordance with the financial rules of the Fund of UNEP (rules 204.1 and 204.2), the Executive Director may accept counterpart (earmarked) contributions in the form of agreed contributions from the Governments or cooperating agencies or supporting organizations or others made in cash or in kind to support specific activities, services and facilities, as set out in individual project documents. 21. Of the total expenditures of $18.8 million in the biennium 2000-2001, $15.4 million took the form of direct support for the UNEP programme of work and $3.4 million was spent on activities of conventions, regional seas programmes and protocols. This represents an overall increase of $1.4 million over the previous biennium, when the combined total counterpart (earmarked) contribution expenditure was $17.4 million. 22. It is estimated that counterpart (earmarked) contribution expenditures for 2002-2003 and 2004-2005 in support of the UNEP programme of work will be in the region of $25 million for each biennium. At the same time, it is estimated that counterpart (earmarked) contributions to conventions, regional seas programmes and protocols will increase from $3.4 million in 2000-2001 to $5.5 million in 2002-2003 and $8.4 million in 2004-2005. This assumption is based on the increasing willingness shown by donors to support the participation of developing countries in meetings and other activities of the conventions, regional seas programmes and protocols. 23. A breakdown of the actual expenditures for the biennium 2000-2001 and the estimates for 2002-2003 and 2004-2005 is given in table 6 below: Table 6: Counterpart (earmarked) contributions for 2000-2001 actual expenditures; 2002-2003; revised estimated expenditures; and 2004-2005 projected expenditures by UNEP subprogrammes and in support of conventions, protocols and regional seas programmes Counterpart (earmarked) contributions for: 2000-2001 Actual expenditures 2002-2003 revised estimated expenditures 2004-2005 projected expenditures Prior period adjustment Total UNEP Environment Fund activities Total conventions, protocols and regional seas 24. Document UNEP/GC.22/INF/8 contains tables on programmatic description and expenditure of the trust funds administered by UNEP for 2000-2001, 2002-2003, and 2004-2005, prepared to supplement this report on the management of trust funds and counterpart contributions. III. LOAN FROM THE ENVIRONMENT FUND FINANCIAL RESERVE 25. The following section has been prepared pursuant to Governing Council decision 21/33 of 9 February 2001, which requested the Executive Director to report to the Governing Council at its twenty-second session on the implementation of the decision. A. Background information 26. The underlying need for the further expansion of the United Nations premises in Nairobi stems from several successive General Assembly resolutions, initially resolution 44/211 of 22 December 1989, by which the Assembly called on all organizations of the United Nations system to make the necessary arrangements for the implementation of the United Nations common house concept and to establish common premises at the country level. The implementation of that concept was again underlined by the Secretary-General in his initiatives on the United Nations reforms, endorsed by General Assembly resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997. In line with those resolutions, the regional, subregional and country offices of the United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes still remaining in downtown Nairobi would be relocated to the United Nations compound. The need for such relocation has also been prompted by the complex security situation on the ground. Relocation of those offices to the compound would require some additional 11,000 square metres of office space, which is not currently available. 27. In the context of the Secretary-General's initiative of greater coordination and consolidation of the United Nations programme activities at the country level, the Executive Director of UNEP, in his capacity as Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi, submitted in early 1998 a number of proposals to United Nations Headquarters regarding expansion of the present facilities of the United Nations complex in Nairobi, including the construction of additional office space. The total cost of the construction of the new office buildings is estimated at approximately $14 million. B. Actions taken 28. On receipt of a positive response to his proposals for additional construction, the Executive Director held extensive discussions with the senior management of the United Nations Secretariat. In order to ensure the immediate availability of the necessary cash flow, it was suggested that the financing of the construction would follow the same approach as in the 1991-1993 construction exercise in Nairobi, whereby the UNEP Governing Council agreed to lend $6 million from the Environment Fund for the initial funding of construction. That loan with pre-agreed interest was then repaid through non-remittance of rent for the office space occupied by UNEP in the United Nations complex. Following the same pattern, the UNEP Governing Council, at its twenty-first session, held in February 2001, authorized the Executive Director to approve an advance of $8 million from the Environment Fund financial reserve on a loan basis towards the construction of the additional office space, as described above. In accordance with established procedures, the Secretary-General's proposals for proceeding with the preparation of the detailed design of the construction and the related cost estimates of the project were submitted to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ). The Advisory Committee, by its letter of 12 December 2001, concurred with the request of the Secretary-General to initiate the first phase of the construction of additional office space at the United Nations complex in Nairobi. 29. In line with Governing Council decision 21/33, the Executive Director ensured that the agreement, signed in July 2002 between UNEP and the United Nations Secretariat on the advance from the Environment Fund for the financing of the construction of additional office space at the United Nations complex in Nairobi, included the following provisions: (a) That the advance of $8 million, including the interest that the Environment Fund would have earned on the funds used for the advance payment, would be repaid to UNEP through remission of future rent due from all offices of the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies located in the UNUnited Nations complex in Nairobi; (b) That the amount of advance from UNEP would cover only part of the construction costs and the remainder of the costs would be financed from the United Nations regular budget against income from rent at the United Nations complex in Nairobi; (c) That the rate of interest for the initial twelve months would be fixed at 6 per cent compounded annually (0.5 per cent per month) from the month in which the advance payment was made until the month in which the repayment is completed. Thereafter, the rate of interest could be adjusted annually, based on the average closing weekly rate of the United States six-month Treasury Bill, subject to the 6 per cent per annum floor rate; (d) The loan would be subject to immediate repayment should the Executive Director of UNEP so request. 30 The Executive Director reported to the Committee of Permanent Representatives on 12 November 2002 on the status of implementation of this decision. In his report, the Executive Director informed the Committee of the remittance of the first tranche of the $8 million loan, amounting to $1.4 million for the pre-construction phase of the project and confirmed that United Nations Headquarters had issued the allotment and was expediting the request for proposals for the detailed design cost plan, consultancy services and project supervision. IV. MERCURE SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM 31. In its decision 21/34 of 9 February 2001, the Governing Council requested the Executive Director to implement the action plan presented in the report of the Executive Director on information and communication technology requirements, contained in document UNEP/GC./21/7/Add.2, further to developing the Mercure system for the United Nations organizations in Nairobi and to invite United Nations bodies and agencies in Nairobi to use Mercure on a cost-sharing basis. 32. The decision also authorized the Executive Director to make a direct donation of Mercure ground station facilities at partner sites to those countries that participated in the Mercure network and to continue, in those countries, the development of environmental information servicing capacities. 33. The action plan presented in the report of the Executive Director and referred to above calls for institutional development aimed at streamlining the strategic management of information and communication technology requirements;5 operational developments primarily designed to meet telecommunication requirements through commercial contract provisions; and environmental information services through the "UNEPnetunep.net" operation. 34. In April 2001, the Executive Director commissioned a task force, with the head of GRID-Arendal serving as the acting Senior Information Officer, to develop an information and communications technology strategy for UNEP. The task force concluded its work in December 2001. The Executive Director has continued efforts to secure the necessary financial support to implement the recommendation of the strategy, including by sending written appeals to the donor community and by making presentations at bilateral donor meetings. 35. Most of the priority information system applications identified as part of the process of developing the information and communications technology strategy fall into the category of administrative information handling and are therefore shared by all United Nations entities in Nairobi. The United Nations Office at Nairobi, working within the framework and under the guidance of the Nairobi Information and Communication Technology Committee (ICTC), on which UNEP is represented, is taking initiatives to meet a number of such common requirements. It is therefore expected that some of the priority needs experienced by UNEP for information and communications technology applications will be met in the near future through the work envisaged within the framework of ICTC. 36. In September 2001, the Executive Director, in a letter addressed to environmental ministers of countries that participated in Mercure, informed them of the scaling down of Mercure with effect from December 2001, to handle only the service needs of the United Nations Nairobi location; in the letter, he offered Mercure ground station facilities to countries without any reservation and encouraged them to integrate such facilities with their respective national telecommunications infrastructure as appropriate. 37. In addition, a project proposal to solicit continued donor support for maintaining and expanding activities initiated by Mercure at partner sites has been prepared by partner institutions under the guidance of GRID-Arendal. The Executive Director encourages initiatives that mobilize extrabudgetary resources, within United Nations financial rules, for implementing this project. 38. In connection with the Secretary-General's efforts to strengthen the United Nations presence in Nairobi, in September 2001 the United Nations Office at Nairobi was approached by the two departments of the United Nations Secretariat assigned the responsibility fofor providing telecommunications services to United Nations operations worldwide, with a proposal to expand the capacity provided in Nairobi under the United Nations telecommunications network (UN-net) through a new satellite connection, to be established through Brindisi, in Italy. 39. Additional capacity proposed for UN-net would provide a type and level of services similar to those of Mercure for 40 per cent of the annual fixed cost (i.e., contract fees paid to network operators) of Mercure; and for 65 per cent on average of the per-minute telephony charges of Mercure. A cost comparison between UN-net and Mercure for the operation of a 1,200 Kbps link for data and telephony may be summarized as follows: Annual fixed cost: Mercure UN-net added capacity Satellite space segment of 1,200 Kbps Network management, internet access and spares and maintenance contacts UNEPnet Implementation Centre, GRID-Arendal Total Telephone charges to UNEP popular destinations (cost per minute in US$)) New York Geneva Paris London Washington DC Mexico Bangkok Manama 40. In mid-January 2002, after evaluating the two options, the Executive Director decided in favour of the United Nations proposal and approved commencement of the proposed expansion of UN-net in Nairobi and the phasing- out of Mercure. The transition from Mercure to UN-net was completed in June 2002 and consequently the Mercure system was closed down. 41. The telecommunication needs of all United Nations bodies and agencies in the Gigiri compound are currently met by the services rendered on a cost-recovery basis by the United Nations Office at Nairobi, using the UN-net facilities. A comparison of past and present telecommunication facilities offered at United Nations Office at Nairobi is as follows: Comparison of network capacity: Past Present Data UN-net via New York UN-net added capacity via Brindisi, Italy 576 Kbps 960 Kbps 2,048 Kbps 1,536 Kbps 2,624 Kbps Telephony, IDD lines 12 circuits 22 circuits 32 circuits 34 circuits 44 circuits ISDN/video conferencing... 256 Kbps 384 Kbps 320 Kbps 704 Kbps 42. The "unepUNEP.net" operation is an integral part of the broader environmental information service of UNEP and is guided by the assessment and early warning subprogramme strategy. Details of the data and information activities for the 2004-2005 biennium may be found in document UNEP/GC.22/6, in the section dealing with subprogramme 1, on assessment and early warning. V. SUGGESTED ACTION BY THE GOVERNING COUNCIL 1. The Governing Council may wish to consider the adoption of decisions along the lines suggested below. A. Revision of the financial rules of the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme, of the general procedures governing the operations of the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme, of the general guidelines for the execution of projects and of the institutional and financial arrangements for international environment cooperation The Governing Council, Having considered the report of the Executive Director on the revision of the financial rules of the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme, of the general procedures governing the operations of the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme, of the general guidelines for the execution of projects and of the institutional and financial arrangements for international environment cooperation, 1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director; 2. Approvess the following revisions of the financial rules of the United Nations Environment Programme: Where the expression "management and administrative support cost" is used (rules 209.1, 210.1, 211.2, 211.5 and 212.1), it shall be replaced by the expression "Environment Fund biennial support budget"; Where the expression "counterpart contributions" is used (rules 204.1, 204.2 and 205.1) it shall be replaced by the expression "earmarked contributions"; 3. Approves the following revisions of the general procedures governing the operations of the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme: In article VI, paragraph 3, the expression "management and administrative support cost" shall be replaced by "Environment Fund biennial support budget"; In article I, paragraph l (l), and in article VIII, paragraphs 2, 3 and 5, the expression "project document" shall be replaced by "project document or costed work plan"; In article VIII, paragraph 6, the words "Administrative Committee on Coordination" shall be replaced by "United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination"; 4. Approves the following revisions of the general guidelines for the execution of projects: In article A, paragraphs 6 and 13, the expression "project document" shall be replaced by "project document or costed work plan"; 5. Approves the following revisions of the institutional and financial arrangements for international environment cooperation: In article IV, paragraph 1, the words "Administrative Committee on Coordination" shall be replaced by "the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination". BA. Management of trust funds and counterpart (earmarked) contributions Having considered the report of the Executive Director on the management of trust funds, 1. Notes and approves the establishment of the following trust funds since the twenty-first session of the Governing Council: (a) General trust funds: AE - General Trust Fund for the Environmental Assessment of Afghanistan, established in 2002 with an expiry date of 31 December 2004; DU - General Trust Fund to Support the Activities of the Dams and Development Unit to Coordinate Follow-up to the World Commission on Dams, established in 2001 with an expiry date of 31 December 2003; EG - General Trust Fund to establish a secretariat for the Environment Management Group in International Environment House, Geneva, established in 2001 with an expiry date of 31 December 2004; IG - General Trust Fund to Support the Activities of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Group of Ministers or their Representatives on International Environmental Governance, including the Participation of Developing Countries, established in 2001 with an expiry date of 31 December 2003; MC - General Trust Fund in Support of the Preparation of a Global Assessment of Mercury and its Compounds, established in 2001 with an expiry date of 31 December 2003; WP - General Trust Fund to Provide Support to the Global Environment Monitoring System/Water Programme Office and to Promote its Activities, established in 2002 with an expiry date of 31 December 2007; (b) Technical cooperation trust funds: BN - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Provision of a Senior Technical Cooperation Advisor/Liaison Officer for the UNEP Office in Brussels (financed by the Government of the Netherlands), established in 2002 with no fixed expiry date; IA - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for Ireland Aid Multilateral Environmental Fund for Africa (financed by the Government of Ireland), established in 2002 with an expiry date of 31 July 2005; MR - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund on the Conservation and Management of Marine Turtles and their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia, established in 2002 with an expiry date of 31 March 2004; SN - Special Purpose Trust Fund for the Provision of a Professional Officer to the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)/Secretariat of the Basel Convention (financed by the Government of Switzerland-SAEFL), established in 2002 with an expiry date of 31 December 2004; and UC - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Enhancement of Cooperation between UNEP and the United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC) in the Implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 687 (1991), established in 2002 with an expiry date of 31 December 2004; 2. Approves the extensions of the following trust funds, subject to the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme receiving requests to do so from the relevant Governments or contracting parties: AW - General Trust Fund for the Conservation of the African-Eurasian Waterbirds Agreement, through 31 December 2005; BA - General Trust Fund for the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic and North Seas Agreement, through 31 December 2005; BC - General Trust Fund for the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, through 31 December 2006; BD - General Trust Fund to Assist Developing Countries and Other Countries in Need of Technical Assistance in the Implementation of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, through 31 December 2006; BEL - General Trust Fund for Additional Voluntary Contributions in Support of Approved Activities under the Convention on Biological Diversity, through 31 December 2005; BK - General Trust Fund for the Clean-up of Environmental Hotspots following the Kosovo Conflicts and Preparation of Guidelines on Assessment and Remedial Measures for Post-conflict Environmental Damages, through 31 December 2005; BT - General Trust Fund for the Conservation of European Bats Agreement, through 31 December 2005; BY - General Trust Fund for the Convention on Biological Diversity, through 31 December 2005; BZ - General Trust Fund for Voluntary Contributions to Facilitate the Participation of Parties in the Process of the Convention on Biological Diversity, through 31 December 2005; CR - Regional Trust Fund for the Implementation of the Action Plan for the Caribbean Environment Programme, through 31 December 2005; CT - General Trust Fund for the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, through 31 December 2005; DU - General Trust Fund to Support the Activities of the Dams and Development Unit to Coordinate Follow-up to the World Commission on Dams, through 31 December 2005; EA - Regional Seas Trust Fund for the Eastern African Region, through 31 December 2005; EGL - General Trust Fund to Establish a Secretariat for the Environment Management Group in International Environment House, Geneva, through 31 December 2005; ES - Regional Trust Fund for the Implementation of the Action Plan for the Protection and Development of the Marine Environment and Coastal Areas of East Asian Seas, through 31 December 2005; ET - Trust Fund for the Environmental Training Network in Latin America and the Caribbean, through 31 December 2005; IG - General Trust Fund to Support the Activities of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Group of Ministers or their Representatives on International Environmental Governance, including the Participation of Developing Countries, through 31 December 2005; ME - Trust Fund for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea against Pollution, through 31 December 2005; MS - Trust Fund for the Convention on Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, through 31 December 2005; PN - General Trust Fund for the Protection, Management and Development of the Coastal and Marine Environment and the Resources of the North-west Pacific Region, through 31 December 2005; and WA - Trust Fund for the Protection and Development of the Marine Environment and Coastal Areas of the West and Central African Region, through 31 December 2005; AH - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund to Assist the Implementation of Agenda 21 in Europe and to Strengthen the Pan-European Environmental Cooperation (financed by the Government of the Netherlands), through 31 December 2005; AN - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund in Support of the UNEPnet Implementation Centre, through 31 December 2005; BS - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund to Support the Establishment of Regional Centres under the Basel Convention (financed by the Government of Switzerland), through, 31 December 2006; EL - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund to Strengthen the Institutional and Regulatory Capacity of Developing Countries in Africa (financed by the Government of the Netherlands), through 31 December 2005; GF - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the United Nations Environment Programme Implementation of the Activities Funded by the Global Environment Facility, through, 30 June 2005; GN - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund in Support of the Coordination Office of the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities (financed by the Government of the Netherlands), through 31 December 2005; GW - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Provision of Support to the Global International Waters Project (financed by the Government of Finland), through 31 December 2005; IP - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund to Assist Implementation of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer in Developing Countries (Financed by the Government of Sweden), through 31 December 2005; KT - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Promotion of Cleaner Production Investments in Developing Countries (financed by the Government of Norway), through 31 December 2005. 3. Notes and approves the closure of the following trust funds by the Executive Director, subject to completion of their activities and clearance of all financial implications: HL - General Trust Fund in Support of the United Nations Environment Programme High-level Committee of Ministers and Officials; LA - General Trust Fund in Support of the Lusaka Agreement Task Force on Cooperative Enforcement Operations Directed at Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna and Flora; PF - General Trust Fund in Support of the Work of the Government-Designated Group of Experts on Chemical Risk Reduction; HA - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund in Support of the Meetings of the UNEPUnited Nations Environment Programme High-Level Committee of Ministers and Officials (financed by the Government of the United States of America); CS - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Provision of a Senior Professional Officer to the United Nations Environment Programme (financed by the Government of Canada); and ZA - Technical Cooperation Trust Fund for the Provision of a Mining Expert (financed by the South African Chamber of Mines). C. Loan from the Environment Fund financial reserve Recalling its decision 21/33, by which the Governing Council authorized the Executive Director to approve an advance of up to eight million United States dollars from the Environment Fund financial reserve to the United Nations Secretariat, Taking into account the actions taken by the Executive Director in line with the Governing Council's request that the loan agreement between the Environment Fund and the United Nations Secretariat include a provision on the immediate repayment of the loan should the need arise, Considering that the Executive Director has submitted to the Committee of Permanent Representatives a status report on the implementation of this decision, 1. Notes with satisfaction the report of the Executive Director on the loan from the Environment Fund financial reserve and the progress achieved in the implementation of the first phase of the construction project; 2. Notes with appreciation the actions taken by the Executive Director for negotiating the most favourable terms and rate of interest for the advance from the Environment Fund financial reserve and for ensuring that the agreement include a provision that the loan would be subject to immediate repayment should the Executive Director so request; 3. Requests the Executive Director to report to the Committee of Permanent Representatives on further progress of loan drawdowns and the status of the construction project. 