%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|RWANDA|DISSOLUTION|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|INVENTORIES|

Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 146 Financing of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda Financing of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda * The submission of the present document was delayed slightly owing to internal consultations. Report of the Secretary-General* Paragraphs Page Introduction Classification and disposition of the assets of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 1. The present report on the final disposition of the assets of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) whose mandate expired on 8 March 1996, is submitted pursuant to section VII of General Assembly resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, in which the Assembly endorsed the proposals of the Secretary-General on the disposition of the assets of peacekeeping operations contained in his report of 25 May 1994 (A/48/945, para. 110 (d)) and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its report of 18 November 1994 (A/49/664, para. 116). II. Classification and disposition of the assets of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda 2. The process of liquidating the assets of UNAMIR was guided by the following principles and policies as approved by the General Assembly in section VII of its resolution 49/233 A: (a) Equipment in good condition that conforms to established standardization or is considered compatible with existing equipment will be redeployed to other United Nations operations elsewhere in the world or will be placed in reserve to form the start-up kits for use by future missions; (b) Equipment not required by other peacekeeping missions but which may be useful for operations of other United Nations agencies, international organizations or non-governmental organizations and which it is not feasible to keep in reserve will be sold to a relevant agency or organization; (c) Any equipment or property not required or which it is not feasible to dispose of in the above manner or which is in poor condition will be subject to commercial disposal in the area of operations, following standard United Nations regulations and procedures; (d) Any surplus mission assets remaining after disposition under the terms referred to under subparagraphs (a) to (c) above, and/or any assets which have already been installed in the country and which, if dismantled, would in fact set back the rehabilitation process of the country, will be contributed to the duly recognized Government of the country involved. This refers in particular to airfield installations and equipment, bridges and mine-clearing equipment. All efforts should be made to obtain from the Government its agreement to compensate the United Nations in a mutually acceptable form (contributions, services, tax exemption, etc.) for the residual value of any surplus mission assets installed in the country which could not be otherwise disposed of. The General Assembly should, as a matter of principle, be requested to approve any such disposition of mission assets, which would provide for free-of-charge contribution to the Government. 3. Based on the inventory records at 17 December 1997, the assets of UNAMIR amounted to an inventory value of $64,472,700. The assets have been grouped into 15 categories of equipment presented in standard peacekeeping operation budgets: prefabricated buildings, vehicular equipment, communications equipment, office equipment, data-processing equipment, generators, observation equipment, petrol tank plus metering equipment, medical and dental equipment, accommodation equipment, refrigeration equipment, miscellaneous equipment, water purification equipment, air traffic control equipment and water and septic tanks. 4. In accordance with the principles and policies recalled in paragraph 3 above, the assets of UNAMIR have been placed into three groups as presented in summarized form in table 1 below. Table 1 Summary of the final disposition of assets of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (Thousands of United States dollars) Category Inventory value Transferred to other missions or for temporary storage to the United Nations Logistics Base (UNLB) at Brindisi Disposed of in the mission area Sold Donated Written off Lost Total (a) Group I includes assets identified as meeting the requirements of other United Nations missions. The items in this group, with an inventory value of $38,352,300 (59.5 per cent of total asset value), have been transferred to other United Nations missions, United Nations Headquarters and UNLB, for temporary storage pending future use; (b) Group II consists of assets with an inventory value of $20,225,200, representing 31.4 per cent of the total inventory value of UNAMIR assets. It includes two subgroups: subgroup II (a) comprises items sold ($7,529,500) and subgroup II (b) comprises items donated ($12,695,700), as follows: (i) Subgroup II (a), with an inventory value of $7,529,500 representing 11.7 per cent of the total asset value, consists of assets sold locally and at depreciated value to the extrabudgetary programmes undertaken by the United Nations offices/programmes and agencies operating within the mission area. The amount of $1,467,500, representing the proceeds of sale, was credited as miscellaneous income to the UNAMIR Special Account (see table 2 below); (ii) Non-lethal assets, with an inventory value of $12,581,000 and $79,200 representing 19.5 per cent and 0.1 per cent, have been donated to the Government of Rwanda and a medical unit of a Member State. The remaining non-lethal assets, with an inventory value of $35,500, had been donated to United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations; (c) Group III totals $5,895,200, representing 9.1 per cent of the total asset inventory value. These assets have been written off as a result of accidents and damages caused by natural elements and acts of war, abandonment owing to the then prevalent security situation in Rwanda and loss owing to theft. Information on all items in various categories of assets written-off is summarized in table 3 below. Table 2 Sale of the assets of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda Sold to Sale value United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations Government and local institutions Private individuals Table 3 Written-off United Nations property reported by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda Residual value Obsolescence Reported lost Wear and tear Surplus Accident Theft Damage III. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 5. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are: (a) To take note of the present report on the final disposition of assets of UNAMIR; (b) To approve the donation of assets with a total inventory value of $12,581,000 and corresponding residual value of $2,401,300 to the Government of Rwanda; (c) To approve the donation of assets with a total inventory value of $79,200 and corresponding residual value of $53,400 to the Medical Unit of a Member State. 