%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|CAPACITY BUILDING|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|CONSULTATIONS|RAPID DEPLOYMENT FORCES|HUMAN RESOURCES|GENDER|CHILDREN|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|DISARMAMENT|RULE OF LAW|LANDMINES|STAFF SECURITY|REGIONAL COOPERATION|FINANCING|CODES OF CONDUCT|

Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 78 Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects Report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations Rapporteur: Mr. Alaa Issa (Egypt) I. Introduction 1. In its report (A/55/1024), welcomed by the Assembly in its resolution 56/225 A of 24 December 2001, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations decided to continue its consideration of the recommendations contained in the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see A/55/305-S/2000/809) and of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of those recommendations (A/55/502) at its regular session, to be held after the completion and submission of the comprehensive review. 2. The General Assembly, in its resolution 56/225 B of 22 May 2002, welcomed the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/56/863) and decided that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, should continue its efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and should review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field. 3. At its 170th meeting on 3 March 2003, the Special Committee elected the following representatives as its officers for a one-year term of office: Arthur Mbanefo (Nigeria), Chairperson; Luis E. Cappagli (Argentina), Glyn Berry (Canada), Koji Haneda (Japan), and Beata Peksa-Krawiec (Poland), Vice-Chairpersons; and Alaa Issa (Egypt) as the Rapporteur. 4. The Special Committee also discussed its organization of work and decided to establish an open-ended working group, to be chaired by Canada, to consider the substance of the mandate entrusted to the Committee by the General Assembly. 5. The Special Committee welcomed Switzerland as a new member. II. General debate and working group 6. At its 170th to 173rd meetings, on 3 and 4 March 2003, the Special Committee held a general debate on the matters presented in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee (A/57/711). 7. In his statement to the Special Committee at its 170th meeting, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations introduced the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee, outlined the status of the reform efforts and identified future challenges, as well as areas needing further attention. 8. The Under-Secretary-General told the Special Committee that the provision of well-equipped, well-trained and disciplined military and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations was the collective responsibility of all Member States. He appealed to delegations to maintain their commitment to and support for United Nations operations deployed around the world and requested that ways be identified in which contributions could be made to further enhance peacekeeping capacity, especially in the areas of rapid deployment, training and disciplinary issues. He noted that steady progress was being made to enhance African peacekeeping capacity. 9. During the ensuing general debate, many delegations underlined their continuing commitment to peacekeeping as an important instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security. The same delegations noted, however, that peacekeeping could not be a substitute for permanent solutions, nor could it resolve the underlying causes of conflicts, but that its utility lies rather in its use as a temporary measure, which contributes to the cessation of hostilities, lessens the possibility of escalation of conflict and provides a conducive atmosphere in which to pursue an end to conflicts through peaceful means. 10. Many delegations reiterated that peacekeeping operations should strictly observe the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and called for the respect of basic peacekeeping principles, namely the consent of the parties, the non-use of force, except in self-defence, and impartiality. In addition, delegations urged that mandates for peacekeeping operations be clearly defined and assured of secure financing. 11. A number of delegations reiterated that the activities of the United Nations in the maintenance of peace and security formed a continuum, stretching from conflict prevention to peacekeeping and peace-building, and emphasized that there must be coordination and continuity of peace efforts both during and after peacekeeping activities. 12. With regard to the continuing reform of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, many delegations expressed their satisfaction with the rate of progress and continued to support an integrated approach to the work. 13. While acknowledging the efforts made by the Secretariat to improve the representation of troop-contributing countries and underrepresented countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, delegations urged that more be done to ensure transparency in the process, stressing, however, that merit must be the deciding factor in recruitment. 14. With regard to mission leadership, many delegations reiterated the view that the appointment of candidates to senior positions in the field should reflect the respective levels of contribution to the force in question. 15. A number of delegations reiterated that the Secretariat should continue to work towards the goal of enhancing its capacity to deploy operations within 30 days, or within 90 days in the case of complex peacekeeping operations, after the adoption of the mandate of a mission. 16. Many delegations welcomed the considerable progress made in strengthening the United Nations Stand-by Arrangements System (UNSAS) for military, civilian police and civilian personnel, and in the procurement and management of strategic deployment stocks in the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy. 17. While welcoming improvements in the timeliness of reimbursements for troop costs and contingent-owned equipment, many delegations reiterated that all delegations must pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without conditions. 18. A number of delegations noted that the ability of developing countries to contribute to peacekeeping operations was impeded by financial constraints and shortfalls in equipment. 19. Several delegations suggested the creation of a "rapid reimbursement policy" to allow troop-contributing countries with budgetary constraints to meet the established rapid deployment timelines. 20. Many delegations acknowledged and welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to enhance the timely availability of strategic airlift and sealift capabilities, but noted that, despite those efforts, the United Nations has not been able to secure firm pledges from Member States with regard to such capabilities. States with such capability were urged to pledge it to the United Nations Stand-by Arrangements System. 21. Some delegations noted the valuable and necessary role of Integrated Mission Task Forces (IMTFs) in ensuring the planning, coordination and implementation of all aspects of mission plans. 22. Many delegations noted that operations must address challenges in a comprehensive way, acknowledging the need for additional research and analysis on the interrelated areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform and the strengthening of the rule of law in post-conflict environments. Many delegations also recognized that while United Nations peacekeeping operations may not be responsible for any aspects of activities in those areas, there is a need for conceptual clarity and an appraisal of the expertise and capacities that exist within and outside the United Nations system in order to ensure operational coherence on the ground. In this regard, many delegations welcomed the establishment of a dedicated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration focal point in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 23. Delegations highlighted rule of law as an essential element for sustained stability in a post-conflict environment and stressed the need for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to work closely with Member States to strengthen and consolidate its capacity in this area. In this regard, while the report of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security Task Force on comprehensive rule of law strategies was welcomed, the need to conduct more detailed discussions with Member States on the proposals contained in it was stressed. 24. A clear information and communication policy was identified by many delegations as a priority for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The improvement of information-sharing mechanisms between delegations, the Situation Centre, the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit and other areas of the Department was encouraged. 25. A number of delegations expressed satisfaction with the work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in gender mainstreaming for peacekeeping operations and continued to support the efforts of the United Nations Secretariat to establish a focal point for gender issues within the Department. 26. A number of delegations expressed satisfaction with the commitment of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the development of common training standards for the police and military in peacekeeping missions. The development of a generic force headquarters and the creation of standardized generic training modules were highlighted as positive and necessary developments for the improvement of peacekeeping activities. 27. Many delegations sought clarification as to the legal status of civilian police officers serving with the United Nations, considering them to be part of a national contribution rather than individual civilian specialists. The proposal by the United Nations Secretariat to hold a meeting with Member States during 2003 to examine this issue was welcomed. 28. A number of delegations reiterated the need to further clarify and refine the civilian police standards selection system so as to ensure that police recruited from Member States are suited for the existing conditions in a peacekeeping operation. 29. Many delegations expressed support for the observation in the report of the Secretary-General on the importance of impeccable conduct on the part of all peacekeepers and agreed on the need to develop a single United Nations standard for all personnel serving in peacekeeping operations. In this regard, the suggestion of the creation of an "ombudsman" position in United Nations peacekeeping missions was presented. 30. The importance of working with regional peacekeeping organizations was recognized by many delegations. In this regard, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was encouraged to develop close working relationships with these organizations and to provide support and advice to national and regional training centres. 31. The planned expansion of the role of the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit as the interface between the Secretariat and the delegations was welcomed by many delegations. 32. A number of delegations welcomed the intention of the Secretariat to establish, together with Member States, validation mechanisms for lessons learned. 33. A number of delegations supported the idea of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations conducting regular self-evaluations and systematic reviews. 34. Many delegations welcomed the enhancement of the triangular consultation mechanisms between the Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat. The need for increased cooperation was stressed and particular note was made of the need for troop-contributing countries to have greater input in planning mission mandates and in cases of changes in the tasks or operational concepts of peacekeeping missions. 35. The positive role of quick impact projects in peacekeeping operations was noted by some delegations and the Secretariat was encouraged to work closely with troop-contributing countries to expand this activity to enhance flexibility. 36. Delegations highlighted the issue of safety and security in peacekeeping operations. Ensuring the safety of peacekeepers was seen as a priority for all troop-contributing countries. The need for close consultation with delegations to establish clear guidelines was emphasized. 37. A number of delegations welcomed the appointment of an HIV/AIDS adviser for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 38. Delegations welcomed the adoption of resolution 57/129, designating 29 May as the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. III. Proposals, recommendations and conclusions A. Introduction 39. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in making its recommendations, reaffirms the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. 40. The Special Committee reaffirms that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security rests with the United Nations, in accordance with the Charter, and affirms that peacekeeping continues to be one of the key instruments available to the United Nations in discharging that responsibility. The Committee, as the only United Nations forum mandated to comprehensively review the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, including measures aimed at enhancing the capacity of the Organization to conduct peacekeeping operations, is uniquely able to make a significant contribution in the area of issues and policy relating to peacekeeping operations. It encourages other United Nations bodies, funds and programmes to avail themselves of the Committee's particular perspective on peacekeeping operations. 41. Noting that in recent years there has been a sudden surge in United Nations peacekeeping efforts in various parts of the world, requiring the participation of Member States in various activities, the Special Committee considers it essential that the United Nations be able to effectively maintain international peace and security. This calls for, inter alia, an improved capacity to assess conflict situations, effective planning and management of peacekeeping operations and quick and effective responses to mandates of the Security Council. 42. Since the end of the Cold War, there has been an increase in the number of complex peacekeeping operations. The Special Committee notes that the Security Council has recently mandated peacekeeping operations that have included, in addition to the traditional tasks of monitoring and reporting, a number of other mandated activities. In that regard, the Committee stresses the importance of an effective Department of Peacekeeping Operations that is efficiently structured and adequately staffed. 43. The Special Committee pays tribute to the men and women who have served and continue to serve in peacekeeping operations for their high level of professionalism, dedication and courage. Particular tribute is due to those who have given their lives for the maintenance of peace and security. 44. The Special Committee stresses the importance of consistently applying the principles and standards it has set forth for the establishment and conduct of peacekeeping operations and emphasizes the need to continue to consider those principles, as well as definitions of peacekeeping, in a systematic fashion. New proposals or conditions concerning peacekeeping operations should be discussed in the Committee. B. Guiding principles, definitions and implementation of mandates 45. The Special Committee stresses that peacekeeping operations should strictly observe the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter. It emphasizes that respect for the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States and non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State is crucial to common efforts, including peacekeeping operations, to promote international peace and security. 46. The Special Committee believes that respect for the basic principles of peacekeeping, such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-defence, is essential to its success. 47. The Special Committee is of the view that peacekeeping operations should not be used as a substitute for addressing the root causes of conflict. Those causes should be addressed in a coherent, well-planned, coordinated and comprehensive manner, using political, social and developmental instruments. Consideration should be given to ways in which those efforts can continue without interruption after the departure of a peacekeeping operation, so as to ensure a smooth transition to lasting peace and security. 48. The Special Committee stresses that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter. The Committee notes the statements by the President of the Security Council of 29 December 1998 (S/PRST/1998/38) and 20 February 2001 (S/PRST/2001/5) with regard to the inclusion, as appropriate, of peace-building elements in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, with a view to ensuring a smooth transition to a successful post-conflict phase. The Committee stresses the importance of those elements being explicitly defined and clearly identified before they are incorporated into the mandates of peacekeeping operations, whenever appropriate. The Committee emphasizes the role of the General Assembly in the formulation of post-conflict peace-building activities. 49. The Special Committee continues to stress the importance of providing peacekeeping operations with clearly defined mandates, objectives and command structures, as well as secure financing, in support of efforts to achieve peaceful solutions to conflicts. It also stresses the need to ensure, in the formulation and implementation of mandates, congruity between mandates, resources and objectives. The Committee emphasizes that, when changes are made to an existing mandate, commensurate changes should be made to the resources available to a peacekeeping operation to carry out its new mandate. Changes in the mandate of an ongoing mission should be based on a thorough and timely reassessment by the Security Council, including military advice, of the implications on the ground. The Committee also believes that such changes in mandates should occur after thorough discussion between contributing countries and the Security Council. 50. The Special Committee stresses the need to ensure the unity of command of United Nations peacekeeping operations. It recalls that the overall political direction and control of United Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations is within the competence of the Security Council, while their execution remains the responsibility of the Secretary-General. C. Cooperation with troop-contributing countries 51. The Special Committee believes that there is a need to strengthen the relationship between those who plan, mandate and manage peacekeeping operations and those who implement the mandates for these operations. The Committee believes that a true partnership must develop between the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries, one which is sustainable in the face of complex peacekeeping operations. Troop-contributing countries, through their experience and expertise, can greatly contribute to the planning process and can assist the Security Council in taking appropriate, effective and timely decisions on peacekeeping operations. 52. In the critical area of cooperation between the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries, the Special Committee reiterates the need for substantive and meaningful consultations. In this context, the Committee takes note of the provisions of section B of annex II to Security Council resolution 1353 (2001). The Committee welcomes the Security Council's commitment to hold consultations in a timely manner, at various stages of a peacekeeping operation, in particular: (a) when the Secretary-General has identified potential troop-contributing countries for a new or ongoing peacekeeping operation; (b) during the implementation phase of an operation; (c) when considering a change to, renewal of or completion of a peacekeeping mandate; or (d) when a rapid deterioration in the situation on the ground threatens the safety and security of peacekeepers. The Committee believes that the meetings and mechanisms established by Security Council resolution 1353 (2001) and the note of the President of the Security Council of 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) have improved the consultation process. The joint meeting between the Security Council Working Group and the troop-contributing countries on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) in 2002 is a case in point. The Committee looks forward to further meetings being held in 2003 and for these meetings to be substantive and meaningful. The Committee recommends that the holding of all consultative meetings should be more transparent and that all potentially significant actors are informed beforehand of these meetings. 53. The Special Committee shares the view expressed in the report of the Secretary-General (A/57/711, para. 9) regarding the importance of intensive and ongoing discussions between the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. The Committee welcomes the Secretary-General's commitment that such cooperation will remain a high priority for the Secretariat in 2003. 54. The Special Committee urges the Secretariat to consult with troop-contributing countries in a timely manner when planning any change in the tasks, mission-specific rules of engagement, operational concepts or command and control structure affecting personnel, equipment, training and logistics requirements in order to enable troop-contributing countries to give their advice during the planning process and to ensure that their troops have the capacity to meet these new demands. 55. The Special Committee urges the Secretariat to consult with the troop-contributing countries concerned when planning a draw-down of troops in any peacekeeping operation. The implementation of the draw-down should only take place after considering inputs from the troop-contributing countries concerned and bearing in mind the situation on the ground. 56. The Special Committee welcomes the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to give comprehensive briefings to Member States on specific peacekeeping operations and generic peacekeeping issues. The Committee encourages the Secretariat to make further use of modern audio-visual presentations and information technology systems. The Committee requests that the Secretariat provide the contents of the briefs and the slides to the Member States concerned, where feasible. 57. The Special Committee requests that Member States concerned should be fully consulted and be provided with a timely account of United Nations investigations or inquiries into incidents when there is likely to be a determination of responsibility on the part of any of their personnel. In cases where the loss of or damage to property or death or personal injury is alleged to have been caused by gross negligence or wilful misconduct of nationally contributed personnel or equipment, and therefore a troop-contributing country could be seen as liable for such claims, the Committee urges the Secretariat to involve the latter in the investigation. The outcome of the investigation, including the rationale and related evidence, must be made available to the troop-contributing country to enable its national authorities to consider questions of legal liability. 58. The Special Committee recommends that the Secretariat develop additional modalities for information-sharing with troop-contributing countries and other personnel contributors. Troop-contributing countries and other personnel contributors should be informed of new developments by the fastest and most efficient means, particularly in crisis situations, when the security situation in the field changes or when casualties have occurred. 59. The Special Committee commends the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for conducting the first course for troop-contributing countries, New York-based military advisers, civilian police advisers and/or officials responsible for peacekeeping issues at the permanent missions, with the aim of enhancing cooperation and information sharing between the Department and Member States. The Committee encourages the Department to hold another course in 2003 and on an annual basis thereafter. 60. The Special Committee encourages the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to make more use of issue-specific workshops and briefings throughout the year to pursue a focused cooperation with Member States on questions related to peacekeeping. 61. The Special Committee encourages close consultation between the Secretariat and Member States in the development and updating of peacekeeping-related guidelines and policy documents. Such consultation is essential for the commitment of Member States to the implementation of these documents. 62. The Special Committee requests that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provide ready access for Member States to a comprehensive and up-to-date list of existing and anticipated peacekeeping-related policy papers, guidelines, manuals, standard operating procedures and training materials and to any documents required by Member States for peacekeeping-related purposes, including through the use of information technology such as the Internet. The list and documents should contain information that allows Member States to keep close track of the status of such documentation. 63. The Special Committee reaffirms the importance of continuing the practice of exchanges of views between its Working Group and the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. In this regard, it is important to maintain a channel of communication on peacekeeping issues of common interest. 64. The Special Committee recalls its recommendation in its previous report (A/56/863, para. 72) that the Situation Centre in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should be able to process relevant information from the field in a useful and timely manner. 65. The Special Committee recommends that communication between troop-contributing countries and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations be improved in the area of predeployment visits. D. Enhancing the capacity of the United Nations for peacekeeping 66. The Special Committee stresses the importance of closer cooperation between the Secretariat and the Member States in enhancing United Nations peacekeeping capacities. The Committee welcomes the six issues recommended in the report of the Secretary-General (A/57/711) for particular attention by the Secretariat and Member States in 2003, namely: integrating lessons learned and best practices into operational planning and coordination; developing and implementing comprehensive strategies for complex peacekeeping operations; enhancing rapid deployment; strengthening training; minimizing disciplinary problems; and strengthening regional peacekeeping capacities, particularly in Africa. 67. The Special Committee encourages the Secretariat to continue collaborating with the Committee in these areas and, in this regard, ensuring that open communications are maintained with Member States on critical areas and key topics related to the operation and management of peacekeeping operations. 68. The Special Committee requests to be briefed by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on its ongoing evaluation of the impact of the recent restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as requested in General Assembly resolution 56/241, and also requests the Secretariat to conduct an independent review of the status of the implementation of the reform process initiated by the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/305-S/2000/809), to be presented to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 1. Lessons learned and implementation of best practices 69. The Special Committee supports the Secretary-General's intention to ensure that the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit plays a more prominent role in the work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and, in this regard, encourages the Department and relevant parts of the United Nations system to strengthen their dialogue with the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit. 70. In strengthening best practices for current and future peacekeeping operations, the Special Committee encourages the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit to consult with those Member States that have participated in United Nations peacekeeping missions. To this end, the Unit should consider holding workshops to discuss themes of practical and special interest to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and to all Member States. 71. The Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit should also consider the development of validation mechanisms for lessons learned and best practices, including consultations, for example workshops with former force commanders, police commissioners and national contingent commanders. 72. The Special Committee emphasizes the useful role the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit can play in coordinating with other arms of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the wider United Nations system. In fulfilling this role, the Committee encourages the Unit to develop recommendations for the application of best practices and the implementation of lessons learned in the planning and the conduct of ongoing and future missions, particularly in areas such as security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, rule of law and gender. 73. The Special Committee welcomes the undertaking by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to complete the handbook on multidimensional peacekeeping operations by mid-2003. The Committee requests that the handbook be provided to Member States for timely comment before completion of the final draft. 74. The Special Committee notes that in its last report it had anticipated a dialogue with the Secretariat on the intention of the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit to develop mechanisms on validation, dissemination and implementation of lessons learned, and now looks forward to a meeting between the Secretariat and Member States to develop validation mechanisms for the lessons-learned process. The Committee strongly endorses the proposal to develop a field-level lessons-learned network and supports the incorporation of lessons learned in the conduct of all mission tasks. 75. The Special Committee emphasizes the importance of effective and timely information sharing and dissemination between the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit and Member States in order to ensure that lessons learned are implemented in future missions and incorporated into policy and training documents and, in this regard, encourages the Unit to build relationships with national and regional centres of peacekeeping research. 2. System-wide information and analysis 76. Recognizing the informational and analytical requirements of the United Nations, mainly with respect to United Nations peacekeeping operations, the Special Committee reiterates its view that it should continue to consider the needs of the United Nations in this regard and how best to use existing resources. The Committee looks forward to further suggestions from the Secretariat on ways to address this important issue. 3. Operational planning and Integrated Mission Task Forces 77. The Special Committee welcomes the effort of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to complete an initial mapping of the full planning process and looks forward to this information being shared with all Member States. 78. The Special Committee recognizes that the increasing complexity of peacekeeping operations requires greater coordination between the United Nations Secretariat, peacekeeping missions, funds and programmes, the specialized agencies of the United Nations, bilateral donors, and the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as non-governmental organizations (NGOs), as appropriate. The Committee considers that the optimal, timely and coordinated engagement of these actors, when appropriate, through different phases of peacekeeping operations will contribute substantially to the full achievement of mandates. It will also facilitate a smoother transition to post-conflict developmental and political arrangements. Successful achievement of such transitions requires careful and deliberate planning from the outset and recognition by all that there should be no exit without strategy. In this context, the Committee recognizes the valuable role of integrated mission task forces in ensuring the coordination of all aspects and all phases of mission planning between all relevant actors. 79. The Special Committee requests that the Secretary-General inform Member States, no later than in his next report to the Committee, on progress made since the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, in strengthening relationships between the Secretariat, other agencies and the Bretton Woods institutions. 4. Rapid deployment 80. The Special Committee reiterates the validity of the goal of enhancing United Nations capacity to deploy peacekeeping operations within 30 days, or 90 days in the case of complex peacekeeping operations, after the adoption of a mandate. In this regard, the Committee expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the Secretariat to ensure the achievement of that goal. 81. The Special Committee reiterates its belief that, in order to meet these time frames, the Secretariat must have the capacity to act in a timely manner on the three critical and interdependent aspects of rapid deployment -- personnel, materiel readiness and funding -- once it becomes clear that a peacekeeping operation is likely to be established. 82. While welcoming the recent consultations with Member States on the key aspects of rapid deployment, the Special Committee reaffirms the importance of continued dialogue between the Secretariat and the Member States on how to achieve rapid deployment. 83. The Special Committee agrees on the need to further improve the rapid deployment capacity of the military, civilian police and civilian components of peacekeeping operations and welcomes the briefings provided by the Secretariat and the regular consultations with Member States on this issue. 84. In order to comply with the time frame established for rapid deployment, the Special Committee recommends that consultations with potential troop-contributing countries start once it becomes clear that a peacekeeping operation is likely to be established. 85. The Special Committee recognizes the importance of improving predeployment training and preparations of the United Nations on-call mechanisms, as well as providing for better inter-operability and cooperation among the field units of troop-contributing countries. The Committee encourages the Secretariat to focus on these issues. Personnel 86. The Special Committee notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Secretariat to enhance the rapid deployment capacity of the military, civilian police and civilian personnel, in particular with a view to establishing generic headquarters at new missions. 87. In this respect, the Special Committee welcomes the progress made towards making on-call lists, on-call rosters and the Rapid Deployment Team operational and encourages that further efforts be undertaken to train the relevant personnel. 88. The Special Committee notes the forthcoming practical training exercises, such as the On-Call List Training Course to be held in Hungary from 13 to 22 May 2003 and the Command Post Exercise to take place in Argentina in June 2003, recognizes their importance as methods for validating the on-call system in the effective integration and coordination of the model mission military headquarters and, in this regard, looks forward to having the Secretariat share the outcome of these exercises with Member States at a relevant meeting. 89. The Special Committee welcomes the initiatives to improve the capacity for rapid deployment of civilian personnel and considers the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Rapid Deployment Teams to be very valuable in this regard. 90. The Special Committee furthermore encourages the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to investigate the possibility of a short-term assignment of some military officers from its staff, in parallel with the civilian Rapid Deployment Teams and in consultation with the permanent missions, to assist the core planning team, once deployed in the field, during the first phase of a mission. 91. The Special Committee welcomes the introduction of the civilian police on-call roster, the model police headquarters and corresponding job descriptions as important steps towards preparing for the rapid deployment of civilian police. Materiel readiness 92. The Special Committee supports the establishment and continuing development of the Strategic Deployment Stocks at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi and the establishment of appropriate management mechanisms, policies and procedures to ensure effective use of the strategic deployment stocks and looks forward to further progress in this regard. 93. The Special Committee welcomes the logistics partners conference held in Freetown, from 3 to 5 March 2003 and recognizes that many troop-contributing countries are still faced with problems of logistical support. In an endeavour to overcome such difficulties, the Committee recommends that, where troop-contributing countries face shortfalls in contingent-owned equipment or self-sustainability, the United Nations should continue to provide assistance in overcoming these shortfalls, including through bilateral arrangements, other Member States and United Nations stocks. The Committee emphasizes the need for appropriate arrangements to be made in order to clearly define in advance the responsibilities of all parties involved in this mechanism. 94. The Special Committee notes the ongoing considerations by the Secretariat of ways to overcome equipment shortfalls faced by troop-contributing countries, and asks the Secretariat to present the results of its considerations to the Committee upon completion. Funding 95. The Special Committee reiterates its request to the Secretariat to report before its next session on the difficulties troop-contributing countries face in complying with rapid deployment requirements and to recommend, on the basis of consultations with Member States, ways to overcome these difficulties, including the financial aspects. To this end, the Committee requests the creation of a working group with the participation of all interested Member States, along the lines of the working group on levels of ammunition for peacekeeping operations, to consider this issue, including ways of assuring rapid reimbursement in the rapid deployment phase. Strategic lift 96. The Special Committee welcomes the efforts to clarify capabilities regarding specialized enabling resources and strategic lift capabilities. With regard to enabling resources, the Committee recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provide Member States with detailed requirements. The Committee supports the practice of contracting private companies for the provision of required capabilities. 97. The Special Committee encourages the Secretariat to continue in its efforts to secure firm pledges for strategic lift and urges those with the means to do so to make such pledges to the United Nations Stand-by Arrangements System. 5. Recruitment 98. Reaffirming Articles 100 and 101 of the Charter the Special Committee urges the Secretary-General to take immediate measures to implement openly and transparently paragraphs 11 and 12 of General Assembly resolution 56/241 in future recruitment for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 99. The Special Committee takes note of the use of Galaxy for the recruitment of posts in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. In view of the huge number of applications generated by Galaxy, the Committee requests that the Secretary-General provide detailed information on the procedure employed in handling all applications received and the criteria followed in screening those applications. 6. Training 100. The Special Committee supports enhancing the coordination of the Department of Peacekeeping Operation's military, civilian police and civilian training activities and requests that the Secretary-General report, at the Committee's next session, on ways to further improve this coordination, including the feasibility of establishing a single multidimensional training unit, closely linked to the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit. The Special Committee therefore encourages the strengthening of training coordination at United Nations Headquarters. 101. The Special Committee welcomes the introduction of standardized generic training modules and would appreciate, in due course, an update on their implementation. The Committee believes that the development of the standardized generic training modules, level I, is important in improving the effectiveness of training, and, in order to take this process forward, recommends that the development of standardized generic training modules, levels II and III, should be given high priority. The modules should be flexible and appropriate to the new demands placed on United Nations peacekeeping and should cover the training requirements of military personnel, civilian police and civilian experts. In this regard, the modules should incorporate lessons learned and best practices, including through consultations with national and regional peacekeeping centres, other relevant institutions and the Member States. 102. The Special Committee fully endorses the establishment of mission training cells and would welcome more detailed information on how these will function. The Committee supports the inclusion in all Missions of a permanently staffed mission training cell to conduct military, civilian police and civilian training. 103. The Special Committee supports the new focus of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on providing national and regional peacekeeping training centres with the necessary guidance for training peacekeeping personnel. The Committee requests the Secretariat to provide the same guidance to training focal points located in Member States. The Committee looks forward to the formalization of a policy on providing such support in 2003. The Committee also supports the revitalization of the United Nations training assistance team concept. 104. The Special Committee welcomes bilateral and regional training arrangements between Member States for peacekeeping personnel participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Committee also recognizes the useful role that the Secretariat plays in facilitating bilateral and regional training arrangements between Member States. 105. Regarding training activities, the Special Committee considers the expansion of the concept of integrated training, both at Headquarters and in the field, as highly relevant to the increasing complexity of peacekeeping operations. 106. The Special Committee welcomes the Secretariat's intention to continue its support for the regional cooperation mechanism for peacekeeping training activities, focusing mainly on providing training support to the emerging troop-contributing countries and enhancing regional peacekeeping capacities. 107. The Special Committee welcomes the establishment of a line item for police training for incorporation into the budget of the Training and Evaluation Service and encourages that, in the immediate future, the integration into the police-training activities of relevant input from international, bilateral and interdisciplinary training partners with whom the Civilian Police Division is actively involved be a main focus. Furthermore, the Committee looks forward to the completion of the revision and update of currently available police training materials. 108. The Special Committee welcomes the logistics support training that has been conducted to date in New York and, recognizing the importance of this training to troop-contributing countries, encourages the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to develop such logistics support training for delivery to troop-contributing countries through peacekeeping training centres and, to a small degree, during pre-deployment visits. This training should focus on the interpretation of logistics and administrative manuals, particularly in the areas of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment. 109. The Special Committee believes that the production and delivery of training materials should be expedited. The Committee reminds the Secretariat of the need for the prompt and timely translation of all United Nations peacekeeping training documents into all of the official languages of the United Nations. 7. Civilian police 110. The Special Committee supports the integration of civilian police expertise, together with other rule of law elements, as appropriate, in the planning process for new missions, including the participation in reconnaissance missions to the field. 111. The Special Committee emphasizes the importance of the role the United Nations civilian police component plays in United Nations peacekeeping operations and expresses its appreciation for the work done to date by the United Nations Civilian Police Division. However, the Committee encourages an increased focus on United Nations policing issues in peacekeeping operations, noting that outcomes in this area affect the timely fulfilment of mandates and the establishment of an environment conducive to post-conflict development. The Committee stresses the important role of the United Nations Civilian Police Division, when mandated, as in the case of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), in facilitating the development of law enforcement institutions. 112. The Special Committee stresses that when civilian police and corrections personnel are assigned executive tasks, in which they directly implement law and order functions, they may be required to use enforcement measures in accordance with their mandates and the rules of engagement. In this regard, the Committee requests that the Secretariat consider assigning such personnel privileges and immunities equivalent to those of armed military personnel. The Committee urges the Secretariat to report to the Committee on this issue before its next regular session. 113. The Special Committee requests the Secretariat to consider reviewing its policy regarding the recruitment of retired police officers for peacekeeping operations and raising of the age limit for civilian police service, taking into account the different requirements for various types of appointments. 8. Gender and peacekeeping 114. While commending the Secretariat for the efforts it has made in mainstreaming a gender perspective in the activities of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Committee, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and General Assembly resolution 55/71, encourages the Secretariat to pursue this policy further and, in so doing, to implement the valuable recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and security (S/2002/1154). 115. The Special Committee commends the steps taken by the Secretariat to incorporate gender focal points and gender affairs offices in field operations and efforts to improve gender related training of peacekeeping personnel. It takes note of the comprehensive package of resource material on gender and peacekeeping being prepared for application in all peacekeeping field missions. The Committee looks forward to receiving further information on the contents of this package and its implementation from the Secretariat. 116. The Special Committee notes that further action is required in systematically integrating a gender perspective in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and in adequately addressing the specific needs of women in conflict situations. 117. In order to address the mounting needs of Headquarters support to field missions, the Special Committee has repeatedly asked for the establishment of a gender capacity in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. A focal point with sufficient experience is needed to support the work of gender offices in the field missions and to help to mainstream gender issues in all aspects of the work of the Department. The Committee reiterates its support for the creation of this capacity within the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit. 118. The Special Committee notes the importance of ensuring full participation of women at the decision-making level and in negotiations of peace agreements at the national, regional and international levels, wherever possible. 119. The Special Committee encourages all Member States to provide names of qualified candidates, especially women candidates, to serve in high-level positions in peacekeeping activities. 120. The Special Committee takes note of the Secretary-General's report on gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping activities (A/57/731) and stresses the need for ongoing reporting from the Secretary-General on how gender mainstreaming is being implemented in the field and at Headquarters. 9. Children and peacekeeping 121. The Special Committee recognizes the special needs that children, especially girls, have in conflict situations. In this context, it welcomes Security Council resolution 1460 (2003) on children and armed conflict and supports its full implementation. 122. The Special Committee welcomes the appointment of child protection advisers in United Nations peacekeeping missions, including the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and encourages the establishment of such posts in other peacekeeping operations, where appropriate. 10. Public information 123. The Special Committee continues to stress the important role of public information in the modern operational environment and welcomes the Secretariat's efforts to: enhance inter-departmental consultation and coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Public Information; improve capacity at Headquarters and in the field to deliver coherent guidance for public information activities in peacekeeping operations; and develop a comprehensive communications and public information strategy. The Committee looks forward to further details on the overall strategy and the arrangements between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Public Information in this regard. 124. The Special Committee recalls having welcomed the intention of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to revitalize its Internet web site in 2002, to make it a comprehensive source of information on the activities of the Organization, including peacekeeping training. In this regard, the Committee encourages the Department to aim at redressing the imbalance among the six official United Nations languages, in cooperation with the Department of Public Information. 11. Comprehensive strategies for complex peacekeeping operations 125. The Special Committee recognizes that peacekeeping operations have to address all challenges in a comprehensive way. The Committee acknowledges the need for additional research and analysis on the interrelated areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform and the strengthening of the rule of law in post-conflict environments, which are among the many challenges faced by complex peacekeeping operations, including in the political, social, economic and humanitarian areas, in order to draw any lessons for the planning and conduct of current and future peacekeeping operations, where relevant and where mandated by the Security Council. The Committee also recognizes that while United Nations peacekeeping operations may not be responsible for any or all aspects of efforts in these areas, there is a need for conceptual clarity and an appraisal of the expertise and capacities that exist within and outside the United Nations system to ensure operational coherence on the ground. Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration 126. The Special Committee recognizes that, where they are conducted, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes are a critical part of peace processes and peacekeeping operations and actively supports the strengthening of these programmes and their coordination in peacekeeping operations, both at Headquarters and in the field. 127. The Special Committee underlines the importance of the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit focusing, as soon as possible and within current capacities, on the development of comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration strategies, learning from the experiences and best practices of current and past peacekeeping operations and, in doing so, drawing on the assistance of relevant departments and other agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system. 128. The Special Committee stresses that, first and foremost, the success of any disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process depends on the political will and mutual trust of the parties in conflict. The Committee further recognizes that appropriate programme design, better multidimensional coordination and secure financing, especially in the reintegration phase, are also of critical importance. 129. In the context of a peace or ceasefire agreement, the Special Committee stresses the need for the parties to reach an agreement on broad disarmament, demobilization and reintegration issues and, during the negotiation of those issues, to take into consideration, when possible, technical advice from the United Nations regarding the implementation of the agreement. The Committee also stresses the importance of early planning and coordination of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration components in peacekeeping operations, where appropriate, as well as of these components receiving the necessary resources to accomplish the mandated tasks. 130. The Special Committee reiterates the importance of timely funding for the planning and early stages of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes mandated by the Security Council as part of peacekeeping operations, when necessary through the assessed budgets of peacekeeping operations, and believes that further efforts should be undertaken to identify ways to secure financing for all components of the programmes throughout the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, including special commitments from the donor community. In this regard, the Committee recognizes the importance of providing funding as soon as possible to meet the essential needs, including food, of former armed combatants after they have signed an agreement and before they assemble at disarmament, demobilization and reintegration points. 131. The Special Committee stresses the need for all disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes to take into account the special needs of child and women soldiers, as well as of children and women who are dependants of ex-combatants. 132. The Special Committee also stresses the importance of a coherent public information programme in the implementation phase of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes in order to promote and sustain the confidence of the local population in the goals of the process and the role of the international community. 133. The Special Committee underlines the importance of effective disarmament measures, including the collection, safe storage, disposal or destruction of arms from ex-combatants, for the overall success of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, in accordance with the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In this respect, the Committee also highlights the importance of the United Nations study on disarmament and non-proliferation education and looks forward to its implementation in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. Rule of law 134. The Special Committee agrees that an essential element to sustained stability in a post-conflict environment is the strengthening and consolidation of local rule-of-law capacity. As such, the consolidation of this capacity should attract the focused and sustained attention of United Nations peacekeeping missions, where it forms part of their mandates. The Committee stresses the fundamental role of local actors in the country concerned and the need to engage them fully in devising and undertaking rule of law initiatives in peacekeeping operations. 135. The Special Committee recalls its decision to recognize the complementary role of judicial experts to the work of civilian police in United Nations peacekeeping missions, when appropriate and where called for in mission mandates. The Committee continues to stress the need for coordination between the Civilian Police Division and other units in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other relevant areas of the United Nations to optimize the efficiency and effectiveness of rule of law elements, in particular civilian police, in the field. 136. The Special Committee welcomes the report of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security Task Force, which addresses, inter alia, the arrangements for United Nations system-wide coordination of rule of law strategies. The Committee believes that the report represents a comprehensive identification of available expertise within and outside the United Nations system and suggests possible arrangements through which United Nations departments and agencies and external entities, including Member States and NGOs, as appropriate, can provide necessary expertise. 137. The Special Committee welcomes the recommendations of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security Task Force regarding the need for enhanced United Nations system-wide coordination to mobilize identified resources and encourages their early implementation. The Committee requests that the Secretariat report on the status of such implementation, including any preliminary observations regarding their effectiveness, at the Committee's next session. 138. The Special Committee invites the Secretariat to hold consultations with Member States, within the next three months, to discuss, inter alia, means by which Member States could share information concerning available national rule of law resources with the Secretariat. 139. The Special Committee supports the formation of legal assessment teams comprised of civilian police and other rule of law elements, as appropriate, in the planning process for new missions. These teams should participate in reconnaissance missions to the field in order to evaluate the needs of a host country in creating an environment in which the application of and adherence to the rule of law can be achieved. 140. With regard to the recruitment procedures for rule of law personnel, the Special Committee supports a coordinated effort that would take into account the ongoing work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to enhance its capability to rapidly deploy civilian components of peacekeeping operations and the recommendations of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security Task Force. 12. Quick impact projects 141. The Special Committee stresses the importance of quick impact projects and suggests that such projects be integrated into mission planning and development and the implementation of comprehensive strategies in order to meet the challenges facing complex peacekeeping operations. 142. The Special Committee recognizes that quick impact projects, which are designed to address the immediate needs of the local population, also serve to build and sustain confidence and support for peacekeeping operations. It recommends that the selection procedures for quick impact projects be made more flexible and be dealt with, as much as possible, at field level. It further recommends that quick impact projects be planned in direct support of the mission mandates rather than addressing needs that are covered by the customary development and humanitarian assistance efforts in the field. The Committee requests that such projects, if practical, be integrated with developmental planning using non-peacekeeping funds as soon as such funding becomes available to the mission. It also requests that the effectiveness of the projects be carefully evaluated following implementation. 13. Mine action 143. The Special Committee is aware that while mine action forms a critical part of peace-building, it can also play an important role in peacekeeping operations that have been mandated accordingly. During the peacekeeping phase, mine action activities should be implemented in such a manner that their viable continuity is guaranteed to the maximum degree possible. 144. The Special Committee also welcomes the ongoing "Study of the role of the military in mine action", which is being conducted at the request of the United Nations by the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD), and hopes that the enhanced knowledge base resulting from this study will be useful for troop-contributing countries in conducting mandated mine action tasks in peacekeeping operations. 145. The Special Committee welcomes the efforts to ensure that mine action is conducted in accordance with accepted national and international standards, including International Mine Action Standards (IMAS). The Committee encourages troop-contributing countries to follow these standards, as applicable, in conducting mine action in peacekeeping operations. It also notes the advisability of utilizing an information management system such as the Information Management System for Mine Action (IMSMA) for the collection and treatment of mine action related information. 146. The Special Committee welcomes the framework of the rapid response plan in support of the emergency deployment of mine-action assets in the context of peacekeeping operations and humanitarian programmes. In this context, the Committee recognizes that military units in a peacekeeping operation can make a valuable contribution by assisting, whenever appropriate, mine action activities under this framework. 147. The Special Committee encourages the coordination of mine action training and mine-risk education material and procedures used by troop-contributing countries and relevant United Nations agencies. 14. Safety and security of United Nations and associated personnel 148. The Special Committee places the highest priority on the safety and security of United Nations and associated personnel in peacekeeping operations. The Committee considers this a responsibility of all involved parties and, above all, of the countries hosting peacekeeping operations. The Committee pays tribute to the courage and dedication of personnel working in peacekeeping operations and to those who have lost their lives in the service of peace. 149. The Special Committee is gravely concerned about the continuing attacks and other acts of violence against United Nations and associated personnel and stresses the need for host countries and others concerned to take all appropriate steps to ensure their safety and security, including a legal regime that ensures that there is no impunity for the perpetrators of such attacks. Noting that the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel has been ratified or acceded to by 63 States, the Committee urges those States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Convention as soon as possible. 150. The Special Committee reiterates the need to explore possibilities for further ensuring the safety and security of United Nations and associated personnel and, in this context, expresses its appreciation of the work done in this regard by the Ad Hoc Committee on the Scope of Legal Protection under the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. The Committee looks forward to the outcome of the Ad Hoc Committee's deliberations, scheduled for March 2003. 151. The Special Committee emphasizes that status-of-forces and status-of-mission agreements should include specific and practical measures to enhance personnel safety and security, based on the provisions of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. It welcomes the inclusion of such measures in the most recent status-of-forces agreement concluded for the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). The Committee further welcomes the recommendation of the General Assembly, in its resolution 57/28, that the Secretary-General continue to seek the inclusion of key provisions of the Convention in future as well as, if necessary, existing status-of-forces and status-of-mission agreements. 152. The Special Committee stresses the need to expedite the consultations to delineate clear lines of responsibility and ensure close coordination between the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and requests that the report on the outcome of the consultations be distributed to Member States as soon as it is finalized. The Committee supports the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in joining the mechanism of accountability and responsibility in the area of field security. The Committee reiterates its request that the Secretariat inform the Committee in its next report as to how it utilizes the strengthened capacity of the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator. 153. The Special Committee believes that all personnel in peacekeeping operations should be provided with adequate safety equipment. In this connection, it welcomes the ongoing review of the use of minimum operating security standards in a peacekeeping environment and urges its early completion. 154. The Special Committee reiterates the importance of pre-mission and in-the-field training, focusing on the safety and security of military, civilian police and other civilian personnel and requests that the Secretary-General include information on the progress in this regard in his reports to the Committee. 155. The Special Committee takes note of the need to further improve information collection, analysis and dissemination both at Headquarters and in the field and recommends that the strengthened capacity of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, especially that of the Situation Centre, be utilized for this purpose. The Committee stresses the importance of these capabilities, which would be helpful for troop-contributing countries in their decision-making regarding participation, as well as in their training of appropriate personnel to meet specific mission requirements. 156. Considering that the majority of recent incidents involving the death or injury of personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions resulted from accidents, the Special Committee welcomes the establishment of a safety council to promote safety awareness, both at Headquarters and in the field, and encourages its active work. The Committee believes that the Secretariat could benefit from the expertise of safety programmes of Member States, including in the areas of flight safety, vehicle safety and health and fire prevention. The Committee encourages Member States to share with the Secretariat relevant information on national safety programmes. 157. The Special Committee requests information on the status of the Secretariat's work to formalize a policy on protection from nuclear, biological and chemical threats in the field. 158. The Special Committee reiterates its support for the establishment of an entry point for safety and security in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit. The Committee also notes that the Secretary-General stated in his report that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations hopes to resubmit its request for a full-time security and safety focal point. 159. The Special Committee notes with appreciation the progress achieved by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in ensuring the safety of air operations in peacekeeping operations, in particular through the implementation of international aviation standards, the evaluation of air carrier documentation and procedures, the use of rigorous contractual procedures and the continuous monitoring of the Department's aviation operations. The Committee stresses the need to ensure that high standards be maintained at all times, especially when entering into partnerships with other United Nations agencies. 160. The Special Committee requests the Secretariat to ensure that expeditious, comprehensive, impartial and transparent investigations or inquiries are conducted into incidents leading to loss of life or serious injury among personnel deployed in United Nations peacekeeping missions and to provide all troop-contributing countries in the concerned mission with a copy of all internal United Nations investigations or inquiries, including the final outcome, at the earliest stage possible. Early implementation of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to avoid repetition of such accidents should be encouraged. Information on measures actually implemented to avoid the repetition of such accidents should also be made available, as soon as possible, to all troop-contributing countries of the concerned mission. 15. Cooperation with regional arrangements General 161. Bearing in mind the primacy of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security, the Special Committee reaffirms the important contribution that regional arrangements and agencies can make to peacekeeping, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, where appropriate and when the mandate and scope of regional arrangements and agencies allow. 162. The Special Committee emphasizes that, in accordance with Article 53 of the Charter, no enforcement action shall be taken under regional arrangements or by regional agencies without the authorization of the Security Council. Furthermore, the Council shall at all times be kept fully informed of activities undertaken or contemplated by regional arrangements or regional agencies for the maintenance of international peace and security. 163. The Special Committee urges the strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations and relevant regional arrangements and agencies, in accordance with their respective mandates, scope and composition, to enhance the capabilities of the international community in the maintenance of international peace and security. It appreciates the possibility of the practical realization of such cooperation at the regional and subregional levels and encourages the Secretary-General to take concrete steps towards that end. In that regard, the Committee notes the successful cooperation between the United Nations and a number of regional and subregional arrangements and agencies. 164. The Special Committee recognizes the importance of regional organizations in the maintenance of peace and security, in conformity with the Charter, and supports further development of the cooperation between the United Nations and such organizations. Enhancing Africa's peacekeeping capacity 165. The Special Committee reiterates the view that efforts aimed at enhancing the capacity of African countries in the various aspects of peacekeeping are complementary to the obligations of all Member States under the Charter with regard to their contribution to maintaining international peace and security, including in Africa, and are not intended to replace the engagement of non-African countries in peacekeeping operations on the continent. 166. The Special Committee welcomes the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to work closely with all relevant actors in Africa, at the regional, subregional and national levels, in particular for the enhancement of the capabilities of African troop contributors and in capacity-building for regional and subregional organizations. The Committee, in particular, encourages a close relationship between the United Nations, the African Union (AU) and subregional organizations and commends the recent efforts of these organizations and of all actors involved in support of the enhancement of African peacekeeping capabilities on a bilateral or multilateral basis. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the forthcoming meeting between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the African Chiefs of Defence staff, in April 2003, and views this as an important step in the development of a framework for addressing this issue. 167. The Special Committee notes that there have been a number of developments with respect to the enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity. Of major importance in this respect is the decision by the Heads of State of the African Union to establish a Peace and Security Council to resolve and manage conflicts on the continent. A further development has been the adoption by the leaders of the Group of Eight of the Africa Action Plan, which aims to support African efforts through the African Union and the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). In this regard, the Committee welcomes the meeting of the United Nations, the European Union and the Group of Eight held on 6 and 7 March 2003 in Berlin. The Committee maintains that international efforts aimed at enhancing the collective capacity of African countries to participate in peacekeeping operations should focus on enhancing the institutional capacity of the African Union through the provision of financial and technical assistance. In this connection, the Committee underlines the relevance and importance of the African Union Peace Fund and urges Member States to contribute to it. 168. The Special Committee welcomes a close relationship among the United Nations, the African Union and subregional organizations and encourages these organizations in close consultation with the donors to discuss the modalities for a suitable focal point or clearing house for activities aimed at strengthening African peacekeeping capacity. The Committee welcomes an active role for the United Nations, specifically in the areas of information-sharing, promoting transparency, mobilizing support and stimulating contacts between recipients and donors of assistance, for example in training, equipment and logistics. 169. The Special Committee stresses the need for regular consultations between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and interested troop-contributing countries, with a view to enhancing African peacekeeping capacity. The Committee appreciates that African troop-contributing countries have gained relevant experiences that can be harnessed to further develop the capacity for peacekeeping of the African Union and of the United Nations, and also lay the ground for the development of regional standby arrangement systems. Other regional arrangements 170. The Special Committee recommends that the Secretariat study the best cases of cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations within the context of peacekeeping in order to identify adequate modalities of cooperation and to report the results to the Committee. At the same time, the Committee encourages further use of existing models of cooperation with regional organizations, such as that between the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia-Herzegovina. 16. Financial issues 171. The Special Committee again stresses that all Member States must pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without conditions, and reaffirms the obligation of Member States, under Article 17 of the Charter, to bear the expenses of the Organization as apportioned by the General Assembly, bearing in mind the special responsibility of the Permanent Members of the Security Council, as indicated in General Assembly resolution 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963. 172. The Special Committee welcomes the improvement in addressing delays in reimbursements and claims and encourages further progress in this regard. 173. The Special Committee also notes that there are still troop-contributing countries that have not yet been reimbursed for their participation in the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) and in other closed missions. The Committee requests that the Secretariat address this exceptional circumstance and inform the next session of the Committee accordingly. 174. The Special Committee reiterates its request to the Secretariat to find practical modalities for proceeding with regular payments for personnel, starting with the first month of their presence in a United Nations mission, and to calculate an early contingent-owned equipment reimbursement for the first six months of service, payable no later than the end of that period. 175. The Special Committee believes that the signing of a memorandum of understanding prior to the deployment of any national contingents to peacekeeping missions is essential for ensuring the timely reimbursement of Member States for their contribution. In this regard, the Committee, noting that the entire memorandum of understanding process is a joint endeavour between the United Nations and troop-contributing countries, requests that the Secretariat, working closely with the individual countries contributing troops to any future peacekeeping operations, take the necessary steps to ensure that all memoranda of understanding are concluded and endorsed by the respective parties prior to the deployment of any national contingents to peacekeeping missions. 176. The Special Committee requests a review of the relevant administrative and financial procedures, with a view to significantly accelerating the disbursement procedures for resources allocated to the budgets of United Nations peacekeeping missions for quick impact projects. The earliest availability of these resources for the missions in the field is critical for the successful use of quick impact projects in fulfilling their mandates. 177. The Special Committee also recommends that, as a general rule, budgets for United Nations peacekeeping operations provide the necessary resources for recruiting interpreters in order to assist relevant mission components in their interaction with local populations. 178. The Special Committee is encouraged to learn about the work of the Military Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on conditions of service for military personnel, which are aimed at achieving equity between military personnel and civilian staff under appropriate conditions. The Committee would appreciate receiving further information on this issue, including on mission subsistence allowance. 179. The Special Committee believes that military officers having staff positions within United Nations missions should be appropriately accommodated within an existing Headquarters unit. Where this is not possible, these officers should be receiving the same mission subsistence allowance as military observers. 17. Conduct and disciplinary issues 180. The Special Committee affirms the need to ensure that all personnel in United Nations peacekeeping operations function in a manner that preserves the image, credibility, impartiality, and integrity of the United Nations. The Committee fully agrees with the remarks in the report of the Secretary-General concerning the need for all peacekeepers to abide by the code of conduct. Acts of misconduct have a detrimental effect on the relations of national contingents with the local population and could cause difficulties in fulfilling mandates. 181. The Special Committee fully supports the initiatives undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to prevent misconduct, including the abuse of power and sexual exploitation. The Committee emphasizes the need to build greater awareness among United Nations peacekeepers of their responsibilities, including through improved predeployment training. The Committee also encourages the Department to continue efforts in developing necessary training materials to this end. 182. The Special Committee stresses the need to ensure respect for the standard of conduct expected of United Nations peacekeepers. In this regard, the Committee agrees that a single standard of conduct must apply to all personnel serving in peacekeeping operations. 183. The Special Committee also recommends that consideration be given to the development of common principles and guidelines for accountability and to ensure that these instruments take into consideration the relevant provisions of international law. These principles and guidelines should draw on lessons learned from peacekeeping operations and should be incorporated into the training of United Nations personnel deployed in peacekeeping missions. 184. The Special Committee requests that the Secretariat consult closely with the troop-contributing countries, drawing on lessons learned, to develop a common understanding and agreed procedures to handle cases of alleged violations of the Code of Conduct. The Committee also believes that, in handling such cases, there is the need for agreement on applicable laws. To that end, the Committee, considering the importance of this issue, requests that the Secretariat convene a meeting with Member States in 2003 to discuss ways and means of meeting the challenges in this area and minimizing misconduct. 185. Bearing in mind the shared responsibility of the United Nations and troop-contributing countries for their personnel, the Special Committee emphasizes that cases of alleged misconduct should be handled through cooperation between troop-contributing countries concerned and the mission leadership, including with regard to public information, and the need for taking action respecting national laws. In this context, the Committee urges the Secretariat to involve the contributing country concerned from the very outset in an investigation into any case of alleged misconduct. The Committee urges the Secretariat to make the outcome of the investigation, including all related evidence, available to that country, in order to enable its national judicial authorities to take legal steps. 18. Other matters Visits to missions 186. The Special Committee welcomes the holding of the conference "Partners in Peacekeeping" by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in Freetown, from 3 to 5 March 2003, and considers that such conferences, which can be beneficial to troop-contributing countries and to the Department, continue to be held on an annual basis, as appropriate, addressing peacekeeping missions. The outcome of such conferences should be made available to all Member States. Liquidation of missions 187. The Special Committee encourages the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to pursue more actively, and when appropriate, the liquidation of missions, in implementing the relevant decisions of the United Nations Security Council. The Committee believes that the expeditious liquidation of missions upon completion of their mandate, pursuant to appropriate decisions by the Security Council, is of paramount importance. Liquidation of a mission involves not only the withdrawal of troops and the civilian component from the mission area, but also speedy processing of claims, payment to troop-contributing countries and an eventual closing of the book of accounts. Rules of engagement 188. The Special Committee believes that mission-specific rules of engagement should be applied uniformly, in conformity with mission mandates adopted by the Security Council. This will not, however, obviate the need for the development of mission-specific rules of engagement, which should be developed in close consultation with the domestic law of troop-contributing countries. Once developed, these mission-specific rules of engagement should be applied uniformly, in conformity with mandates of the missions concerned, and as adopted by the Security Council and under its political guidance. Command and control 189. The Special Committee notes that, in its last report (A/56/863), it welcomed the initiative of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to clarify the policy paper, distributed in October 2001, on command and control of military components in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Committee requests continued consultations between the Department and interested Member States in completing the development of this policy. Language skills 190. Provided that there are personnel available who are proficient in the local language of the area in which a peacekeeping mission is operating, the United Nations peacekeeping operation concerned should benefit from the contribution of such personnel in the relevant components of the missions since they may improve interaction with the local population. When necessary, missions should be able to recruit interpreters to assist them. HIV/AIDS 191. The Special Committee welcomes the appointment of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations HIV/AIDS Adviser, looks forward to the standardization of awareness and prevention programmes in peacekeeping missions and further welcomes the establishment of HIV/AIDS focal points within missions. 192. The Special Committee recognizes that HIV/AIDS is a major health concern for both peacekeepers and local residents and that it is also a politically sensitive issue with a potentially serious impact on the effectiveness of a given peacekeeping mission. The Committee notes, with approval, education and protection efforts developed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and endorses the proposed research projects of the Department to measure the impact of AIDS intervention at the mission level. The Committee also takes note of the current research of the Department to determine whether there is a relationship between HIV and malaria. 193. The Special Committee notes that prospective peacekeepers displaying clinical symptoms of AIDS are precluded from deployment and recommends that this policy be continued. Noting that the HIV/AIDS policy adviser will be reviewing available procedures and guidelines in order to distil a clear policy, the Committee recommends that, as part of this policy, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations strongly encourage Member States to offer voluntary confidential counselling and testing to all peacekeepers prior to deployment and upon their return. The Committee also recommends that the HIV/AIDS policy adviser should consider the appropriate policy for HIV-positive personnel in this regard. Peacekeeping oversight 194. The Special Committee takes note of the initiative referred to as the Inspectorate-General within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which is an ad hoc consultancy. The Committee requests clarification on the relationship between the Inspectorate-General, the Joint Inspection Unit and the Office of Internal Oversight Services so as to avoid any potential duplication of effort. International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers 195. The Special Committee emphasizes the importance of General Assembly resolution 57/129, in which 29 May was designated as the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers as a tribute to all the men and women who have served and continue to serve in the United Nations peacekeeping operations for their high level of professionalism, dedication and courage and in honour of the memory of those who have lost their lives in the cause of peace. 196. Recognizing that 2003 marks the fifty-fifth anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping, the Special Committee invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, NGOs, as appropriate, and individuals to observe the International Day in an appropriate manner. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the proposed events and activities outlined in the letter of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, dated 18 March 2003, addressed to the Chairman of the Working Group of the Committee. Dag Hammarskjöld Medal 197. The Special Committee once again urges the Secretary-General to display the Dag Hammarskjöld Medal permanently and publicly, along with a memorial book commemorating those who have fallen in the service of peace in United Nations peacekeeping missions. Status-of-mission agreements/status-of-forces agreements 198. Welcoming the efforts to conclude status-of-forces and status-of-mission agreements between host countries of a peacekeeping operation and the United Nations, the Special Committee reiterates that such agreements should be finalized at the earliest possible time and made available to the troop-contributing countries. 199. The Special Committee believes that cooperation between peacekeeping missions and their host countries should, in all cases, be institutionalized through status-of-mission agreements or status-of-forces agreements. By creating a legal basis for relations between a peacekeeping operation and its host country, various important issues would be subject to precise and consistent regulation, while many potential legal, technical and other difficulties would be avoided, thus contributing to more effective discharging of the mandate of peacekeeping operations. Documentation 200. The Special Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Secretariat develop clear criteria for determining which United Nations documents relating to peacekeeping operations are made available only to the Governments of Member States for their official use and which are made available to the general public, and further requests that the Secretariat give clear indication whenever distributing such documents to Permanent Missions. Procurement 201. The Special Committee welcomes the procurement procedures carried out by the Secretariat with regard to United Nations peacekeeping operations, that is, to procure supplies and services from local and regional markets when it is more efficient and cost-effective. In this regard, the Committee encourages the United Nations to increase procurement opportunities for vendors from developing countries and countries with economies in transition. Contingent-owned equipment 202. The Special Committee welcomes the Secretariat's circulation of the revised Contingent-owned Equipment Manual -- 2002 and notes that the original project plan for the development of the revised contingent-owned equipment system envisaged that all contingent-owned equipment policy issues would be determined by now. Recognizing that peacekeeping is an evolving activity and that contingent-owned equipment policy issues may have to be clarified as experience is gained, the Committee requests that the Secretariat propose a mechanism by which unresolved contingent-owned equipment policy issues can be resolved in a timely manner. Boards of Inquiry procedures 203. The Special Committee notes the convoluted and confusing nature of current procedures for the conduct of Boards of Inquiry and requests that the Secretariat conduct a review of these procedures, in conjunction with interested Member States, with the aim of improving the efficacy of these procedures. Seminars on peacekeeping 204. The Special Committee appreciates the value of the international seminars on peacekeeping operations arranged by Member States and encourages the continued holding of such seminars and the circulation of their outcomes to Member States. Such seminars provide a valuable opportunity to share experiences and develop a better understanding of the various facets of peacekeeping. The Committee commends all Member States that actively pursue a greater understanding of peacekeeping, in particular those countries willing to host conferences that attract wide participation. A list of seminars and conferences organized by Member States on peacekeeping operations and held since the last session of the Special Committee is contained in annex III of the present report. Report of the Secretary-General 205. The Special Committee requests that the Secretary-General submit, six weeks prior to its 2004 session, a report on progress made in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the present report, covering those for which specific reports have not been requested. 206. The Special Committee supports the recommendations in the Secretary-General's report (A/57/387, paras. 97-99) to improve the efficiency of communication between the Secretariat, the Member States and the Committee. In this regard, the Committee encourages the Secretariat to provide requested reports in the most efficient manner. Composition of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at its 2003 session Members: Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Observers: Botswana, Burundi, Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Guyana, Israel, Madagascar, Papua New Guinea, Somalia, Sovereign Military Order of Malta, Sri Lanka, European Commission to the United Nations and International Committee of the Red Cross. Briefings to the 2003 session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations 1. In a series of presentations and exchanges of views with delegations, the Secretariat briefed the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, from 3 to 17 March 2003, on a number of the aspects of peacekeeping under consideration. 2. Briefings began with comments from the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, who responded to questions relating to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that had been raised by the Special Committee in the course of the general debate. In particular, he presented delegations with the views of the Department on recruitment, the role of the Inspectorate-General, HIV/AIDS and rapid deployment. The Under-Secretary-General also discussed the enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity, the role of the Situation Centre and the preparations for the first International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. 3. The Civilian Police Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations briefed the Special Committee on rule of law issues. 4. The Special Committee heard a presentation on gender and peacekeeping from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 5. The Military Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations gave an update on military aspects of rapid deployment. 6. The Special Committee was also provided with an overview of recruitment from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of Human Resources Management. 7. Representatives of the Medical Support Section of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations gave an overview of HIV/AIDS issues. 8. The Office of Mission Support of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations gave a presentation on aspects of rapid deployment, strategic deployment stocks, troop-contributing country reimbursement, contingent-owned equipment, quick impact projects and the Sierra Leone conference on self-sustenance of African peacekeeping forces. 9. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations provided a briefing on African peacekeeping capacity and regional cooperation. 10. The Special Committee heard a presentation from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on issues relating to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. 11. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations also provided a briefing on integrated mission task forces. 12. In addition, the Office of Mission Support of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provided the Special Committee with a briefing on air safety. Seminars and conferences: 2002-2003 Title of conference or seminar Location Date Sponsor/organizer 1. The Experiences of Local Actors in Peace-building, Reconstruction and the Establishment of the Rule of Law Singapore 23-25 March 2002 Singapore, United Nations Association of the United States Project on Justice in Times of Transition, Harvard University 2. United Nations Military Observers and Civilian Police Officers Peacekeeping Training Course Tehran 6-27 April 2002 Islamic Republic of Iran and the United Nations 3. Australian Defence Force, International Peace Operations Seminar Canberra and Williamstown, Australia 29 April-10 May 2002 Australia 4. Incorporating Local Voices into International Rule of Law Strategies: A Policy Dialog New York 14-16 June 2002 United Nations Association of the United States Project on Justice in Times of Transition, Harvard University 5. Silk Road Flag Officers Seminar on Peace and Security Partnership for Peace Training Center, Ankara 17-21 June 2002 Turkey 6. United Nations Logistics Course Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre, Port Dicksen, Malaysia July 2002 Malaysia, Department of Peacekeeping Operations and Norwegian Defence International Centre 7. Thirty-second International Peace Academy Vienna seminar on Peacemaking and Peacekeeping, "Central Asia's First Decade of Independence: Promises and Problems" Vienna 4-6 July 2002 International Peace Academy, Austrian Diplomatic Academy, Austrian National Defence Academy 8. Establishing Rule of Law and Governance in Post-Conflict Societies Istanbul 11-14 July 2002 Turkey, United Nations Association of the United States Project on Justice in Times of Transition, Harvard University 9. Foundation Courses on Conflict Resolution Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict Resolution, Stadtschlaining, Austria 1-14 September 2002 and 2-15 February 2003 Austria 10. UNTAET: Debriefing and Lessons Tokyo 16-18 September 2002 United Nations Institute for Training and Research, Institute of Policy Studies, Japan Institute of International Affairs 11. Exercise Pirap Jabiru Bangkok 23-27 September 2002 12. Building Capacities for Peacekeeping and Women's Dimensions in Peace Processes Santiago 4-5 November 2002 European Union, Chile and Denmark 13. Challenges of Peace Operations -- The Rule of Law on Peace Operations Melbourne, Australia 11-13 November 2002 14. Specialization Course on Facilitation and Mediation 15-28 September 2002 15. Rule of Law and the Legacy of Conflict Gaborone 16-19 January 2003 Botswana, the United Nations Association of the United States Project on Justice in Times of Transition, Harvard University, University of Botswana 16. Specialization Course on Post-conflict Reconstruction 16 February- 1 March 2003 17. International Senior Officers Peace Support Operations Course Kenya Peace Support Training Centre, Nairobi 10-21 March 2003 Kenya and the United Kingdom 18. Eighth International Military Observer Course Szolnok, Hungary 28 April-16 May 2003 Hungary 19. On-Call List Training Course 13-22 May 2003 United Nations and Hungary 