%%%AIRSPACE|NICOSIA (CYPRUS)|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|

General Assembly Fifty-seventh session Agenda item 54 Question of Cyprus Security Council Fifty-eighth year Letter dated 7 April 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 4 April 2003 addressed to you by Mr. Reşat Çağlar, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the test of the present letter and its annex would be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 54, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Ümit Pamir Ambassador Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 19 March 2003 (A/57/764-S/2003/349) addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative at the United Nations, which contains allegations of "violations ... of the airspace of the Republic" and "of the flight information region of Nicosia", and to bring to your kind attention the following: It will be recalled that similar allegations of so-called airspace and flight information region violations were refuted in our previous communications address to you, most recently in our letter dated 15 January 2003 (A/57/709-S/2003/55, annex). I wish, once again, to reiterate that flights within the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus take place with the full knowledge and consent of the appropriate authorities of the State, over which the Greek Cypriot Administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or any right of say whatsoever. Furthermore, it should be underlined that allegations of so-called violations of the flight information region or violations of air-traffic regulations are void and groundless under international law. Every precaution is being taken for the safety of navigation of civilian air traffic during the activities of Turkish State aircraft within international airspace, within which the civil aviation authority of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is the only competent authority to provide air-traffic and aeronautical information services. As stated in our previous letters, such allegations are based on the false and illegitimate claim that the sovereignty of the Greek Cypriot Administration extends over the whole island, including the territory of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This claim by the Greek Cypriot side is divorced from the existing realities in Cyprus, namely, the existence of two independent States, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction within its respective territory on the island. Attempts by the Greek Cypriot representatives, through often repeated false claims, to confer legitimacy upon an illegal Administration will be futile for as long as the Turkish Cypriot people refuse to bow to its writs. What would indeed be conducive to a better climate on the island would be for the Greek Cypriot side to stop arrogating to itself rights and responsibilities that it does not legally have, and to cease all hostilities, including embargoes, towards the Turkish Cypriot people. I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 54, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Reşat Çağlar Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 