%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|TERRORISM|CRIME PREVENTION|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|CONFERENCES|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|PUBLICATIONS|

Fifty-eighth session * A/58/50/Rev.1 and Corr.1. Item 170 of the preliminary list* Measures to eliminate international terrorism Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report has been prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/53 of 11 December 1995, entitled "Measures to eliminate international terrorism". The information contained herein has been submitted by States and international organizations. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Measures taken at the national and international levels regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism and information on incidents caused by international terrorism Information received from Member States Information received from international organizations International legal instruments related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism Status of international conventions pertaining to international terrorism Recent developments related to General Assembly resolution 51/210 Information on workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism United Nations system Other international organizations Publication of a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations 1. In General Assembly resolution 50/53 of 11 December 1995, entitled "Measures to eliminate international terrorism", the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to follow up closely the implementation of the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism (resolution 49/60, annex) and to submit an annual report on the implementation of paragraph 10 of the Declaration, taking into account the modalities set out in his report to the Assembly at its fiftieth session (A/50/372 and Add.1) and the views expressed by States in the debate of the Sixth Committee during that session.1 2. In paragraph 10 of the Declaration, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to assist in the implementation of the Declaration by taking, within existing resources, the following practical measures to enhance international cooperation: "(a) A collection of data on the status and implementation of existing multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements relating to international terrorism, including information on incidents caused by international terrorism and criminal prosecutions and sentencing, based on information received from the depositaries of those agreements and from Member States; "(b) A compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, based on information received from Member States; "(c) An analytical review of existing international legal instruments relating to international terrorism, in order to assist States in identifying aspects of this matter that have not been covered by such instruments and could be addressed to develop further a comprehensive legal framework of conventions dealing with international terrorism; "(d) A review of existing possibilities within the United Nations system for assisting States in organizing workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism." 3. By a note dated 19 February 2003, the Secretary-General drew the attention of all States to General Assembly resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994 and the Declaration annexed thereto and requested them to submit information on the implementation of the Declaration under paragraphs 10 (a) and (b) thereof by 31 May 2003. In the note, the Secretary-General also noted that in the information to be submitted by States they might wish to give particular attention to paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 1269 (1999). Furthermore, by a letter dated 19 February 2003, the Secretary-General invited relevant specialized agencies and other organizations to submit information or other relevant material on the implementation of the Declaration, pursuant to its paragraphs 10 (a) and (d), by 31 May 2003. 4. As at 23 June 2003, replies had been received from Albania, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Israel, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Philippines, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Switzerland, Turkey and Uzbekistan. Several States referred to the information contained in their respective reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council; these reports can be consulted at http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373. 5. Replies had also been received from the following United Nations bodies and specialized agencies: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Maritime Organization, World Health Organization. The following intergovernmental organizations had also replied: African Union, Commonwealth of Independent States, Council of Europe, European Union, League of Arab States, Organization of American States, Organization of the Islamic Conference. More detailed information on the counter-terrorism activities of several international, regional and subregional organizations can be found in a Security Council document issued for the 6 March 2003 meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee with those organizations (S/AC.40/2003/SM.1/2). 6. Sections II, III and IV of the present report contain information about measures taken at the national and international levels, based on materials transmitted by Governments and the international organizations and other bodies mentioned in paragraphs 4 and 5 above. Section V deals with the matter of publishing a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 7. With respect to subparagraph 10 (c) of the Declaration, the present report does not contain an analytical review of existing international legal instruments relating to international terrorism, since such a review was included in the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session (A/51/336, paras. 6-36). Several suggestions for possible further action contained in that review are being acted upon through the implementation of Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996, as discussed in section III.B below. II. Measures taken at the national and international levels regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism and information on incidents caused by international terrorism * Information on the participation of States in multilateral agreements relating to the suppression of international terrorism is presented separately in section III.A. Additional information can be found in the reports which States have submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council. These reports can be found at www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373. 8. The texts in this section describing measures taken by Member States and international organizations have been taken directly from the replies received from the respective Member States and international organizations. A. Information received from Member States* 9. Albania referred to the multilateral instruments to which it is a party and also supplied information on its national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of acts of international terrorism.2 10. After the 2001 terrorist attacks against the United States, Albania speeded up its efforts to becoming part of all relevant international instruments against terrorism. Albania reacted promptly to the terrorist attacks by declaring its full solidarity with the United States and by firmly establishing its position in support of the coalition of nations taking decisive action against this common evil. The Albanian Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution of full support to the campaign against terrorism, declaring all national infrastructures available for use if necessary. The Government of Albania did the same, both providing political support and adopting concrete measures with regard to border control, economic, financial, military, security and other related issues. 11. Albania strongly supported the adoption of Security Council resolutions concerning the fight against terrorism, in particular those which declare terrorism a threat to peace and international security. In this context, Albania declared its support for the British and United States attacks directed against terrorist bases and their infrastructure in Afghanistan and against the Taliban regime that supported terrorism. 12. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), the Albanian Central Bank established a working group tasked with the investigation of the possible presence in the country of bank assets belonging to individuals included in the Office of Foreign Assets Control lists of supporters of terrorist acts. Following careful investigation of this matter, several bank assets belonging to two foreign citizens suspected of being affiliated with terrorist organizations were frozen. Also in this context, some immovable properties were put under pre-emptive juridical sequester. 13. In addition, Albania referred to the numerous steps it had taken in relation to the prevention of money-laundering, in cooperation with relevant institutions in other countries, as well as at the subregional and regional levels. 14. Following previous concrete steps by the Albanian specialized bodies and the close cooperation with relevant United States authorities that resulted in the identification and expulsion of 10 presumed extremist elements from the Albanian territory, a set of measures aimed at bolstering counter-terrorist activities was elaborated. In this context, all Islamic charity organizations existing in the country are carefully monitored and checked. 15. Following close cooperation with relevant foreign specialized bodies, on 6 October 2001, Albania expelled five suspect foreign citizens who had been residing in Albania and presented a number of others with an order to leave the country. In December 2001 the Albanian authorities, in cooperation with partners from Turkey and the United States, opened a criminal proceeding against a foreign citizen accused of money-laundering. 16. Albania has adhered to eight international counter-terrorism conventions and is in the process of adhering to other conventions. A series of measures have been taken in implementation of the law for foreigners. Cooperation with international partners, such as France, Israel, Italy and the United States, is increasing. Instructions were given to the Embassies' staff, as well as to foreign citizens, that they might be the targets of terrorist attacks. Additional measures were taken to protect the main State institutions, improving at the same time the rules and the regime for entry to those institutions. 17. Clear instructions were given to all police structures, especially the border police, regarding procedures and actions in the case of identification of dangerous foreign citizens. 18. In the framework of bilateral cooperation, Albania ratified an agreement with Romania in 2002 on cooperation in combating terrorism, organized crime, illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and other illegal activities, and another agreement with Slovenia in 1998 on cooperation in combating terrorism, illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and organized crime. 19. Austria indicated that it had signed and ratified all international and regional conventions against terrorism; it also supplied information on its national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of acts of international terrorism.2 20. Furthermore, Austria referred to the following criminal proceedings on international terrorist activities. 21. An unknown culprit detonated a hand grenade in a discotheque in Linz on 27 July 2002, severely injuring several persons. Since this discotheque was mainly frequented by adolescents of Croatian descent, police authorities acted on the assumption that this could have been an ethnically motivated terrorist attack. The enquiries have not yet been closed. 22. Based on media coverage and diplomatic sources it became known that hand grenades from an Austrian producer had been used in an attack on the Indian Parliament in New Delhi on 13 December 2003. The district public prosecution authority of the city of Wels started proceedings against officials of this company, suspecting them of violating article 17 of the Austrian Foreign Trade Law. In the course of these investigations no evidence was found with regard to behaviour that would make the company criminally liable. This company had already exported a manufacturing plant for hand grenades to Pakistan at the end of the 1980s. For that reason, it has to be assumed that the grenades used in this terrorist attack were produced in Pakistan. Therefore, the legal proceedings against the company were closed in January 2003. 23. An Austrian citizen of Russian descent was among those killed in the terrorist attack against a theatre in Moscow on 23 October 2002. Her body was transferred to Vienna at the end of October 2002. In order to clarify the cause of death, the district public prosecution authority of the city of Vienna has filed an application for a post-mortem examination of the body of the Austrian citizen as a part of legal proceedings against unidentified delinquents accused of extortionate abduction. The report of the department of forensic medicine of the University of Vienna is not yet available. 24. Colombia indicated that it was in the process of becoming a party to the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection, the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Furthermore, Colombia provided a list of bilateral agreements relating to judicial cooperation on penal matters, as well as extracts of relevant provisions of its national legislation dealing with the prevention and suppression of international terrorism.3 25. Colombia also reported that there were no ongoing criminal investigations regarding the implementation of the multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements on international terrorism. 26. Cuba stated that the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism contained in General Assembly resolution 49/60 remained a current and completely valid instrument for combating the dreadful scourge of terrorism. 27. Cuba had upheld and continued to uphold fully the principles, concepts and ideas enshrined in the Declaration. It reiterated its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by and against whomever committed and whatever its motivations, including those in which States were directly or indirectly involved. It also vigorously condemned the practice of State terrorism. 28. Cuba believed that terrorism must be combated the international community as a whole, in an atmosphere of close cooperation and in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, the norms of international law and international humanitarian law. 29. In that context, Cuba reaffirmed that it was for the United Nations alone to lead and coordinate an international campaign against terrorism. The fight against terrorism could not be conceived or carried out solely on the basis of the national interests and foreign policy ambitions of any particular country. 30. Cuba wished to reiterate that, regardless of the role that other United Nations organs such as the Security Council might play in combating terrorism, the General Assembly was the organ with the mandate and necessary characteristics to carry out that task effectively. 31. Cuba felt it necessary to place on record its utter rejection of the use of the campaign against terrorism as a pretext for interfering in the internal affairs of other States, committing aggression and challenging the national sovereignty of States. 32. Cuba had always taken a constructive approach to any legitimate, viable initiative aimed at furthering the campaign against terrorism. 33. In that context, Cuba recalled its position with respect to the adoption of a general convention on international terrorism. 34. Having been the victim since 1959 of countless terrorist actions plotted, organized and funded with complete impunity from United States territory, often by the Government of that country or with its explicit support, Cuba wished to reiterate its belief in the need to make progress in defining acts of terrorism committed by a State with the intention of destabilizing another State, by sponsoring, funding, training or protecting inside or outside its territory terrorist elements acting against another State. 35. Cuba deemed it unacceptable that the activities of the armed forces of a State that were not regulated by international humanitarian law should be excluded from the scope of a future general convention. 36. Cuba joined with other third world countries in calling for a general convention on international terrorism that would draw a clear distinction between terrorism and the legitimate struggle of peoples for their independence, against foreign domination and in defence of their right to self-determination. 37. Cuba condemned the fact that some States manipulated the theory of the inherent right of self-defence to justify committing terrorist acts by invoking the so-called right to preventive defence. The sole aim of such manipulation was to try to legitimize aggression against other States, interference in the internal affairs of other States and State terrorism. 38. Cuba once again reaffirmed its complete readiness to cooperate bilaterally with any State combating terrorism, provided that such cooperation was based on respect for the principles of sovereign equality of States and non-interference in their internal affairs. 39. Cuba vehemently rejected the unilateral practice of some States, a practice contrary to the spirit of the Declaration, the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, of arrogating themselves the right to issue certifications and lists of countries that allegedly sponsored international terrorism.4 Cuba's absurd inclusion on the list drawn up yearly by the United States Government of States that allegedly sponsored international terrorism, was prompted by domestic policy considerations in a country where a terrorist mafia, acting with impunity, had organized, funded and carried out hundreds of acts of terrorism against the Cuban nation. 40. It was the United States Government that was carrying out a policy of genocide against the Cuban people reflected in the inhumane, irrational blockade imposed against Cuba for over 40 years and repeatedly condemned by the international community. 41. It was the United States Government that had maintained a policy of assisting, supporting, and tolerating the terrorism committed against Cuba from its territory, with a view to preventing the Cuban people from exercising their right to self-determination. 42. The main actions that Cuba had taken in recent years in the campaign against terrorism included: the adoption and ratification of all the international instruments on terrorism; the unanimous adoption of the Law against Acts of Terrorism, which sought to codify and punish terrorist acts and other related acts on the basis of the current Penal Code and the international conventions adopted in the framework of the United Nations to which Cuba was a party; the adoption of a series of legal and administrative measures and actions aimed at preventing and detecting terrorist acts and other related international crimes; full compliance with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001); and the pursuit of bilateral cooperation in combating international terrorism, based on mutual respect and sovereign equality of States.5 43. For over 40 years, the Cuban people had been the victim of innumerable terrorist actions, the great majority of them planned and organized from United States territory with support, protection and funding from successive United States Governments. 44. It was widely known that countless terrorist organizations operated against Cuba from United States territory with complete impunity and that notorious, avowed criminals, including known terrorists and murderers, had circulated freely on its streets. 45. The policy of support for anti-Cuban terrorism pursued by the Government of the United States, that country's violation of the Migration Agreements signed by the two countries with a view to ensuring legal, orderly and safe emigration, the existence in that country of laws that openly encouraged illegal emigration from Cuba, such as the so-called Cuban Adjustment Act, and the United States authorities' benevolent treatment of hijackers of Cuban ships and aircraft, who committed crimes falling within the scope of the international counter-terrorism instruments signed by the United States Government, had been the direct cause of the countless terrorist actions carried out in Cuba by unscrupulous individuals who had endangered people's lives, and even committed murder, in order to hijack ships or aircraft and take them to the United States. The Government of that country had not even attempted to return any of those individuals to face prosecution in Cuba. 46. Those facts proved once again that the United States Government lacked the political will to punish the crime of terrorism when it was committed against countries that held independent positions and did not submit to its policies. 47. The unjust conviction by a corrupt Federal Court in Miami of Cuban citizen Gerardo Hernández, Ramón Labañino and Fernando González and United States citizens Antonio Guerrero and René González, were evidence of the United States Government's double standard in its so-called international campaign against terrorism.6 48. Meanwhile, the Miami-based Cuban American terrorist Mafia was continuing its efforts to thwart the prosecution in Panama of terrorists Luis Posada Carriles, Gaspar Jiménez Escobedo, Guillermo Sampoll and Pedro Remón Rodríguez.7 49. A number of terrorist acts had been committed against Cuba during the past 10 months.8 The gravity and increasing frequency of such acts, openly encouraged by the United States policy of instigating illegal emigration from Cuba, and the fact that they were part of a large-scale plan aimed at destabilizing the country, creating a migration crisis and helping escalate tensions between Cuba and the United States, thereby threatening the security of the region, had forced the Cuban courts to impose harsh penalties on the perpetrators and even to impose the death penalty on some of the most violent terrorists captured. The Cuban Council of State had confirmed those penalties regretfully, but mindful of its responsibility to protect the peace and security of its people. 50. The Government of Cuba had not rested, and would never rest, in the exercise of its right of self-defence against such actions. 51. Denmark provided a translation into English of relevant parts of its Criminal Code and its Administration of Justice Act.2 52. Estonia provided extracts of its national laws and regulations relating to terrorism2 and indicated that it had criminalized terrorism as such as a criminal offence in its Penal Code.9 Furthermore, Estonia reported that it was in the process of becoming a party to the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, that it had concluded several bilateral anti-terrorism agreements and that it was preparing a law on the suppression of financing of terrorism. 53. Germany indicated that a new section 129b had been added to its Penal Code (StGB). The new section provides for the prosecution in Germany of persons participating in or supporting a terrorist organization acting outside of Germany. Germany also reported that the new section 24c of the Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz (KWG)) created a computerized system for the retrieval of key account data; that provision would, inter alia, constitute an effective prerequisite for freezing financial assets of specific persons and organizations in order to counter terrorism. 54. Israel indicated that its citizens had continued to suffer from the ravages of terrorist attacks of the most brutal and indiscriminate nature; a list of major terrorist attacks on Israelis within the past year was provided.2 55. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya indicated that it had signed a number of bilateral agreements with Algeria, Italy, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen in the sphere of security cooperation, which included provisions relating to the combating of terrorism. 56. With regard to legal provisions relating to the combating of terrorism, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya reported that although its national legislation did not to date include specific legislation on counter-terrorism, a set of legal provisions relating to the combating and punishment of terrorist acts did exist. Those provisions were contained in the Libyan Penal Code of 1954, which was the principal criminal legislation in the country; a number of provisions had subsequently been enacted as amendments to the Code. 57. The Marshall Islands supplied the text of its Counter-Terrorism Act 2002.2 58. New Zealand provided the text of its Terrorism Suppression Act 2002.2 59. Norway indicated that in order to replace a provisional ordinance of 5 October 2001, a bill amending a number of acts so as to establish effective legislative measures against acts of terrorism and the financing of terrorism had taken effect on 28 June 2002; in addition, other Norwegian legislation had been reviewed to ensure that the requirements of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) were fully met. 60. The new legislation makes it a serious offence to commit or to directly or indirectly finance terrorist acts and requires that the Norwegian authorities immediately freeze any assets or fund belonging to any person or entity suspected of such acts. 61. Furthermore, Norway is in the process of becoming a party to the Protocol amending the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism. 62. Oman reaffirmed its steadfast position with regard to international terrorism and its condemnation of all forms of terrorism for any motive and from any source, bearing in mind the need to distinguish between terrorism and the right of peoples to legitimate struggle against foreign occupation, as affirmed in the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism and the Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on Combating International Terrorism. 63. Oman indicated that it was considering becoming a party to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. At the regional level, Oman is a party to the Gulf Cooperation Council Security Agreement. Oman also provided extracts of its national laws and regulations relating to terrorism.2 64. Saudi Arabia stated that its consistent and resolute stance on terrorism was based on the Islamic Shariah, from which the country derived its statutes and regulations. Despite the fact that the Kingdom has long been a target of terrorism, its condemnation of terrorism and terrorist acts and its efforts to combat them did not stem from specific situations or events. Rather, its position on the subject is founded on the following principles: :: Adherence to the Islamic Shariah, international law, principles of morality and the humanistic heritage of the Arab nation; :: Condemnation of and efforts to suppress terrorism in all international and regional forums and effective participation in related efforts, including participation in the drafting of relevant international and regional conventions and the signature and ratification of those conventions; :: Resolute action against perpetrators of terrorist offences, the pursuit of such offenders and the taking of legal and judicial steps against them in accordance with the provisions of the Islamic Shariah and the Kingdom's international, regional and bilateral obligations; :: The strengthening and further development of statutes and regulations relating to the fight against terrorism and terrorist offences; :: The modernization and development of security bodies and all other organs concerned with counter-terrorism; :: The strengthening of cooperation with other States and international and regional organizations for the prevention and suppression of terrorism, especially in the field of information exchange. 65. International conventions and protocols on terrorism to which Saudi Arabia has become a party become part of the domestic legislation of the country, which constantly strives to develop and strengthen its statutes and regulations against terrorism and the financing of terrorism. 66. Senegal indicated that under current Senegalese law, there was no legislation governing or suppressing acts characterized as international terrorism. 67. The competent Senegalese authorities had, however, issued appropriate guidelines for putting in place special legislation for the prevention and suppression of terrorist acts. The main elements of that legislation would be: :: Criminalization of terrorist acts and establishment of penalties for such acts; :: Application of special rules of criminal procedure for effectively prosecuting criminals; :: Establishment of a new judicial structure for that purpose. 68. Switzerland reported that it planned to become a party to the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings in 2003. 69. With a view to ratifying the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and in order to strengthen its capacity to combat terrorist financing, Switzerland would shortly adopt the following new penal provisions: :: A provision in the Swiss Penal Code criminalizing the financing of terrorism (new article 260 quinquies); :: A provision in the Swiss Penal Code on the liability of legal entities for serious economic crimes including the financing of terrorism (new article 100 quater); :: An amendment to the provision on the jurisdiction of the Confederation in matters of criminal prosecution (transfer of jurisdiction from the cantonal to the federal authorities) with respect to the crime of financing of terrorism (amended article 340 bis). 70. That new legislation would strengthen the wide range of instruments already available to Switzerland for preventing and punishing the financing of terrorism effectively. 71. Turkey provided a list of national laws and regulations relating to the prevention and suppression of acts of international terrorism.2 72. Uzbekistan provided the text of its Law for the Suppression of Terrorism and a relevant extract of its Penal Code.10 B. Information received from international organizations 1. United Nations system 73. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reported that in the wake of the 11 September 2001 attacks, it had moved rapidly to conduct a thorough review of intra-Agency programmes relating to the prevention of acts of nuclear and radiological terrorism, and to compile a comprehensive plan for upgrading nuclear security worldwide. The IAEA plan of action for protection against nuclear terrorism is being implemented and covers eight activity areas:11 :: Physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities; :: Detection of malicious activities (such as illicit trafficking) involving nuclear and other radioactive materials; :: Strengthening of State systems for nuclear material accountancy and control; :: Security of radioactive sources; :: Assessment of safety and security related vulnerabilities at nuclear facilities; :: Response to malicious acts or threats thereof; :: Adherence to international agreements and guidelines; and :: Coordination and information management for nuclear security related matters. 74. In September 2001, the IAEA Director General convened an open-ended group of legal and technical experts to prepare a draft amendment of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. On 14 March 2003, the group adopted by consensus its final report and agreed to submit it to the Director General. The final report of the group sets out possible amendments to be made to that Convention. The text prepared by the group identifies possible amendments that, inter alia, reflect the extension of the scope of the Convention to cover the physical protection of nuclear material in domestic use, storage and transport, and the protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities against sabotage; reflect the importance of national responsibility for the establishment, implementation and maintenance of a physical protection regime; cover the Physical Protection Objectives and Fundamental Principles; establish the basis for cooperation in the case of a credible threat of sabotage of nuclear material and nuclear facilities or in the case of sabotage thereof; and establish new offences relating to sabotage, nuclear smuggling, and contributing to and organizing or directing the commission of an offence. However, the text prepared by the group still contains a small number of bracketed clauses on which agreement has not yet been reached: for example, how the Fundamental Principles of physical protection are to be incorporated in an amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; whether offences should include damage to the environment; and whether activities of military forces should be addressed by an amended Convention. A State or States Parties would have to initiate the procedure for the convening of a conference to consider proposed amendments, in accordance with article 20 of the Convention. 75. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) indicated that the Council of ICAO, on 14 June 2002, approved the ICAO Aviation Security Plan of Action. This plan of action includes regular, mandatory, systematic and harmonized audits to enable the evaluation of aviation security in place in all ICAO Contracting States. 76. The Council also established the ICAO Universal Security Audit Programme relating to, inter alia, airport security arrangements and civil aviation security programmes, with a view to assessing the level of implementation by States of security-related standards. 77. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) reported, inter alia, that the 2002 SOLAS Conference on Maritime Security had adopted mandatory provisions for incorporation in the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), a new chapter XI-2 on special measures to enhance maritime security, supplemented by a new International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code. 78. The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf are currently under revision by IMO to ensure that these treaties, which provide for the prosecution or extradition of alleged criminals wherever they happen to be, remain relevant in the light of the events of 11 September 2001. 79. IMO is currently cooperating with the International Labour Organization on the development of a new seafarer's identity document and a new code of practice on port security. IMO is also currently cooperating with the World Customs Organization on the integrity of the multi-modal transport chain. 80. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime indicated that the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance in preventing and combating terrorism" (E/CN.15/2003/9) included information provided by Governments on the implementation of the universal anti-terrorism instruments and of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). In addition the report reflected the information provided by some Member States regarding the regional instruments and bilateral agreements to which they were party. The report also contained information on national and international actions to combat terrorism and on national legal frameworks against terrorism. 2. Other international organizations 81. The African Union (OAU) recalled that its member States had long expressed concern over the growing phenomenon of terrorism. This common concern at the continental level was first given concrete expression within the framework of OAU in the early 1990s. Early attempts of OAU to combat terrorism were aimed at addressing the root causes as well as strengthening continental integration and inter-State cooperation in Africa. In this context, the organization adopted two resolutions, in 1992 and 1994, which were aimed at regulating certain behaviours, such as extremism in inter-African relations and the use of religion to justify terrorist and other violent acts. 82. The African Union has continued the philosophy of its predecessor and is determined to take the counter-terrorism campaign in Africa to a different level, by intensifying cooperation and setting new standards and specific obligations for member States, as well as to enhance cooperation with the international community in the fight against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 83. In addition to its participation in and support for international counter-terrorism instruments, especially those concluded under the aegis of the United Nations, the African Union has taken several measures to eliminate the scourge of terrorism and its linkages such as corruption, drug trafficking, transnational organized crime, the proliferation of small arms and weapons of mass destruction, human trafficking and money-laundering. Those measures included the 1999 OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted in Algiers, unequivocally condemning all acts of terrorism wherever they may occur. The adoption of the Algiers Convention marked the first major comprehensive legislative approach to addressing the scourge of terrorism in Africa. The Convention clearly recognizes the gravity and severity of the threat of terrorism. It offers an African definition and concept of terrorism, clearly delineating the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial rule or foreign occupation for freedom from crimes of terrorism. 84. The Council of Europe indicated that a protocol amending the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism had been adopted on 15 May 2003. 85. It also stated that the priorities for further counter-terrorist action were: To study the concepts of "apologie du terrorisme" and of "incitement to terrorism"; Special investigation techniques; Protection of witnesses and pentiti; International law enforcement cooperation; Fight against financing of terrorism; Questions related to identification matters. 86. These priorities12 will be examined and gradually implemented, in particular within the context of the European Committee on Crime Problems and of the European Committee on Legal Cooperation. The Committee of Experts on Terrorism was established to be in charge of reviewing at regular intervals the progress achieved in the implementation of priority actions against terrorism and making new proposals to intensify action against terrorism while preserving and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms. 87. With respect to the fight against the financing of terrorism, the Committee of Ministers adopted revised terms of reference to the Select Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering Measures in order to include self- and mutual evaluation of the performance of States in complying with the eight special recommendations on terrorist financing formulated by the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering. These recommendations cover, inter alia, the mandatory requirements on States to act to take immediate steps to ratify United Nations instruments, to criminalize the financing of terrorism, to report suspicious transactions linked to terrorism and to afford the widest measure of international cooperation in connection with enquiries into the financing of terrorism. 88. The Council of Europe has also set up a Consultative Panel on Media and Terrorism with a mandate to compile information on existing regulatory or self-regulatory initiatives concerning media coverage of terrorism and the fight against it. The Panel will also evaluate their adequacy and effectiveness and will examine restrictions on the freedom of the media in different countries and the justification given for these restrictions, in the light of article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The Panel will also collect information on current initiatives taken by the media to explain the causes of terrorism and to promote a better understanding between peoples. 89. Lastly, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance has decided to draft a general policy recommendation on the subject of the fight against terrorism and combating racism. It will deal with issues related to the risks which might arise from the inclusion of racist elements in anti-terrorist measures and from the implementation, or as a consequence, of such measures. 90. The European Union provided a summary of its activities in the field of counter-terrorism.13 91. The Organization of American States (OAS) highlighted the adoption of the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism which provides the juridical basis for signatories to update their national systems to reflect the changed nature of the terrorist threat. In particular, the establishment of national financial intelligence units will give member States new tools to fight money laundering and terrorist financing. The training, information exchange, and technical cooperation mandated by the convention will improve the region's ability to deal with a wide variety of new and old terrorist challenges. Better border controls will assist in campaigns against drug traffickers and arms smugglers, as well as terrorists. Information exchanges can help prevent terrorist acts and can help authorities investigate and prosecute terrorists and those that support them. Lastly, the Convention provides member States with new tools to improve mutual legal assistance, particularly by denying the "political offence" exception to accused terrorists. 92. The challenge for member States now is to implement the Convention through effective national legislation and administrative practice, and then follow through with enhanced training to assist those charged with employing the new counter-terrorism tools. 93. The work plan of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism14 calls for programme development in two general areas, information-sharing and training, and identifies two critical areas for development: strengthening safeguards against terrorist fundraising and money transfers, and improving the control of people and material that cross national borders. The secretariat has launched programmes in all of these areas. III. International legal instruments related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism A. Status of international conventions pertaining to international terrorism 94. Currently, there are 21 global or regional treaties pertaining to the subject of international terrorism. Each instrument listed below is represented by the letter shown on the left, which is featured in the tables that follow to reflect the status of that instrument: A. Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September 1963 (entered into force on 4 December 1969): status as at 31 May 2003;15 B. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970 (entered into force on 14 October 1971): status as at 31 May 2003;15 C. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 23 September 1971 (entered into force on 26 January 1973): status as at 31 May 2003;15 D. Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 14 December 1973 (entered into force on 20 February 1977): status as at 25 June 2003;16 E. International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 17 December 1979 (entered into force on 3 June 1983): status as at 25 June 2003;16 F. Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, signed at Vienna on 3 March 1980 (entered into force on 8 February 1987): status as at 11 June 2003;17 G. Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 24 February 1988 (entered into force on 6 August 1989): status as at 31 May 2003;15 H. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, done at Rome on 10 March 1988 (entered into force on 1 March 1992): status as at 31 May 2003;18 I. Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, done at Rome on 10 March 1988 (entered into force on 1 March 1992): status as at 31 May 2003;18 J. Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection, signed at Montreal on 1 March 1991 (entered into force on 21 June 1998): status as at 31 May 2003;15 K. International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 15 December 1997 (entered into force on 23 May 2001): status as at 25 June 2003;16 L. International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 9 December 1999 (entered into force on 10 April 2002): status as at 27 June 2003;16 M. Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, signed at a meeting held at the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States in Cairo on 22 April 1998 (entered into force on 7 May 1999): status as at 16 June 2003; N. Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on Combating International Terrorism, adopted at Ouagadougou on 1 July 1999; status as at 9 March 2002: status as at 30 June 2003; O. European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, concluded at Strasbourg on 27 January 1977 (entered into force on 4 August 1978): status as at 23 June 2003;19 P. OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes against Persons and Related Extortion that are of International Significance, concluded at Washington, D.C., on 2 February 1971 (entered into force on 16 October 1973): status as at 23 June 2003;20 Q. OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted at Algiers on 14 July 1999 (entered into force on 6 December 2002): status as at 15 May 2003; R. SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, signed at Kathmandu on 4 November 1987 (entered into force on 22 August 1988): all seven States members of SAARC (Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka) are parties to the Convention; S. Treaty on Cooperation among States Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating Terrorism, done at Minsk on 4 June 1999: status as at 19 June 2003; T. Inter-American Convention against Terrorism, adopted at Bridgetown on 3 June 2002: status as at 30 June 2003;20 U. Protocol Amending the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, adopted at Strasbourg, on 15 May 2003: status as at 23 June 2003.19 Table 1 Total participation in international conventions pertaining to international terrorism Signature A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U 45a 22b 41c Ratification, accession or succession 16b 8b 22c a Includes the European Atomic Energy Community, which is not listed in table 2. b Includes the Palestinian Authority. c Includes the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic. Table 2 Status of participation in international conventions pertaining to international terrorism State Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo (Republic of the) Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Monaco Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia and Montenegro Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe B. Recent developments related to General Assembly resolution 51/210 95. By its resolution 57/27 of 19 November 2002, the General Assembly reaffirmed the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996. The Ad Hoc Committee held its seventh session from 31 March to 2 April 2003 to continue the elaboration of a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, with appropriate time allocated to the continued consideration of outstanding issues relating to the elaboration of a draft international convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, and to keep on its agenda the question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations to formulate a joint organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.21 96. The work of the Ad Hoc Committee is expected to continue during the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, within the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee. IV. Information on workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism A. United Nations system 97. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicated that it is implementing an extensive programme of physical protection related training, workshops and seminars directed at international, regional and national audiences. A field-type training course, "Practical application of physical protection", was conducted at a training centre in the Russian Federation where established in-field training facilities have been made available for the training of operators of nuclear installations of Russian origin and design. Efforts are under way to further upgrade this centre for training on how to test the design of physical protection systems, including alarm, detection and delay. Thereafter, the training will be offered to a larger group of States. A pilot regional course on security of nuclear installations has been held to deal specifically with security aspects of "mixed facilities" in which research reactors and laboratories are operated and radioactive sources are produced. Furthermore, a tentative work plan includes a regional awareness seminar for Africa to combat illicit trafficking, and nuclear security evaluation missions to five States that have requested such assistance. The seminar will provide the foundations for determining subsequent nuclear security assistance. 98. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is continuing to develop the training programme for aviation security, which comprises a series of aviation security training packages (ASTPs), designed for global application. To date, seven ASTPs have been completed and are available for sale and distribution throughout the international civil aviation community. ICAO is in the process of finalizing the following training packages: hostage negotiation and crisis exercise. A national auditors training package is also being developed in order to assist in the implementation of the aviation security audit programme. The purpose of these initiatives is to provide States with the necessary training tools that will assist them in developing the components of their national aviation security training programme. Furthermore, to meet States' training requirements and to render assistance in the area of programme formulation, topic-focused seminars/workshops have been developed and are being conducted in all ICAO regions in the ICAO regional aviation security training centres. 99. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) reported that in February 2002 it had launched a two-year programme of global assistance on maritime security and that during its first year several subregional seminars/workshops had been held. 100. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime indicated that its Terrorism Prevention Branch has been active in the past year in assisting States in organizing workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism.22 101. The Global Programme against Terrorism was launched in October 2002 after consultation with Member States. Its overall aim is to respond promptly to requests for counter-terrorism assistance. Within its framework, the Centre for International Crime Prevention is implementing two projects on strengthening the legal regime against terrorism. The first, a preparatory assistance project, includes a legislative guide to the universal anti-terrorism conventions and protocols. 102. The full-fledged project on strengthening the legal regime against terrorism encompasses, inter alia, providing direct legislative assistance to assist countries in preparing the bills necessary for becoming party to the international instruments related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism. It also includes regional and subregional working meetings to engage in an analytical review of the incorporation into the national legislation of offences contained in these inter national instruments. In addition, the project allows for regional expert group meetings to develop model laws, as well as segments of model legislation, and contains provisions for the holding of national seminars for practitioners to strengthen their capacities to fulfil primary obligations under the international instruments previously mentioned. To date, legal advisory services have been provided to 22 requesting countries and it is anticipated that approximately 15 additional countries will be provided assistance in the remainder of 2003. B. Other international organizations 103. The Organization of American States (OAS) reported that it had begun developing a variety of training programmes designed to help Member States meet their obligations under Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism, and to enhance their expertise on specific counter-terrorism issues. The strategy is to look for opportunities to provide unique expertise while avoiding duplication of existing efforts. A list of relevant training opportunities available through other organizations to which Member States may apply directly is being compiled. 104. Among the training initiatives currently in development are the following: :: "Terrorist typologies and methods", a basic course which will be offered and taught online; :: A policy engagement exercise involving a terrorist incident exploiting radiological materials in the Caribbean; :: A workshop on key issues in implementing the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism; :: The investigation of terrorist financing for financial intelligence units; :: "Best practices" in combating terrorist financing; :: An introduction to cyber security. V. Publication of a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations 105. The Secretariat is in the process of compiling material to be included in a second volume of the United Nations Legislative Series entitled "National Law and Regulations on the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism. Part II". In this regard, the Secretariat would like to renew its request to those States which have not yet done so to submit contributions in English or French. Notes 1 Note also the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism (resolution 51/210, annex). 2 Available in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 3 The texts are available, in Spanish, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 4 Cuba's contribution is accompanied by an annex containing the statement, dated 2 May 2003, from the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs in response to Cuba's inclusion on the list of States that allegedly sponsor terrorism drawn up by the United States Department of State; the annex is available in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 5 More detailed information is available in the files of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs and in the reports of Cuba to the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council (S/2002/15 and S/2002/1093). 6 More information is available in the files of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs, as well as in the 2002 report of the Secretary-General on measures to eliminate international terrorism (A/57/183) and in documents A/56/969, A/56/1031 and A/57/760. 7 More information is available in the files of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs, as well as in the 2002 report of the Secretary-General on measures to eliminate international terrorism (A/57/183) and in the previously referred to report of Cuba to the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council (S/2002/15). 8 More information is available in the files of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 9 The definition of terrorism is provided in Chapter 15 (Offences against the State), Division 2 (Offences against State Power). 10 The text is available, in Russian, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. 11 The summary of the plan and its progress is available in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs. See also document S/AC.40/2003/SM.1/2. 12 See also http://www.coe.int/gmt. 13 See S/AC.40/2003/SM.1/2, S/201/1297 and S/2002/928. 14 See http://www.cicte.oas.org. 15 www.icao.int/cgi/goto_leb.pl?icao/en/leb/treaty.htm. 16 www.un.org/law. 17 www.iaea.org/worldatom/Documents/Legal. 18 www.imo.org. 19 www.legal.coe.int. 20 www.oas.org/. 21 For the report of the Ad Hoc Committee see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/58/37). 22 See S/AC.40/2003/SM.1/2. 