%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|INTERNAL SECURITY|SPECIAL MISSIONS|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|

Fifty-eighth session A/58/50/Rev.1 and Corr.1. Item 119 (c) of the provisional agenda* Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives Report of the mission of the Special Rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and of a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission Note by the Secretary-General Summary In its resolution 57/233, adopted on 18 December 2002, the General Assembly decided to request the Special Rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission to carry out a joint mission of investigation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo consulted other members of the mission as to their availability. Because of the lack of security in certain parts of the country, notably the east, the joint mission could not be undertaken. 1. In its resolution 57/233, adopted on 18 December 2002, the General Assembly recalled its decision to request the Special Rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission to carry out a joint mission of investigation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while regretting that the security situation had not yet allowed such a mission. 2. In the same resolution, the General Assembly decided to request the Special Rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission to carry out, as soon as security conditions permit and, where appropriate, in cooperation with the National Commission of Inquiry to investigate alleged human rights violations and breaches of international humanitarian law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 1996 and 1997, a joint mission to investigate all massacres carried out on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a view to bringing to justice those responsible, and to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-ninth session and to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. 3. The General Assembly also decided to request the Secretary-General to give the Special Rapporteurs and the joint mission all necessary assistance to enable them to discharge their mandate fully. 4. The Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ms. Lulia Motoc, opened consultations with the other members of the joint mission in order to ascertain their availability. 5. Because of the worsening security situation in certain areas deemed dangerous and inaccessible, particularly in the east of the country, the joint mission could not be undertaken. 6. The Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will go to Kinshasa in September 2003. She expects to establish contact with the members of the transitional Government with a view to obtaining their support for the mission and ensuring secure conditions on the ground. 7. All the relevant information will be given in the next report that the Special Rapporteur will present to the Commission at its sixtieth session. 