%%%PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|DOCUMENTS|

Fifty-eighth session * The present document is an advance version of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the work of its forty-third session. The final report will be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/58/16). Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination Forty-third session (9 June to 3 July and 9 July 2003)* Chapter Paragraphs Page Abbreviations Organization of the session Agenda Election of officers Attendance Documentation Adoption of the report of the Committee Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations Programme questions Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Foreword and introduction Section 1: Overall policy-making, executive direction and coordination Section 2: General Assembly affairs and conference services Section 3: Political affairs Section 4: Disarmament Section 5: Peacekeeping operations Section 6: Peaceful uses of outer space Section 8: Legal affairs Section 9: Economic and social affairs Section 10: Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States Section 11: United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development Section 12: Trade and development Section 13: International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO Section 14: Environment Section 15: Human settlements Section 16: Crime prevention and criminal justice Section 17: International drug control Section 18: Economic and social development in Africa Section 19: Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific Section 20: Economic development in Europe Section 21: Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean Section 22: Economic and social development in Western Asia Section 23: Regular programme of technical cooperation Section 24: Human rights Section 25: Protection of and assistance to refugees Section 26: Palestine refugees Section 27: Humanitarian assistance Section 28: Public information Section 29: Management and central support services Section 30: Internal oversight Section 31: Jointly financed administrative activities Section 35: Development account Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 Programme 7: Economic and social affairs Programme 8: United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development Programme 23: Public information Evaluation Proposed evaluation themes In-depth evaluation of the programme on the law of the sea and ocean affairs Triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of global development trends, issues and policies, global approaches to social and microeconomic issues and policies, and the corresponding subprogrammes in the regional commissions Triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of the advancement of women programme Coordination questions Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 New Partnership for Africa's Development Report of the Joint Inspection Unit: Results approach in the United Nations: implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate Provisional agenda for the forty-fourth session of the Committee Annexes I. Agenda of the forty-third session of the Committee II. List of documents before the Committee at its forty-third session CEB United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination ECA Economic Commission for Africa ECE Economic Commission for Europe ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ESCWA Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee ICSC International Civil Service Commission ITC International Trade Centre NEPAD FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNDCP United Nations International Drug Control Programme UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme UNHCR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNMAS United Nations Mine Action Service UNICs United Nations Information Centres UNMOGIP United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East UNTSO United Nations Truce Supervision Organization WTO World Trade Organization Chapter I 1. The Committee for Programme and Coordination held its organizational session (1st meeting) at United Nations Headquarters on 5 May 2003 and its substantive session from 9 June to 3 July and on 9 July 2003. It held a total of 23 meetings and a number of informal consultations. A web site for the Committee for Programme and Coordination was established to provide easy access to the relevant documentation and the programme of work. A. Agenda 2. The agenda for the forty-third session, adopted by the Committee at its organization session (1st meeting), is contained in annex I. At its 2nd meeting, on 9 June 2003, the attention of the Committee was drawn to an addendum to the provisional annotated agenda contained in document E/AC.51/2003/1/Add.1 and the Committee decided to include the question of the proposed revisions to Programme 23: Public information, of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 under agenda item 4, Programme questions sub-item (b), Proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005. 3. At its organizational session (1st meeting), on 5 May 2003, the Committee approved the proposed programme of work for its forty-third session, which was subsequently issued in document E/AC.51/2003/L.2. 4. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/303, the Committee, as requested by the Assembly, considered at its forty-third session the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled "The results approach in the United Nations: implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration" (A/57/372) and the related comments by the Secretary-General and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon (A/57/372/Add.1). B. Election of officers 5. At its organizational meeting (1st meeting), on 5 May 2003, the Committee elected, by acclamation, Mr. Seyed Morteza Mirmohammad (Islamic Republic of Iran), Chairman of the Committee for the forty-third session. 6. At its 1st and 2nd meetings, on 3 May and 9 June, the Committee elected, by acclamation, the following members of the Bureau for the forty-third session: Vice-Chairpersons: Mr. Oleksii V. Ivashchenko (Ukraine) Ms. Loipa Sanchez Lorenzo (Cuba) Ms. Nonye Udo (Nigeria) Rapporteur: Mr. Jerry Kramer (Canada) C. Attendance 7. The following States members of the Committee were represented: Argentina Mexico Armenia Monaco Bahamas Nicaragua Benin Botswana Nigeria Pakistan Brazil Republic of Korea Canada Republic of Moldova Central African Republic Russian Federation China South Africa Cuba Switzerland Ethiopia Tunisia France Ukraine Gabon United Kingdom of Great Britain Germany and Northern Ireland India United Republic of Tanzania Indonesia United States of America Iran (Islamic Republic of) Uruguay Japan 8. The following States Members of the United Nations were represented by observers: Algeria Morocco Australia Netherlands Austria New Zealand Bangladesh Panama Belgium Peru Colombia Philippines Costa Rica Poland Croatia Portugal Dominican Republic Qatar Egypt Romania Greece Saudi Arabia Guatemala Singapore Guyana Syrian Arab Republic Italy Trinidad and Tobago Jamaica Uganda V Jordan Venezuela Kazakhstan 9. The following regional commissions and specialized agencies were represented: Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) Regional Commissions New York Office United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Health Organization (WHO) 10. Also present at the session were the Under-Secretary-General for Management, the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management, the Under-Secretary-General for Communications and Public Information, the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services, the Legal Counsel, the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, the Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Africa, the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the Controller, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs, the Assistant Secretary-General for Central Support Services, the Deputy Secretary-General for Trade and Development, the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Special Advisor for Africa, the Chairman of the Joint Inspection Unit and senior officials of the United Nations Secretariat. 11. Ms. Doris Bertrand, Inspector in the Joint Inspection Unit, also participated in the work of the Committee. 12. The following sections of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 were discussed by means of videoconferencing: section 6: Peaceful uses of outer space; section 16: Crime prevention and criminal justice; section 17: International drug control; section 20: Economic development in Europe; section 24: Human rights; section 29E: Administration, Geneva; section 29F: Administration, Vienna; section 29G: Administration, Nairobi; and section 31: Jointly financed administrative activities, (b) Joint Inspection Unit. D. Documentation 13. The list of documents before the Committee at its forty-third session is set out in annex II. 14. At the 22nd meeting, on 3 July 2003, the Secretary of the Committee read out a statement on the programme budget implications of holding an additional meeting for the adoption of the report of the Committee. 15. At its 23rd meeting, on 9 July 2003, the Committee adopted the draft report on the work of its forty-third session (E/AC.51/2003/L.5 and Add.1-40 and 42-44). Progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures 16. At its 4th meeting, on 10 June 2003, the Committee considered the report of the Secretary-General on progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures (A/58/70). The Under-Secretary-General for Management, acting as the representative of the Secretary-General, introduced the report and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the report. She stressed that the report comprised a first step towards responding in a rigorous way to the Committee's demand for comprehensive analysis of the progress and impact of management improvement measures. The measures analysed include efforts to eliminate wasteful practices and maximize value for money, and to cut through administrative layers in managing business processes. Her remarks included a commitment to further development of the reporting methodology to capture and summarize direct savings and other tangible improvements. Discussion 17. A number of delegations expressed appreciation for the new direction taken in the report, and welcomed the fact that reports were becoming progressively more useful in comparison to earlier years' versions. It was noted that the report of the Secretary-General demonstrated a more quantitative analytical approach than that of previous reports, which had consisted largely of listings of projects. In addition, it was noted that quantitative analysis alone could not fully inform judgement and provide adequate perspective on the management of change; rather, a balance of quantitative and qualitative insights was required. Further, the comment was made that proper presentation of the findings from such analysis would guide legislative decision-making by Member States. 18. The view was stated that the new reporting approach could become a source of good practices, and support the development of systems for monitoring and accountability. It was also noted that it was necessary to continuously track and evaluate the results of management improvement measures in order to ensure that they continue to make progress and achieve their desired impact. 19. Several delegations expressed appreciation that the report was concise, and that its language was straightforward and informative. Some also noted with approval the systematic nature of the report's discussion. 20. On the matter of obstacles to implementation of improvement measures, a view was expressed that the Secretariat's treatment of this topic represented a welcome tone of candour. Delegations expressed concern regarding obstacles described in the report, particularly resistance to change and lack of cooperation among offices. A number of representatives requested that the Secretariat specify remedial steps that would be taken to address the identified obstacles, and report back on this matter in the future. 21. The view was expressed that it was necessary to evaluate continuously the results of management improvement measures in order to keep the measures functioning effectively and also that further efficient and effective management of the Organization was indispensable to strengthening the functioning of the United Nations. 22. The view was expressed that, with regard to paragraph 47 of the report, no individual management improvement measure was used for the improvement in geographical distribution, and that a management improvement measure concerning improvement in geographical distribution should be introduced during the future process. 23. The view was expressed that a future update report should include information on what degree of progress the Secretariat has achieved in the management improvement measures. 24. While welcoming the report as a step in the right direction, most representatives strongly emphasized that major enhancements were still needed in order to fully respond to previous mandates. In particular, delegations underlined the critical need for reporting on impact in quantitative, verifiable terms. While noting that the current report set an analytical baseline, representatives expressed strong expectations that future reporting would realize the goal of true impact measurement. The view was put forward that the impact of technology projects could be measured in terms of number of end-users and financial savings, and impact on culture and knowledge could be measured by surveying the attitude of the staff and/or the opinion of Member States and service users. 25. Several delegations requested clarification regarding the review process that had been applied to the data, and highlighted the need for information in future reports to be verified by an independent party. 26. Several delegations noted with concern the scarcity of information regarding results-based budgeting and financial management, and called for more extensive reporting on this area in the future. Many questions were raised as to the meaning of the flexible financial management arrangements referenced in the document. The representative of the Secretary-General noted that flexibility referred to the new financial rules and regulations that had recently been legislated, which now empower programme managers to exercise discretion within allocated programme budgets while continuing to ensure full accountability. 27. Most delegations welcomed the introduction of the Secretariat's new data warehouse on management improvement measures, the progress and impact reporting system. It was viewed as an innovative and useful tool with the potential to support a broad range of reporting demands, and encouragement was expressed for its continued development. Regarding the information that Project Offices provide their own self-evaluation information on the progress and impact of their initiatives, the view was expressed that due consideration be given to entrusting an oversight body to carry out such evaluation for greater transparency and confidence in the measurement of the Progress and Impact Reporting System's impact and improvement of efficiency in the system. 28. Specific concern was expressed about lack of information on gender balance and geographical distribution, and representatives called for enhanced reporting on these matters. 29. Some delegations noted favourably the inclusion of offices away from Headquarters in the analysis, as well as the incorporation of productivity as a cross-cutting reform theme. Conclusions and recommendations 30. The Committee took note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the work in progress towards implementing the Secretary-General's management reform programme (A/58/70). 31. The Committee welcomed the implementation by the Department of Management of the Progress and Impact Reporting System to analyse progress related to the implementation of the reform measures. The Committee encouraged the Secretariat to continue and improve further the new approach to reporting on management improvement measures. The Committee recommended that the system include in the future a fuller evaluation and analysis of the implementation of all management improvement measures, specifying remedial steps that would be taken to address the identified obstacles. 32. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General: (a) To intensify his examination of cross-cutting issues; (b) To ensure that there is better cooperation between the Monitoring Section of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Management Policy Office of the Department of Management; (c) To explore the option of incorporating, as appropriate, the quantitative data of the Progress and Impact Reporting System into future budget submissions with a view to providing Member States a tool for measuring impact of activities. 33. The Committee stressed the need for future reports to provide more analytic information and a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of the management reform measures it addresses, and recommended that the General Assembly urge all relevant departments and offices to cooperate fully in the preparation of future reports. 34. The Committee recommended, regarding paragraph 45 on the initiatives in the human resources area concerning staff selection and recruitment, with the introduction of competency-based recruitment, that the Secretary-General continue to take into consideration Article 101 of the Charter concerning the need to pay due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. 35. The Committee also recommended, concerning paragraph 51 on the implementation of new policy of mobility requiring rotation between posts, at least every five years, that the Secretary-General fully observe the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on human resources management reform. 36. The Committee further recommended that future reports include specific information on efficiencies achieved as a result of implementation of reform measures within the United Nations Secretariat. Chapter III A. Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 37. At its 9th and 10th meetings, on 16 and 17 June 2003, the Committee considered the foreword and introduction to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Introduction)). 38. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the document and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 39. The presentation of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 in a shorter, more strategic format was welcomed. It was noted that the overall approach is set out clearly in a concise, reader-friendly format. Appreciation was expressed for a number of elements underlying the overall budget, namely, the expansion and reinforcement of results-based budgeting, the reflection of specific gender-dimension issues in the logical framework and the clear identification of the Secretary-General's proposed initiatives aimed at further strengthening the United Nations. It was noted that a shorter budget format could also result in increased requests for documentation. 40. Appreciation was expressed for the clarity with which the foreword and introduction set out the programmatic objectives of the Organization for 2004-2005 in accordance with the medium-term plan for 2002-2005 and incorporated the measures and proposals of the Secretary-General consequent to the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002. 41. Satisfaction was expressed with the efforts by the Secretary-General to improve the results-based budgeting format, taking into account particularly the recommendations of the Committee. It was observed that results-based budgeting was being implemented in a gradual and incremental manner and that the Secretary-General should continue his efforts to improve the format. The view was expressed that some expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement in the proposed programme budget did not reflect precisely those in the medium-term plan for 2002-2005. The view was also expressed that while efforts had been made to quantify indicators of achievement, further efforts should be made in future proposed programme budgets to draw clear linkages between objectives, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and outputs. Concern was expressed that some external factors included internal factors within the control of the Secretariat. 42. The extension of the results-based budgeting framework to the executive direction and management components of the budget was welcomed. The incorporation of baselines and targets in the budget for the measurement of indicators of achievement was also welcomed. However, it was noted that in many sections of the budget, these baselines and targets had not yet been established for specific accomplishments and indicators of achievement, thereby limiting the ability of Member States and programme managers to measure real programme impact. 43. It was noted that there were still cases where the objectives and expected accomplishments were too general and the indicators of achievement lacked practical applicability. It was also pointed out that the 900 indicators of achievement in the budget were far too many, and some were difficult to measure. It was acknowledged that this was only the second budget to be submitted in a results-based format and that results-based budgeting was not an end in itself. The formulation and application of indicators of achievement should reflect the unique character of the United Nations. In addition, care should be taken so that results-based budgeting would provide full justification. 44. It was pointed out that the availability of financial resources stemming from contributions to the regular budget should not be considered an external factor, since the availability of these resources is integral to the results-based budgeting planning and logical framework. 45. It was noted that the budget document contained concrete proposals to continue the efforts to strengthen the United Nations, and that these measures were highlighted in the foreword and introduction. The inclusion of information on subsequent General Assembly resolutions on these initiatives would have facilitated the discussion and review of the document. More detailed information on the efforts to implement the follow-up activities to major international conferences and the Millennium Development Goals would also have been helpful. 46. It was recalled that the General Assembly was receptive to the Secretary-General's proposal for a shorter format, with the understanding that budget proposals should fully justify resource requirements and better reflect the medium-term plan, the Millennium Declaration and the outcomes of major international conferences. It was emphasized that the medium-term plan should continue to be the basis for the budget and that the Millennium Development Goals should serve as a guide. Due care should be taken in reflecting elements of the Millennium Declaration and reform initiatives in the budget. 47. Full agreement was expressed with the Secretary-General on the principle that redeployment from activities of marginal utility constitutes the main means of responding to new priorities, in accordance with approved mandates. 48. Great importance was attached to the process of prioritization identified in the Secretary-General's report on strengthening the United Nations. Support was expressed for the principle that redeployment from activities of marginal utility constituted the main means of responding to new priorities, consistent with approved mandates. The view was expressed, however, that more information was required about the actual degree of prioritization in the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005, the extent to which resources had been shifted between competing activities, the financial implications of such shifts and the degree to which programme managers had been able to identify low-value activities and recommended termination. It was stated that any reallocation of resources should comply with the priorities established in the medium-term plan and should not adversely affect the ability of the Organization to implement the development goals. It was noted that most of the financial redeployment described in paragraph 15 of the introduction related to funds freed up by one-time items and provisions for special political missions. 49. It was recalled that General Assembly resolution 57/300 emphasized that reform should not be viewed as a budget-cutting exercise and that the efforts of the United Nations to implement the development goals should be further strengthened through enhanced mechanisms, adequate resources and effective follow-up actions. 50. It was recalled that regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation required identification of outputs that could be discontinued because they were obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective. General Assembly resolution 57/300 again specifically requested the Secretary-General to implement regulation 5.6 and rule 105.6. It was acknowledged that the proposed programme budget contained a discontinuation of 912 outputs, an improvement over the discontinuation of 27 outputs in the last proposed budget, but that substantially more could be done in this regard. 51. Concern was expressed that in nearly half the sections not one obsolete output had been presented, leaving the impression that some programme managers did not respond appropriately to this requirement. In order to discuss new priorities, obsolete programmatic activities must first be identified. It was recalled that in accordance with General Assembly resolution 31/93 of 14 December 1976, the Committee for Programme and Coordination was instructed to determine which programmes or subprogrammes were obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective and to recommend, as appropriate, their curtailment or termination. Accordingly, it was requested that more information be provided by programme managers responsible for sections that had not adequately identified outputs to be discontinued. 52. It was stated that, in accordance with regulation 5.8 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Committee should prepare a report on the proposed programme budget containing its programme recommendations and its general assessment of the related resource proposals. In this connection, the view was expressed that a thorough reprioritization of programmes should be conducted and additional activities should be absorbed through redeployment of resources from lower priorities to higher priorities. 53. Concern was expressed regarding potential duplication of activities within and among United Nations duty stations. A clear division of labour was sought in several areas, including between the regional commissions and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and between the Department of Management and the executive offices. It was noted that duplication was difficult to monitor given that the budget is presented in fascicle format. The absence in the introduction of any references to efforts to eliminate programmatic or administrative duplication, as requested by the General Assembly in resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001, was noted. The distinctive responsibilities between United Nations duty stations and the regional economic commissions should be made explicit in future proposed programme budget documentation. 54. Great interest was expressed in the possible contribution of information technology to improving the productivity of the Organization. The budget proposed, however, did not fully reflect or support the vision set out in the proposed information technology strategy. 55. Concern was expressed that despite high investments in information technology, training and management improvement measures, the budget proposal started with a request for additional posts and reclassifications. It was noted that in some new areas of work, new positions reflected priorities approved by the General Assembly in resolution 57/300, but offsetting reductions in other areas had been expected. 56. It was pointed out that the information on the question of the post structure of the United Nations Secretariat, which the General Assembly had requested in its decision 57/574 of 20 December 2002, was not fully provided in the proposed programme budget. It was stated that upward reclassifications should be accompanied by corresponding downward reclassifications. 57. Support was expressed for the heightened emphasis on Africa and the new United Nations support structures for the New Partnership for Africa's Development and the strengthening of the regular budget component of the United Nations Office at Nairobi. Support was also expressed for the establishment of a new Assistant Secretary-General post to support policy coherence and management and a Financing for Development Office in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 58. It was noted that public information efforts, including libraries and publications, were very important. While support was expressed for the rationalization of United Nations Information Centres beginning in Europe, concerns were also raised as to whether any real need exists for such rationalization. It was also noted that the rationalization of the United Nations Information Centres beyond Western Europe was not yet reflected. 59. It was noted that the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005 includes a number of transfers between sections of the programme budget. Concerns were expressed regarding these transfers, particularly the transfer of the technical secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees from sections 29 and 8 to section 2, and the transfer of the Cartographic Section from section 28 to section 5. 60. It was noted that the budget for 2004-2005 reflects the Secretary-General's proposals regarding the discontinuation of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs. Concerns were raised regarding the proposed discontinuation of the Repertory, and the view was expressed that resources for the Repertory should be included in the programme budget for 2004-2005. 61. The increased focus on training of staff was noted. Support was expressed for proposals included in the budget to address the need for investment in staff training in 2004-2005. However, concern was also expressed regarding the level of training activity required for the period. 62. The improved presentation of information technology requirements was noted. The view was expressed that efficiency benefits derived from enhancing information technology were not specifically and concretely indicated, and that justification in each section would be required for information technology. It was noted that significant investments have been made in the information technology and communication needs of the Organization and emphasized that these should be harnessed properly in all the regional commissions and duty stations for more efficiency and effectiveness. 63. It was noted that extrabudgetary resources continue to play a significant role in the activities of the Organization. It was also pointed out that only limited information in this regard had been provided in paragraphs 96 to 98 of the introduction. Concerns were expressed about the considerable share of operational activities financed through extrabudgetary funds. The view was expressed that, since the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights deals with core activities of the United Nations, most of its activities should be funded through the regular budget. The proposed increase in resources would contribute to a more balanced funding structure of the Office. It was also noted that as a result of the Secretary-General's measures to strengthen the United Nations Office at Nairobi, the total regular budget under section 29G for 2004-2005 would exceed extrabudgetary resources for the first time since the establishment of that Office. 64. Having examined the overall pattern of proposed resource allocation, the Committee noted that the risk to the discharge of core functions resulting from excessive reliance on extrabudgetary resources should be reduced by progressively increasing the share of the regular budget devoted to human rights and humanitarian affairs. This would also better reflect the objectives of the Organization set out in the Charter and the programme objectives defined in the medium-term plan. 65. It was noted that better programme monitoring and evaluation were needed and that the results should be reflected in the next budget. It was pointed out that a shorter budget was not necessarily a more strategic one, and that the Secretary-General had acknowledged in his reform report that one of the impediments was that programme performance measurement and evaluation were not well linked to the planning and budget cycle. A strategic approach to the planning and budget cycle required the capacity to learn from past experience and as a step towards addressing this, performance and evaluation reporting should be more integrally aligned within the programme budget cycle. 66. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the narrative part of the foreword and introduction of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following. 67. The Committee welcomed the efforts by the Secretary-General to improve the results-based budgeting format taking into account particularly the recommendations made by the Committee at its forty-first session, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 56/253. 68. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to encourage programme managers to continue their efforts to improve the presentation of the proposed programme budget in the light of the views expressed in the Committee. 69. The Committee viewed the revised format of the proposed programme budget as representing progress towards the development of the shorter and more strategic presentation mandated by the General Assembly, while providing Member States with adequate information to make informed decisions. 70. The Committee noted that external factors are too general and too broad in scope in some fascicles and recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to review these factors and retain only those that relate strictly to the indicators of achievement of the Secretariat in such fascicles. 71. The Committee agreed that the preparation of a strategic budget requires that future cycles benefit from the experience of preceding ones, and recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to make proposals to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the better alignment of programme performance and evaluation reporting with the budget cycle, as well as to ensure full implementation in the Organization of all regulations and rules concerning evaluation, in particular those of article 7 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, including those concerning self-evaluation. 72. The Committee recalled paragraph 64 of General Assembly resolution 56/253. 73. The Committee took note of the indicators of reprioritization presented by the Secretary-General, but regretted that the reprioritization was not persuasively presented, bearing in mind that the bulk of the financial redeployment described in paragraph 15 related to funds freed up by one-time items rather than programmatic choice. 74. The Committee expressed its concern at the very limited and inconsistent compliance with rule 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, in particular the absence in many parts of the budget of any recommendations for the deletion of outputs. 75. The Committee recommended that the Secretary-General submit to the General Assembly for consideration, in the context of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005, a consolidated report for the following sections, identifying outputs proposed for termination, or a clear explanation of why none should be terminated: Section 1, Overall policy-making, direction and coordination; Section 3, Political affairs; Section 5, Peacekeeping operations; Section 17, International drug control; Section 22, Economic and social development in Western Asia; Section 23, Regular programme of technical cooperation; and Section 29 (A-G), Management and central support services. 76. The Committee noted the absence in the introduction of any references to efforts to eliminate administrative duplication, as requested by the General Assembly in resolution 56/253. 77. The Committee welcomed the application of the results-based framework to the executive direction and management elements of programmes and the introduction of baselines and targets as tools to help measure performance. The Committee nevertheless saw room for improved application of the results-based framework and noted that many of the objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement were generic, very general and not amenable to measurement. 78. The Committee recalled that rule 105.4 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning requires that outputs contribute clearly to a subprogramme objective identified in the medium-term plan and that expected accomplishments shall be objective, feasible and pertinent to the work carried out. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to ensure that expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are formulated in such a way as to give a clear indication of the progress the Organization would make towards the accomplishment of objectives set. 79. The Committee noted that few sections of the proposed programme budget included performance measures related to executive direction and management and recommended that such performance measures be provided to the General Assembly in all sections of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005. 80. The Committee recommended that in all cases the indicator of achievement "full utilization of resources" be replaced with "the efficient and effective use of resources". 81. The Committee recommended that all references to "the Millennium Declaration Goals" and "the Millennium Development Goals" be replaced with "internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration and in the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and international agreements since 1992". 82. The Committee welcomed the improved presentation of information technology requirements, while recognizing that it reflected incompletely the proposals set out in the information and communication technology strategy (57/620) and the General Assembly's comments thereon in its resolution 57/304 of 15 April 2003. 83. With regard to its review of those sections of the proposed programme budget covering the regional commissions, recalling paragraph 69 of General Assembly resolution 56/253, the Committee: (a) Took note of evidence of some streamlining of meetings and publications, but recommended further efforts in this regard and in other activities, particularly those benefiting from the impact of information technology; (b) Requested that resulting efficiency savings be identified where possible in future documentation; (c) Requested in particular that activities regarding collection and distribution of statistical information be examined with a view to eliminating possible overlap with United Nations statistical analysis conducted at other United Nations duty stations. 84. The Committee noted that the proposed programme budget does not include the information requested in paragraph 74 of General Assembly resolution 56/253 and further noted that no report has been submitted to the General Assembly in this regard despite its request contained in the same paragraph of that resolution. 85. The Committee took note of the proposal of the Secretary-General to discontinue the preparation of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs, and recommended that the proposal be further considered by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, taking into account the relevant mandates. 86. The Committee took note of the proposal to integrate the technical secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees into the Department of General Assembly and Conference Management, and recommended that the proposal be further considered by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session in the context of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005. 87. Relating to paragraph 1 of the introduction, the Committee understood that the proposed programme budget was requested in accordance with the revised medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, in accordance with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, and with guidance from the priorities and preliminary indicative estimates of resources reflected in the programme budget outline (A/57/85), which was approved by the Assembly in its resolution 57/280 of 20 December 2002, taking into account General Assembly resolution 57/300. 88. Relating to paragraph 3 of the introduction, the Committee understood that the proposed programme budget took into account the full scope of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, while emphasizing paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 57/300. 89. The Committee understood paragraph 70 of the introduction to respond to paragraph 26 of General Assembly resolution 57/300. 90. The Committee considers that the annex provided to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions with the detailed technical costing information could also be provided to Member States at their request. 91. The Committee noted the introduction of the new element of results-based budgeting called "performance measures" and in this regard recommended that the General Assembly approve its inclusion as one of the elements of the results-based budgeting format. 92. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly carefully review at its fifty-eighth session section A of the foreword and introduction, including its context in the light of all relevant mandates of the General Assembly resolution. Section 1 Overall policy-making, executive direction and coordination 93. At its 10th meeting, on 17 June 2003, the Committee considered section 1, Overall policy-making, executive direction and coordination, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 94. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 1 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 95. The Committee welcomed the presentation of the executive direction and management component in the results-based format, namely, in terms of objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement. The view was expressed that that presentation was in line with the reform process. It was pointed out that indicators of achievement were very vague and might not be easily measured. There was a need, therefore, to design more quantifiable indicators of achievement in line with the recommendations contained in the first report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 (A/56/7). On indicator of achievement (e) (i) in table 1.21, the view was expressed that the timely implementation of the Secretary-General's reform should be in accordance with mandates established by the General Assembly. 96. As to paragraph 1.38, the view was also expressed that "partial restoration" of resource allocations as a result of a General Assembly decision did not constitute a proper justification by the Secretariat for requesting resources in the 2004-2005 biennium. 97. The Committee also welcomed the presentation of the programme narrative of the Office of the Ombudsman in the results-based format. The view was expressed that the expected accomplishment and the indicator of achievement might be too broad. 98. The absence of baseline data for three bienniums to measure performance was questioned, as was the absence of outputs proposed for termination. 99. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 1, Overall policy-making, executive direction and coordination, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications, as well as the provisions in the foreword and introduction: Table 1.21 The Committee recommended much greater specificity in the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement. Under indicator of achievement (e) (i), after the words "of the Secretary-General's reform", insert the words "as mandated by General Assembly resolutions", bearing in mind the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter of the United Nations. Table 1.34 Under Indicators of achievement, add a new indicator reading "(a) The number of conflicts referred to the Ombudsman for which the Ombudsman facilitated a resolution"; and add "(b)" before the words "Reduction in the number". 100. The Committee noted the proposal in paragraph 1.30 and recommended that the General Assembly remain seized of this issue at its fifty-eighth session, if necessary. 101. In connection with paragraph 1.37, the Committee requested that the Secretary-General provide more information to the General Assembly on the Administrative Unit of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General. 102. The Committee observed that the proposals on the Office of the Ombudsman contained in paragraph 1.61 and in table 1.33 were new proposals initiated by the Secretary-General. 103. The Committee requested that programme managers under section 1 comply fully with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and Methods of Evaluation. Section 2 General Assembly affairs and conference services 104. At its 10th and 11th meetings, on 17 June 2003, the Committee considered section 2, General Assembly affairs and conference services, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 2)). 105. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 2 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 106. General support was expressed for the reform measures undertaken by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management in New York and for the intentions of the Department management to undertake, in consultation with the management of regional headquarters, a comprehensive management review of the conference services at Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi. Further steps in the introduction of new technologies should be actively pursued by the Department in order to achieve greater efficiency, productivity and quality of services. 107. Improvements in the results-based presentation, such as the introduction of targets for performance measurement, were welcomed. It was pointed out that many of the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievements did not fully reflect the changes being pursued. Some of the performance indicators were subjective, especially where surveys were used, and not always sufficiently interrelated, in particular between areas of executive direction and management and programme of work. It was important to reflect the need to improve productivity and efficiency and to assess cost-effectiveness. In the meantime, concern regarding the need to comply with the existing workload standards was expressed. The lack of targets and measurements for past bienniums with respect to some of the indicators of achievement was noted. Views were expressed that some of the identified external factors were in fact internal and, as such, their management was within the prerogative of the Secretary-General. Efforts by the Department to identify outputs that were of obsolete, marginal usefulness and ineffective in nature were noted. It was suggested that records of proceedings could also be subject to such review. 108. Views were expressed that the proposals for integration of the secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees into the Department and the discontinuation of the production of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs had not been mandated and that those proposals would require further review and action by the General Assembly. It was also noted that the integration of the secretariat of the Sixth Committee under section 2 had not yet been accepted by members of the Sixth Committee. Views supporting the integration were also voiced. It was further noted that the proposals in relation to library activities made in the context of section 2 were not in line with directives of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005. The suggestion was made that those activities would be better placed in section 28 of the proposed programme budget. 109. It was noted that the budget proposal made no provision for conference-servicing of legislative organs of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa. Views were expressed that the United Nations had a continuing commitment to provide such services to the Conventions within the context of the institutional linkage between the United Nations and the Conventions initially endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolutions 50/115 of 20 December 1995 and 52/198 of 18 December 1997, respectively. 110. Views were expressed that the issue of a comprehensive solution for providing conference services to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States had not been addressed within the proposed programme and that the relevant proposals had yet to be submitted by the Secretary-General in line with provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/283 B of 15 April 2003. 111. The efforts by the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations Office at Nairobi in the context of section 2 were noted. A view was expressed that those efforts should continue on a consistent and comprehensive basis in line with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. 112. The Committee took note of the proposal to integrate the technical secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees into the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the United Nations Secretariat, and recommended that the proposal be further considered in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. 113. With regard to paragraph 2.5, the Committee observed that the proposal concerning the library services should be considered by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 114. The Committee noted that measures to improve the performance of conference-servicing that are being implemented at Headquarters, consequent to an internal comprehensive review of Headquarters and the adoption of General Assembly resolutions 57/283 B of 15 April 2003 and 57/300 of 20 December 2002, are intended to be applied to other duty stations, and recommended that the Assembly request the Secretary-General to proceed accordingly, in accordance with his proposal set out in paragraph 2.7 of section 2 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 115. The Committee urged that the quality of the services provided by the Department be improved and that this concern be better reflected in the proposed expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement. Concerning subprogramme 4, Interpretation, meeting and publishing services, General Assembly and conference management, New York, in paragraph 2.43, in particular, the Committee regretted the absence of indicators of achievement and performance measures relating to the timeliness of production and distribution of parliamentary documentation in the six official languages of the Organization. 116. The Committee noted with concern the lack of supporting narrative for the upward reclassifications of staff proposed in this section. 117. The Committee noted that while many of the measures being taken are aimed at improving efficiency and productivity, few of the expected accomplishments and none of the indicators of achievement refer to efficiency or productivity improvements. 118. The Committee noted the statement in table 2.46, under actions taken to implement the recommendations of the Board of Auditors, that the Department monitors performance of language staff in relation to present workload standards, and recommends that, pending the adoption of new workload standards, this information be provided to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and in future, in the context of its consideration of the programme budget. 119. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 2, General Assembly affairs and conference services, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, with the following modifications: Tables 2.15, 2.17, 2.19, 2.22, 2.24, 2.26, 2.33, 2.35, 2.41 and 2.43 Add the entry "Increased productivity" both under Expected accomplishments and under Indicators of achievement preceded by the appropriate letter, with the entries above lettered or re-lettered accordingly. Table 2.9 Under Expected accomplishments, add the following entry: "(c) Improvement of conference service performance in New York and all other duty stations". Add the following entry under Indicators of achievement: "(c) (i) Optimization of use of technology in key processes; "(ii) Updated proposals for workload standards, efficiency and related performance indicators; "(iii) Issuance of updated bulletins of the Secretary-General that set out the relationship between Headquarters and conference-servicing units in other duty stations". Table 2.13 Delete footnote "(a)" and under Objective, in the first sentence, after the words "Second and Third Committees", delete footnote indicator "a"; Under Indicators of achievement, add the following entry: "(iii) Presentation in time of documents with full respect for the six-week rule". Tables 2.17, 2.19, 2.24, 2.26, 2.33, 2.35, 2.41 and 2.43 Under Indicators of achievement (Performance measures), replace the phrase "2004-2005: to be determined" with the phrase "2004-2005: 90 per cent to be determined". Tables 2.15, 2.22, 2.31 and 2.39 Under Expected accomplishments, add the following entry and re-letter the previous entries accordingly: "(c) Improvement in the timeliness of the production and distribution of parliamentary documentation in the six official languages of the Organization". Under Indicators of achievement, add the following entry and reletter the previous entries accordingly: "The amount and percentage of parliamentary documentation produced and distributed in the six official languages of the Organization within established deadlines". Paragraph 2.33 (a) (ii) d Add the following activity element: "iii. Meetings of regional and other major groupings on the basis of existing practice, bearing in mind further consideration of this issue by the General Assembly during its fifty-eighth session, in accordance with resolution 57/283 B". Table 2.15 Under Indicators of achievement, within the text of indicator of achievement (a), after the words "relevant rules", add the words ", especially the six-week rule for present documents". Table 2.17 Under Indicators of achievement, add the following indicator: "(b) "Presentation of documentation on time, observing the six-week rule" and letter the preceding indicator "(a)". Paragraph 2.43 In the third sentence, after the words "Official Documents System (ODS)", add the words ", without negatively affecting the quality of services provided and the quantity of documents required by Member States". Paragraph 2.45 (b) Add the following output: "(vi) Meetings of regional and other major groupings on the basis of existing practice, bearing in mind further consideration of this issue by the General Assembly during its fifty-eighth session, in accordance with resolution 57/283 B". Paragraph 2.46 In the third sentence, after the phrase "amounting to $459,200", add the phrase ", without negatively affecting the quality of services provided and the quantity of documents required by Member States". Tables 2.22, 2.31 and 2.39 Under Indicators of achievement, within the text of indicator of achievement (a), after the words "in accordance with relevant rules", add the words ", in particular regarding the six-week rule for issuance and distribution of parliamentary documentation simultaneously in the six official languages". Tables 2.24, 2.33, 2.35, 2.41 and 2.43 "(b) Presentation of documentation in time, observing the six-week rule", and letter the previous expected accomplishment "(a)". "(b) The degree of satisfaction expressed by Member States with the presentation of the documentation in time", and letter the previous indicator of achievement "(a)". 120. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly consider at its fifty-eighth session the issue of conference-servicing for the legislative organs of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa. Section 3 Political affairs 121. At its 11th meeting, on 17 June 2003, the Committee considered section 3, Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 3)). 122. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 3 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 123. The view was expressed that the work of the Department of Political Affairs was central to, and the core of, the foundation of the United Nations. Views were expressed in support of actions geared towards the prevention, control and resolution of conflicts. It was pointed out that the international community had expectations for more concrete action in future to prevent, control and resolve conflicts. 124. The Committee welcomed the Secretary-General's intention to focus on the reinforcement of the United Nations conflict-prevention capacity. The Committee also recognized that strengthening cooperation with regional organizations on conflict prevention would contribute to effective implementation by the Department of Political Affairs of its mandate. 125. In that regard, it was underlined that cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations would greatly contribute to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and to peacemaking and peace-building. 126. Appreciation and support were expressed for the valuable work carried out by the Department in the areas of electoral assistance. Support was also expressed to encourage the development of benchmarks for electoral processes. The view was expressed that the utmost efforts should be made to respond in a positive manner to all requests from Member States for electoral assistance. 127. Support was expressed for the work of the Department to service and support the work of the Security Council. It was pointed out that the responsibility of the Department to service and support the work of the Security Council had changed considerably with the adoption of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) concerning measures to eliminate international terrorism. Support was expressed for strengthening the Counter-Terrorism Committee and for it to play a leading role in the fight against international terrorism. 128. The view was expressed that the Palestinian people continued to need international assistance in the economic, social and political areas. The view was also expressed that resources devoted to the activities relating to the question of Palestine should be redeployed and redirected to activities that would directly contribute to the well-being of the Palestinian people. 129. Support was expressed for the activities carried out by the United Nations with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Support was expressed for regular consultations among the Special Committee on the situation with regard to the Implementation of Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the administering Powers and the Non-Self-Governing Territories. The view was also expressed that periodic visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories by delegations of the Special Committee were not needed. 130. The view was further expressed that the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process continued to play an important role both by itself, and as part of the Quartet, in promoting the Middle East peace process. It was also recognized that the Special Coordinator would continue to play an important role in implementing the proposals of the "road map" for a permanent and peaceful resolution of the conflict between the Israeli and the Palestinian people. 131. The Committee underlined the need that Member States be kept up-to-date on the work of the United Nations Special Coordinator in support of the Middle East Peace Process, in particular, through press releases on the web page and the continued practice of monthly briefings to the Security Council. 132. It was indicated that some of the expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement, performance measures and external factors were not clear and therefore needed further refinement. It was also pointed out that the reference to the discontinuation of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs should not have been reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005 without a specific decision by the General Assembly. 133. The Committee drew attention to a provision in Security Council resolution 1483 (2003) concerning the appointment of a Special Representative for Iraq that was not included in the proposed programme budget. 134. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 3, Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the modifications and recommendations appearing below, as well as the provisions in the foreword and introduction. 135. The Committee emphasized the need for the programme managers of this section to comply with Regulation 5.6 and Rule 105.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. Overview Paragraph 3.7 After the words "for further change (A/57/387)", add the words "approved in paragraph 26 of General Assembly resolution 57/300". Policy-making organs: Security Council Paragraph 3.16 In the fourth sentence, delete the words "the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation between Iraq and Kuwait". Subprogramme 1 Table 3.13 At the end of indicator of achievement (i), add the words "through peaceful means". In indicator of achievement (ii), after the words "in which", add the words "conflicts or situations of conflict exist, and in which". In indicator of achievement (ii), delete the words "including in cooperation with partners" and the surrounding punctuation. Subprogramme 2 136. The Committee recommended that the Secretariat ensure prompt and full consideration of requests by Member States for electoral assistance on the basis of the provision in the proposed programme budget for the biennium Subprogramme 3 137. The Committee recommended that the development of the integrated information database on the activities of the Security Council be expedited. Subprogramme 4 Table 3.19 After the words "Non-Self-Governing Territories" at the end of expected accomplishment (a), add the words "in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations". Include as an indicator of achievement the following: "The effectiveness of servicing provided to the Special Committee, its seminars and the General Assembly; the effectiveness of research and analytical studies and reports on conditions in the Territories; and the effectiveness of publicity campaigns". After the words "Non-Self-Governing Territories" at the end of objective 2, add the words "in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations". Paragraph 3.44 (d) Replace the text of subparagraph (d) with the following text: "the administering Powers will cooperate with the Special Committee in the implementation of the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations". Subprogramme 5 Paragraph 3.47 In the last sentence, after the words "international legitimacy", insert the words "and legality". At the end of the paragraph, add the words "in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions". Table 3.21 In indicator of achievement (i), delete the words "as evidenced by the voting on the relevant resolutions". Table 3.25 In indicators of achievement (b) (i) and (ii), delete the word "incontrovertible". 138. The Committee recommended that the Department of Political Affairs formulate more precise, measurable indicators of achievement, since it did not believe that numbers of meetings constitute a meaningful indicator of achievement. Section 4 Disarmament 139. At its 12th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Committee considered section 4, Disarmament, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 4)). 140. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 4 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 141. The Committee welcomed the presentation of the programme narrative of section 4 in the results-based budget format. The Committee also expressed its appreciation of the efforts being made by the Department of Disarmament Affairs in the field of disarmament. Support was particularly expressed for the Department's work on weapons of mass destruction, without diminishing its work on illicit small arms and light weapons. It was observed that more substantiation is required for the new tasks under subprogramme 2, specifically the likelihood of additional conferences on weapons of mass destruction, the implementation of the recommendations of the Policy Working Group on Terrorism and additional mandates from the General Assembly. It was also observed that there is no clear justification for the increase in the resources being requested. A similar observation was made regarding subprogramme 5 on the increased projection of projects, consultants, activities and events related to regional disarmament. 142. The view was expressed that improvements should be made to strengthen the subprogramme related to peace and security and greater support should be given to the field of information technology and web site development; and that the necessary capacity to carry out the Department's mandate should be backed by corresponding resources. 143. It was noted that funding for the activities at Headquarters will increase despite a constant level of staffing and accordingly, there may not be a clear need for the increase in resources. The view was expressed that if the Conference on Disarmament continues to remain deadlocked on agreeing to a work programme, subprogramme 1, with its constant staffing levels will be a logical area to seek reductions. 144. Reference was made to General Assembly resolution 57/65, on the relationship between disarmament and development, and the reason for its omission in the programme narrative. The view was expressed that discontinuation of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and of the outputs was not entirely within the thrust of the ninth preambular paragraph of resolution 57/24 on the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization and resolution 57/300 on the strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change. 145. Queries were raised on the termination of outputs, as well as justifications for the proposed increase in the number of posts and whether redeployment options had been explored. The view was expressed that paragraph 4.38 omitted references to outputs emanating from the fourth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament. In connection with the regional centres, concern was expressed that the external factor indicated in paragraph 4.42 (c), which read, "extrabudgetary funding will be pledged and contributed on time (this factor may prove to be critical in the light of apparently falling contributions to the regional centres)", may affect the delivery of the respective mandates. 146. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative on section 4, Disarmament, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications. 147. The Committee recognizes the importance of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community. 148. In paragraph 4.39, replace the seventh to ninth lines after the words "mandated by the General Assembly:" with "compilation of information on measures taken by Member States and international organizations to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction; make accessible to Member States information on national legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual use of goods and technology;". 149. The Committee took note that general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control remains the ultimate goal of all efforts exerted in the field of disarmament, and that weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, continue to be the primary concern. 150. The Committee recommended that the Department provide further information to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session on the increased requirement for web site management given the expected increase of just 10 web site users per day described in table 4.16. Section 5 Peacekeeping operations 151. At its 12th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Committee considered section 5, Peacekeeping operations, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 5)). 152. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 5 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 153. Speakers expressed appreciation for the efforts being made to improve the capacity of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United Nations Secretariat to address a wide variety of conflict situations; and to plan, establish, manage and direct existing and future peacekeeping operations. Improvements in the capacity and structure should be backed by corresponding resources. In terms of the implementation of the results-based budget, some improvements still needed to be made: it was evident that while progress had been made in the results-based presentation, indicators of achievement could be refined further in order to better assess performance. The expected accomplishments for executive direction and management should set more specific management outcomes. The desirability of having a performance indicator with respect to geographical representation of staff was pointed out. 154. It was pointed out that in paragraph 3.3 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (A/55/6/Rev.1 and Corr.1) it had been stated that special attention would also be given to an increased understanding and recognition of gender issues and geographical balance in peacekeeping operations; and that in paragraph 5.5 in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, this important element of equitable geographical distribution had disappeared. In this connection, the view was expressed that such important elements of the medium-term plan should be included in the narrative of the programme budget, and that in table 5.9, entitled "Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures", expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement should be amended in accordance with paragraph 3.3 of the medium-term plan. 155. Concerns were expressed regarding the identification of a number of external factors. The view was expressed that some of the external factors were in fact internal, while others were outside the control of the Secretariat. In that connection, references were made to the external factors noted in paragraphs 5.29 and 5.39. 156. On the overview of the section, the view was expressed that the first sentence and the last two sentences of paragraph 5.9 should be deleted; and that the paragraph should include only the second sentence, which would be amended to read: "The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002, noted that the proposal of the Secretary-General (A/57/387 and Corr.1) to transfer the functions and resources of the Cartographic Section from the Department of Public Information to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should be considered in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005." 157. Under executive direction and management, it was noted that the text of paragraph 5.22 could be reformulated to exactly match table 5.10. It may be useful, therefore, to combine the first two sentences by inserting the word "and" between the words "Secretary-General" and "non-post resources". 158. On subprogramme 1, Operations, it was noted that the performance measures between 2002-2003 and 2004-2005 reflected no change. The view was expressed that the time required to complete the mission-planning process in line with Security Council demands could be accelerated to less than 10 weeks. The view was expressed that the period should be shortened as much as possible. Queries were also raised why only 80 per cent of the benchmarks would be met by the mission in mandate implementation within the existing time frame. Clarification was sought on when the remaining 20 per cent of the benchmark would be met. 159. With respect to paragraph 5.26, the view was expressed that the first two sentences and the last two sentences could be deleted; and that the paragraph should read: "The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002, noted the proposal of the Secretary-General to transfer the functions and resources of the Cartographic Section from the Department of Public Information to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, while maintaining the services currently provided to users outside the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and decided to consider the proposal in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005." A question was raised about the benefits that would be derived from the transfer of the Cartographic Section. 160. On subprogramme 2, Mission support, it was noted that the formulation of indicators of achievement and performance measures were well laid out and demonstrated a progression from one biennium to the other. It was suggested that that presentation should be followed in the other subprogrammes of the Department. The importance of a more rapid liquidation process and timely settling of claims of troop-contributing countries was emphasized. The decision to include these indicators of achievement under subprogramme 2 was lauded, as they were essential for the participation of developing countries in future peacekeeping operations. 161. The Department was commended for its thoroughness in respect of the process of filling posts and it was stated that priority should be given to staff from troop-contributing countries, since they contributed to the work of peacekeeping. 162. In respect of subprogramme 3, Military and civilian police advice and planning, the efforts to enhance the security and safety of peacekeepers in the field were welcomed. Enhancing United Nations capacity to deploy peacekeeping operations within 30 days, or 90 days, was necessary; however, it was dependent on three critical and interdependent aspects of rapid deployment, namely, personnel, materiel readiness and funding. 163. The need for continued dialogue between the Department and Member States on how to further improve the rapid deployment capacity of the military, civilian police and civilian components of peacekeeping operations was recognized. 164. The view was expressed that the performance measures in table 5.16 could be improved by indicating the number of Member States that had enlisted in the standby arrangements and by reflecting the overall percentage use of the mechanism. 165. In respect of subprogramme 4, Mine action coordination, queries were raised on the link between the indicator of achievement and the expected accomplishment presented in table 5.18. It was pointed out, however, that lower requirements for inter-agency assessment missions did result from reduction of the threat posed by landmines and unexploded ordnance in affected countries. 166. Under programme support, the view was expressed that item (b) of the third sentence of paragraph 5.43 should be deleted since the proposal contained therein was contrary to the provision of General Assembly resolution 57/24 of 19 November 2002. 167. In connection with the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), it was pointed out that the mandate of the mission was to report on the instances of non-compliance by the parties to the ceasefire and peace agreements. The indicators of achievement in table 5.23 should therefore indicate how effectively UNTSO responded to instances of non-compliance by the parties to the ceasefire and peace agreements and to the incidents in the area of separation/Blue Line. As to the indicator of achievement for the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) in table 5.27, it should indicate how effectiveness and efficiency would be improved. 168. Concern was expressed in connection with the request of UNTSO for delayed furniture and equipment purchases for the mission. It was noted that UNTSO had operated without those expenditures and had not made a convincing case for their being necessary. 169. In connection with UNMOGIP, it was observed that the proposal in paragraph 5.58 providing an explanation of the increase under non-post objects of expenditure did not respond to a legislative mandate. It was pointed out that the increase in expenditures was related to enhanced security measures of the United Nations personnel and was consistent with the overall increase in the expenditures of peacekeeping operations in that regard. 170. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 5, Peacekeeping operations, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications, as well as the provisions in the foreword and introduction: Paragraph 5.5 Before the last sentence, insert the following sentence: "The Department will also continue to improve representation of underrepresented and unrepresented Member States in future recruitment". In the fifth sentence, delete the word "also". Table 5.9 Under expected accomplishment (c), after the phrase "gender issues", insert the phrase "and their geographical balance". Under indicator of achievement (c), after the phrase "gender issues", insert the phrase "and their geographical balance". Table 5.12 Under indicator of achievement (i): performance measure: target 2004-2005, replace the phrase "10 weeks" with the phrase "8 weeks". Under indicator of achievement (ii): performance measure: target 2004-2005, replace the phrase "80 per cent of benchmarks" with the phrase "100 per cent of benchmarks within expected time frame". Table 5.14 Under indicator of achievement (b) (ii): performance measure: target 2004-2005, replace the phrase "6 months" with the phrase "4 months". Table 5.16 For indicator of achievement (a) (ii), reword the text to read: "An increase in the number of Member States with which the Secretariat has concluded standby arrangements". Under indicator of achievement (b), reword the performance measures to read: "2000-2001: __ per cent of all personnel deployment needs met by utilizing the United Nations Standby Arrangements System (UNSAS) and rapid deployment levels or the on-call list" "Estimate 2002-2003: __ per cent of all personnel deployment needs met by utilizing UNSAS and rapid deployment levels or the on-call list" "Target 2004-2005: __ per cent of all personnel deployment needs met by utilizing UNSAS and rapid deployment levels or the on-call list". Paragraph 5.29 Delete paragraph 5.29. Paragraph 5.39 Replace paragraph 5.39 with the following: "The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that the Mine Action Service receives an adequate level of resources to respond to General Assembly and Security Council mandates." 171. The Committee emphasized the need for programme managers of this section to comply with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation (ST/SGB/2000/8). Section 6 Peaceful uses of outer space 172. At its 14th meeting, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 6, Peaceful uses of outer space, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 6)). 173. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 6 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the programme. 174. The view was expressed that outer space activities had a great potential to contribute to improving our lives and protecting the Earth's environment. The view was also expressed that it was very important to approach international cooperation activities from a long-term, global perspective in order to make contributions that would benefit all of society, and that people everywhere, not only those living in countries that conduct them, should enjoy the benefits of space activities. In this context, it was stated that priority should be given to activities related to expected accomplishment (b) in table 6.5. 175. It was noted that space technology is important in bridging the gap between developed and developing countries by exposing developing countries to the most advanced technology available. In this regard, the view was expressed that the question of increased social and economic benefits for developing countries resulting from the implementation of some of the recommendations of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), especially in the areas of desertification and prevention and assistance in relation to diseases and disasters, stated as expected accomplishment (c) of table 6.5, also needed the balanced attention of the Office for Outer Space Affairs. 176. Disappointment was expressed that the Office did not propose the discontinuation of any outputs for the biennium 2004-2005. The Committee was informed that the Office had indeed reviewed and identified a number of outputs to be discontinued. 177. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 6, Peaceful uses of outer space, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 178. The Committee also recommended that the Office for Outer Space Affairs continue to review its programme of work and, where applicable, make further proposals on the possible streamlining of meetings for consideration by the relevant intergovernmental bodies. Section 8 Legal affairs 179. At its 12th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Committee considered section 8, Legal affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 8)). 180. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 8 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 181. General support was expressed for the high quality of outputs delivered and efficiency of services provided by the Office of Legal Affairs, particularly online treaty database services, web sites and the work of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. 182. Satisfaction was expressed with the overall quality of the presentation of the proposed programme budget of section 8 and particularly for the well-formulated and measurable expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement. The Committee welcomed the review of outputs by the Office and proposed deletion of 127 outputs in the biennium 2004-2005 which are obsolete or of marginal impact. 183. Satisfaction was also expressed in support of the budget proposal, especially the high degree of flexibility it offered in terms of rationalization of resources to meet the new challenges arising from the shifts in priorities. The proposed redeployments in the Treaty Section to strengthen the work of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea and the General Legal Division were welcomed, as was the proposed strengthening of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). 184. The Committee noted the work done by the Office in following the recommendations presented in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the in-depth evaluation of legal affairs (E/AC.51/2002/5). Satisfaction was expressed in particular with the proposed actions taken to implement recommendation 15 in table 8.23, which addressed the need to review the resource requirements of UNCITRAL arising from the expanded number of working groups. However, the Committee expressed concern at the lack of policy, precision and time frame offered for recommendation 4 (b) regarding legal assistance provided to peacekeeping operations and other missions. 185. Concern was expressed at the proposed reductions in certain functions and the impact those reductions would have in particular for subprogramme 3, Progressive development and codification of international law, and subprogramme 6, Custody, registration and publication of treaties. The view was expressed that the resource requirements for the Administrative Tribunal should be reflected in another part of the proposed programme budget to ensure its independence. The view was also expressed that section 1, Overall policy-making, direction and coordination, might perhaps be a more indicative location for the resources for the Administrative Tribunal. The Committee was informed that the resources for the Tribunal were included in section 8 only for administrative purposes and that the interaction between the Office of Legal Affairs and the Tribunal related entirely to administrative matters. The Committee was further informed that the Office of Legal Affairs respected the independence of the Tribunal and therefore there were no discussions on the substantive aspects of its work. Concern was also expressed at the delay, backlogs and level of effectiveness of the Administrative Tribunal. 186. Regarding the possible reconvening in 2004 and 2005 of an ad hoc Committee to consider a convention to ban human cloning, concern was expressed that the budget fascicle did not indicate that adequate resources had been provided. 187. The view was expressed that as the United Nations was not affiliated with the International Criminal Court, resources under the regular budget should not be used for any activities related to the International Criminal Court. 188. With respect to subprogramme 1, it was pointed out that while it was appropriate for the Office of Legal Affairs to advise bodies that were part of the United Nations system on "formulation of statements of public international law and analysis of specific legal issues", it was not the mandate of the Office to provide such advice to other governmental institutions, non-governmental institutions and the public. The view was expressed that, in working within its mandate, the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea should not interpret the practices and norms of States regarding the law of the sea. The Secretariat gave assurances that its actions did not involve making value judgements and that the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea delivered technical assistance upon request of Member States. 189. The view was also expressed that the consultative process on oceans and the law of the sea was not "newly established"; instead, it had met annually for the past three years. It was therefore not a basis or justification for the growth in the budget of this programme. 190. On subprogramme 5, Progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade, queries were raised on the methods regarding the in-depth collection of data for the formulated indicators of achievement reflected in table 8.18. The Committee was assured that the Office of Legal Affairs had established methods for collecting the necessary statistical data to enable the department to determine an accurate measurement of performance corresponding to each of the indicators of achievement. 191. Views were expressed that the proposals to integrate the secretariat of the Sixth Committee into the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management and to discontinue the production of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs were not entirely within the thrust of decisions taken by the General Assembly in its resolutions 57/283 B of 15 April 2003 and 57/300 of 20 December 2002, and that those proposals would require further review and action by the Assembly. It was also noted that the integration of the secretariat of the Sixth Committee under section 2 had not yet been accepted by members of the Sixth Committee, who were still consulting with the Secretariat in that regard, and accordingly there should be no redeployments of resources to the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management nor should there have been reductions related to the discontinuation of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and the recurrent outputs. On the other hand, views were expressed in support of the proposals with the indication that the integration of the Sixth Committee secretariat into the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management could be beneficial for Member States. 192. With reference to external factors, the Committee noted that reliance on technology was not an external factor. Therefore, paragraph 8.50 (c) was not representative of an external factor. 193. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 8, Legal affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Paragraph 8.3 Under paragraph 8.3, before the words "registers and publishes treaties", insert as an objective "assists Member States regarding implementation of the international legal order for seas and oceans as well as the law of treaties". Paragraph 8.12 Rephrase the third task of the Division to read "The Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea should provide services for the effective application of the international judicial order of the sea and the ocean, thus helping in the understanding, acceptance and consequent application of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982) and the related agreements." Paragraph 8.31 (b) (ix) At the end of the paragraph, insert "meeting the requests of Governments on questions relating to international public law through the relevant subsidiary organs in accordance with the existing practice". Table 8.14 Under Indicators of achievement (a) (iv), rephrase the Performance measures for 2000-2001, Estimate 2002-2003 and Target 2004-2005 to read "1 week, observing the 6-week rule for documentation". Paragraph 8.39 (a) (v) Replace the title "Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Legal Instruments for the Prevention of Terrorist Acts" with "Ad Hoc Committee established in accordance with General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996". Paragraph 8.39 (b) (i) Under Recurrent publications, include "and Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 2002, volumes I and II (General Assembly resolution 987 (X), judgements, advisory opinions, consultations and orders of the International Court of Justice)". Table 8.18 Under Indicators of achievement, paragraph (a), add a new subparagraph (ix) reading "Higher number of international transactions and higher volume of international debt trade carried out under the regime of UNCITRAL". Section 9 Economic and social affairs 194. At its 13th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Committee considered section 9, Economic and social affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 9)). 195. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 9 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the section. 196. Support was expressed for the work programme. The inclusion of follow-up activities to the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development was welcomed. 197. The view was expressed that the structure of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs appeared to be based on the proposals of the Secretary-General relating to the reform process as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/300. 198. The view was expressed that support of intergovernmental processes, particularly the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies was the key mandate of the Department and should be its overwhelming focus. Noting that technical cooperation was the primary responsibility of funds and programmes and the relevant specialized agencies, the view was expressed that the support that the Department provides to technical cooperation (under sections 9 and 23) should be selective, maximize impact in areas within its mandate and be related and without detriment to its analytical responsibilities in support of the intergovernmental processes. 199. The view was expressed that the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of subprogramme 2, Gender issues and advancement of women, were broad and vague. The view was also expressed that indicator of achievement (g) (i) in table 9.12, under subprogramme 2, on the ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and its Optional Protocol was not representative of the progress made by the international community in the area of advancement of women. 200. The view was expressed that the performance measures of indicator of achievement (c) in table 9.16 would more appropriately be classified as outputs as they would not measure the impact of increased awareness. 201. Views were expressed in support of the reforms called for by the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session. It was considered that the work programme did not appear to incorporate the recommendations made by the Commission, hence there was a need to assess and address the means of implementation of such decisions. Views were expressed that the Secretariat should ensure that the themes of the multi-year programme of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development considered at its eleventh session were reflected in the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005. The view was expressed that too much emphasis had been placed on partnership and strengthening of the Commission in table 9.16, whereas other elements of the achievements of the World Summit, such as, in particular, the commitments of Member States to implement the agreements on sustainable development, were not mentioned. 202. Appreciation was expressed for the focus of activities by subprogramme 4, Sustainable development, in implementation of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the view was expressed that the Division for Sustainable Development should continue to focus on how it could best facilitate and catalyse the follow-up to the World Summit on Sustainable Development, particularly through the mechanism of the Commission on Sustainable Development. The Division could best do that by strengthening its role as a "process expert". Appreciation was expressed for the support provided by the subprogramme for the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 203. Views were expressed that the proposed structure and resources for the new Financing for Development Office was inadequate. The Monterrey Consensus, a Member State-driven event, was the single most successful development conference outcome in United Nations history. It was further noted that the Conference on Financing for Development made a decision not to create a new commission to follow up the conference but to give the key role to the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly. 204. The Committee recommended that because there has been no agreement on holding a major Beijing-plus-10 event (officially "Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women"), all non-mandated activities for the event be removed from the proposed programme budget. 205. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly note with appreciation the efforts of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to implement reforms in terms of identifying activities to be discontinued. 206. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly urge that the programme budget reflect the outcomes of the Commission on Sustainable Development in the specific subprogrammes. 207. The Committee recommended that all references to "Millennium Development Goals" be replaced with "internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2) and in the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and international agreements since 1992". 208. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 9, Economic and social affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the 2004-2005 biennium, subject to the modifications set out below. Paragraph 9.3 In the first sentence, insert "and social" after the words "sustained economic". Table 9.12 Under indicator of achievement (a) (iii), insert "with the assistance of the Secretariat" at the end of the text. Under expected accomplishment (b), replace the words "developing countries and countries with economies in transition" with the words "all countries" after the words "that assist". Under indicator of achievement (d) (iii), insert, after the words "gender balance", the words "taking into account the provisions of Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations". Under indicator of achievement (f), insert "with the assistance of the Secretariat" at the end of the text. Table 9.16 Expected accomplishment (a) should read: "Effective implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development at all levels, including, inter alia, through partnership initiatives according to the modalities agreed upon at the Commission on Sustainable Development that support implementation of the commitments agreed at the World Summit". In expected accomplishment (b), delete the words "in all activities of sustainable development". Replace indicator of achievement (b) (i) with the following: "Progress in the achievement of United Nations objectives and goals on sustainable and in particular those related to water, sanitation and human settlements, and the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production". Replace expected accomplishment (e) with the following: "Enabling the Commission on Sustainable Development to effectively review and facilitate partnerships that support the implementation of Agenda 21, Rio+5 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation". Replace indicator of achievement (e) with the following: "Provision of information and summary reports on partnerships in a transparent, participatory and credible manner, according to the procedures which were agreed upon in the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session". Insert in expected accomplishment (f) after the words "in particular" the words "North-South and". Table 9.22 Insert a new expected accomplishment (f) reading: "Improved access by Governments and international bodies to analytical tools, options and adequate methodologies regarding the linkages between political and economic issues and policies, such as economic sanctions, imposition of coercive economic measures, the relationship between disarmament and development and relevant aspects of post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction". Insert a new indicator of achievement (f) and corresponding performance measures reading: "Feedback from Member States on their access to analytical tools, options and adequate methodologies regarding the linkages between political and economic issues and policies "Performance measures: 2000-2001: to be determined Estimate 2002-2003: to be determined Target 2004-2005: to be determined". Table 9.30 In expected accomplishment (a), delete the word "multi-stakeholder". Replace the text of expected accomplishment (e) with the following: "Enhanced capacity of Governments, in particular that of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, to participate actively in the financing for development process". Add new expected accomplishment (f) reading: "Fuller engagement of Governments to ensure proper follow-up to the implementation of agreements and commitments reached at the Conference and to continue to build bridges between development, finance and trade organizations and initiatives within the framework of the holistic agenda of the Conference". Add new indicator of achievement (f) reading: "Feedback from Member States on the contribution of the subprogramme to the fuller engagement of Governments in the follow-up to the implementation of the outcome of the Conference". Add corresponding new Performance measures: "2000-2001: not available Section 10 Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States 209. At its 13th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Committee considered section 10, Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 10)). 210. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 10 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 211. Full support was expressed for the activities of the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States. The view was expressed that the Office should focus on mobilizing international support, promoting global awareness with respect to the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States and reporting at the global level on the implementation of the programmes of action. The clarity of the document was welcomed. 212. It was recognized that since the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States was a newly established office, no output was proposed for discontinuation. However, the need to present outputs for deletion in the future proposed programme budgets of the Office was underlined. 213. The importance of the success of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, which will be held in Almaty in August 2003, was emphasized. It was recalled that the International Ministerial Conference would be the first United Nations international conference to address the needs of the landlocked developing countries. Its follow-up should become a priority. 214. The establishment of the web site of the Office, which provides information on its activities, was welcomed. 215. The view was expressed that paragraph 10.3, which gives a snapshot of the activities of the Office, should focus more on the logical framework. 216. The view was expressed that very close coordination should be developed between the Office and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs in respect of activities related to small island developing States. 217. It was noted that the expected accomplishment (table 10.5) was referring to the three programmes of action as a whole. It was considered that it would have been preferable to have one specific indicator for each programme of action. 218. The view was expressed that the indicators of achievement should be revised to reflect the main function of the Office: to mobilize resources and coordinate among other agencies in the United Nations system helping the least developed countries. The stated performance measures lacked well-defined activities and clear indicators for measuring progress. 219. It was stated that the external factor (b) in paragraph 10.14, "all partners respect the commitments set out in the programmes of action", was not a valid external factor. 220. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 10, Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications. Paragraph 10.1 At the end of the paragraph, add the following sentence: "In addition, the programme is responsible for the provision of effective follow-up support to the further implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, taking fully into account the relevant outcomes of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and General Assembly resolution 57/262 relating to the convening of an international meeting in Mauritius in 2004 to undertake a full and comprehensive review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States." Paragraph 10.4 In the first sentence, after the words "Transport Cooperation and the", insert the words "further implementation of the". In the third sentence, after the words "Department of Economic and Social Affairs", insert the words "the regional commissions and the South Centre". Table 10.5 Under Objective, in the first sentence, replace the words "progress towards the achievement of" with the word "realize"; Under Expected accomplishments, at the end of the paragraph, add the words: "and the relevant General Assembly resolutions". Paragraph 10.14 (d) After the words "political situation", replace the word "of" with the word "in". Section 11 United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development 221. At its 13th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Committee considered section 11, United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 222. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 11 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 223. Full support was expressed for the activities to be carried out under section 11 with the new mandate, as set out in General Assembly resolutions 57/2, 57/7 and 57/300. It was noted with appreciation that under subprogramme 2, the role of the regional, subregional and national institutions and structures had been recognized. 224. It was noted that the priority of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa should be to facilitate the implementation of the commitments made towards development. 225. The view was expressed that the external factor (b) under subprogramme 1 should be deleted since resolution 57/7 calls on the United Nations system to support the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). 226. It was emphasized that the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa should be adequately funded, as requested in resolution 57/300, paragraph 26. 227. It was mentioned that the media outlets for dissemination of information on Africa should not be restricted to those in Europe, North America and Africa. The cooperation of media outlets in other parts of the world should also be sought. 228. There was a general view on the need for coordination, collaboration and coherence in support of the implementation of NEPAD. 229. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 11, United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Paragraph 11.16 Replace the text of external factor (b) with the following text: "the agencies of the United Nations system collaborate and coordinate their activities in a coherent and effective manner". Delete the word "and" before (d) and add a new external factor (e): "all stakeholders implement their financial pledges and other commitments to support NEPAD". Table 11.10 Under expected accomplishment (a), insert "academic institutions," before "the media". 230. The Committee reiterated that the United Nations system should continue to support NEPAD strongly at the national, regional and global levels, including through the newly established Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, mandated in General Assembly resolution 57/300, in order to impact positively on the implementation of NEPAD. 231. The Committee also emphasized that the three subprogrammes submitted should enhance the coordination of constructive partnerships in a holistic and integrated socio-economic initiative for the development of Africa. Section 12 Trade and development 232. At its 14th and 15th meetings, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 12, Trade and development, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 12)). 233. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 12 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 234. Support was expressed for the work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). The change of emphasis in the programme of work and the change in priorities in favour of subprogrammes 2 and 3 were noted with appreciation. The efforts made by UNCTAD to foster international trade and development, and its contributions to the implementation of the World Trade Organization Doha work programme, as well as to the outcomes of the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development, were acknowledged. Special interest was shown in the activities related to capacity-building and enhancement of institutions and human resources in the domain of trade. However, the view was expressed that the reference to the Millennium Development Goals in paragraph 12.6 was inappropriate since some Member States did not agree to these goals. 235. The important role of UNCTAD in the area of technical cooperation, and its attention to sustainable development and debt management, were recalled. Reference was made to the assistance provided by UNCTAD to countries with economies in transition to support their integration into the world economy. 236. Support was expressed for the theme retained for the eleventh session of UNCTAD, namely, "Enhancing coherence between national development strategies and global economic processes towards economic growth and development, particularly of developing countries" and for the preparatory work related to this conference. 237. The view was expressed that every effort should be made to avoid duplication of activities between UNCTAD and the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, as regards the work on least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. Concern was expressed that some outputs had been proposed for discontinuation as a result of the establishment of the Office. In particular, it was regretted that the advisory services referred to in paragraph 11A.43 (a) and (d) of A/56/6 (Sect. 11A) were proposed for discontinuation, taking into account the importance of such services in assisting the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States in their efforts to be integrated into the international economy. 238. The efforts to carry out reforms including streamlining of management processes and enhancing capacity for programme delivery, and reducing the number of publications, were recognized. 239. The improvements in the result-based-budgeting narrative were acknowledged. However, the view was expressed that the indicators of achievements could be further sharpened. As an example, under subprogramme 1A, indicator (a) was thought not to be very clear. It was also stated that the indicators of achievement (a) (i) and (a) (ii), under subprogramme 5, should be revised to show the progress or the impact of the actions carried out. 240. It was suggested that the South-South Centre should be added to the list of the institutions and specialized agencies with which UNCTAD was cooperating (paragraph 12.12). 241. It was noted that the General Assembly, in its resolution 56/227 of 24 December 2001, had called upon the Secretary-General to enhance the operational capacity of UNCTAD as well as that of other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in their activities aimed at supporting recipient countries, and in particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States; and an enquiry was made about what steps, if any, UNCTAD would undertake to ensure that their activities were not duplicative of other United Nations activities aimed at supporting least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. 242. Delegations noted with appreciation that UNCTAD had changed its work programme implementation strategy and redeployed staff and resources to concentrate on assisting least developed countries in four primary areas, in line with the Millennium Development Goals. 243. It was noted that UNCTAD should base its analytical work on empirical studies of country experiences. Therefore, UNCTAD should use actual case studies of countries' success or lack thereof in dealing with globalization and interdependence, specifically focusing on what works and what doesn't, as performance indicators, rather than interventions from Member States. Further, the case studies should include narratives on areas such as debt, obviating the need for many of the recurrent and non-recurrent publications. 244. The view was expressed that the following phrase should be added at the end of the text of the objective of subprogramme 1A: "through policy research and analysis, as well as through technical cooperation assistance in the area of capacity-building and human resources development". 245. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 12, Trade and development, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Replace, in every paragraph where the reference is made, the phrase "the Millennium Development Goals" with the phrase "the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration, as identified in section III of General Assembly resolution 55/2". Paragraph 12.7 In the first sentence, replace the word "sectoral" with the word "national". Paragraph 12.29 (a) Before subparagraph (i), reading "United Nations Conference on Trade and Development", insert new subparagraph (i), reading "General Assembly: substantive servicing of and inputs to the High-Level Dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation for development through partnership, in accordance with the relevant provisions of Assembly resolution 57/250", and re-letter the subsequent subparagraphs of paragraph (a) accordingly. Table 12.10 Under indicator of achievement (e), after the words "drawing on UNCTAD recommendations and the use of UNCTAD technical cooperation projects", add the words "that improve the areas of trade, competition, enterprise development and investment". Table 12.11 Under indicator of achievement (b), replace the words "Increased number of cross-sectoral activities" with the words "Significant increase in the number of cross-sectoral activities". Table 12.15 Under indicator of achievement (a) (ii), replace the words "this area" with the words "the trade-related capacity-building area". Paragraph 12.54 (a) (i) After the phrase "multilateral trading system (2);", insert the phrase "contributions to the report on the implementation of the International Conference on Financing for Development concerning trade". Annex Retain the output contained in document A/56/6, paragraph 11A.31 (d) (i), entitled "Advisory services to developing countries to enhance their capacity to attract foreign portfolio investment funds, and to optimize their developmental impact", and the output contained in A/56/6 (Sect. 11A), paragraph 11A.43 (a) (i) (b), entitled "Inputs to the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States". 246. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly reiterate its support for the creation of a division of management in order to strengthen the management and enhance the programme delivery capacity and performance of the UNCTAD secretariat. 247. The Committee recommended that UNCTAD continue to provide inputs, within its mandate, towards the process of the implementation of the outcomes of the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, as well as assistance to least developed countries in preparing country programmes of the United Nations Development Programme in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 56/227. Section 13 International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO 248. At its 15th meeting, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 13, International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 13)). 249. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 13 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 250. Support was expressed for the activities of the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), in particular in the field of trade services and competitiveness of the business sector. The need of developing countries for technical cooperation in these areas was underlined. 251. The view was expressed that, in accordance with the recent decision of the General Assembly on the ITC outline for the biennium 2004-2005, the complete fascicle to be submitted in the fall should provide for documentation services in Arabic and Chinese to the Joint Advisory Group of ITC. 252. The Committee took note of the preliminary estimate to accommodate the ITC programme of activities during the biennium 2004-2005. It also took note of the fact that, under the existing administrative arrangements approved by the General Assembly, the detailed proposed programme budget of ITC for the biennium 2004-2005 would be submitted directly to the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. 253. The Committee recommended that the proposed programme budget of ITC for the biennium 2004-2005 to be submitted to the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session should reflect the resolution on the budget outline of ITC approved by the Assembly, taking into account that the United Nations share of the ITC budget is 50 per cent. 254. The Committee requested that programme managers within section 13 comply fully with the rules and regulations governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. Section 14 Environment 255. At its 15th meeting, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 14, Environment, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 14)). 256. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 14 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 257. Support was expressed for the programme of work under the section which is one of the priority areas of the United Nations. It was observed that 96 per cent of the funding of the budget of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) comes from extrabudgetary resources, and that the UNEP Governing Council decides on the programme of work financed from extrabudgetary resources. 258. The view was expressed that the programme of work did not fully reflect the decisions of the Governing Council of UNEP taken at its twenty-second session, held in February 2003. It was therefore considered that the narrative of the section should be revised to reflect the decisions taken by the Governing Council at that session. 259. The view was expressed that some indicators of achievement needed to be redrafted in order to make them more relevant. Satisfaction was also expressed with regard to the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of the programme. 260. Support was expressed for the judicial capacity-building activities on environmental law but it was mentioned that the Johannesburg Principles on the Role of Law and Sustainable Development had not been agreed upon by Governments and therefore did not provide a mandate. The view was expressed that the prominence of the Global Judges Symposium should be reduced in the text. The view was expressed that the issues of cultural diversity and biodiversity were debated extensively and narrowly defined during the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the twenty-second session of the UNEP Governing Council, hence references to cultural diversity in the fascicle should reflect the outcomes of the discussions in these two forums. The view was expressed that the output relating to provision of assistance for the development of an international code of conduct designed to develop and apply means in law and practice to promote sustainable patterns of production and consumption referred to in paragraph 14.39 (b) (vi) was beyond UNEP's mandate. It was considered that UNEP's work on climate change and the Rio Principles should follow the mandate provided by the Governing Council. 261. Satisfaction was expressed regarding the measures to be undertaken under subprogramme 5 to strengthen regional strategies and policies on the environment. It was felt that there was an appearance of duplication of efforts between subprogramme 3 and the activities undertaken under the Convention on Biodiversity. 262. The Committee recommended that a revised fascicle of section 14, Environment, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, be issued so as to reflect the decisions adopted by the Governing Council of UNEP at its twenty-second session and submitted for the consideration of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. Section 15 Human settlements 263. At its 19th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Committee considered section 15, Human settlements, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 15)). 264. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 15 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 265. Support was expressed for the work programme to be undertaken by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat). 266. Agreement was expressed regarding the focus on the role of women as active participants in the efforts to improve shelter conditions and urban governance, under subprogramme 1. The view was expressed that in addition to the importance attached to the role of women, the roles of the private sector and civil society should also be given prominence in the strategy for implementation of subprogramme 1. With regard to the private sector, the view was expressed that part of the role of UN-Habitat should focus on supporting small-scale housing construction enterprises. Regarding civil society, the view was expressed that the role of UN-Habitat should focus on supporting community development activities to facilitate transfer of technology in shelter development, mainly in rural communities. 267. Concern was expressed regarding the lack of proposals to discontinue outputs considered as obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective, in accordance with regulation 5.6 and rule 105.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. 268. The Committee emphasized the need for programme managers of section 15 to comply with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. 269. The Committee recommended replacing all references to the Millennium Declaration goals in section 15 with the phrase "the goals of the Millennium Declaration as set forth in General Assembly resolution 55/2". 270. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 15, Human settlements, of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Table 15.10 Replace expected accomplishment (i) with the following: "Increased awareness of and sensitivity to the plight of the urban poor, and enhanced cooperation and partnership in slum upgrading initiatives in line with the Millennium Development Goal on `cities without slums'". Insert in indicator of achievement (i) after the word "countries" the words "and other Habitat Agenda partners". Delete in expected accomplishment (j) the words "renewable energy and". Replace indicator of achievement (j) with the following: "(j) Number of countries working with UN-Habitat to promote access to diverse and efficient energy services as well as public and non-motorized transport". Section 16 Crime prevention and criminal justice 271. At its 14th meeting, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 16, Crime prevention and criminal justice, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 16)). 272. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 16 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 273. The Committee welcomed the use of videoconferencing facilities to conduct the meeting. The presentation of the budget fascicle was welcomed and complimented. 274. Support was expressed for the overall objectives and activities undertaken by the Centre for International Crime Prevention of the Office on Drugs and Crime. The importance of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme as well as of the assistance provided by the Centre to Member States was stressed. 275. Appreciation was expressed for the formulation of the results-based budgeting logical framework. Views were expressed that the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement were better formulated and fully reflected the work being done by the Centre. The absence of expected accomplishments with regard to money-laundering was noted. 276. Strong support was expressed for the Centre's technical cooperation activities. The increase in technical cooperation projects was welcomed. A view was expressed that some activities were better carried out by affiliate research institutions. The absence of specific legislative mandates for some expert group meetings was noted. The call for gender mainstreaming was welcomed. 277. A view was also expressed that the programme of work should reflect a balance between "hard crimes", such as transnational organized crime and terrorism, and good governance issues such as norms and standards, corruption and the promotion of fair and efficient criminal justice systems. 278. Activities related to the prevention of international terrorism were fully endorsed. Coordination with the Security Council committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (Counter-Terrorism Committee) was appreciated. It was pointed out that the development of special expertise in countering terrorism should be made available to Member States. 279. Clarification was requested regarding any review process undertaken of the usefulness of outputs in accordance with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. Clarification was also requested concerning review of publications in terms of how they are disseminated, who the readers are and whether assessments are made of the impact of the publications. 280. The Programme was encouraged to deliver from regular budget resources all mandates related to transnational organized crime, corruption and crime prevention, and to utilize extrabudgetary resources to supplement regular budget resources. 281. The view was expressed that reports and/or meetings on issues intersecting with the ongoing work of the Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption would be most appropriately addressed within the framework of the Convention, when finished, and should therefore not be dealt with by the Centre for International Crime Prevention. 282. The view was also expressed that as work is already being done on the issue of cybercrime in a number of international forums, the Centre should not entertain proposals for reports and/or expert meetings on this issue, especially given the limited amount of United Nations resources. 283. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 16, Crime prevention and criminal justice, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modification: Table 16.7 (e) Under Indicators of achievement, replace the word "number" with the word "percentage" and adjust performance measures accordingly. 284. The Committee requested that programme managers within section 16 comply fully with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. Section 17 International drug control 285. At its 14th meeting, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 17, International drug control, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 17)). 286. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 17 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 287. The Committee welcomed the use of videoconferencing facilities to conduct the meeting. 288. Full support for the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) and its objectives was expressed. Appreciation for the valuable work of the Programme and of the staff, particularly in Afghanistan and in Central and South-east Asia, was expressed. 289. Measures concerning the thematic evaluation of programmes, leading to strengthening and improvement of services, was welcomed. Concern was expressed with respect to the programme of reform and the financing of the programme, requiring establishment of priorities to improve management. 290. Appreciation was expressed for the actions taken to implement the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. 291. Clarification was requested on whether a review process was undertaken of the usefulness of outputs in accordance with Regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. In-depth evaluation should be made of the usefulness of outputs. Clarification was also requested concerning the growth in the number of publications, the reviews of publications in terms of how they are disseminated, who the readers are and whether assessments are made of the impact of the publications. 292. A view was expressed that international drug control is a shared responsibility, requiring international cooperation through technical and financial assistance, especially to developing countries. A view was also expressed that legal assistance through the technical cooperation programme is valuable. The view was also expressed that there should be a better balance in the efforts devoted to demand reduction and supply reduction. 293. Efforts to synthesize expected accomplishments and to choose indicators of achievement that were detailed and creative were commended. A balance between demand and supply was observed. A view was expressed that subprogramme 1 was less ambitious than the other subprogrammes. 294. Support was expressed for work related to amphetamine-type stimulants and their precursors. Concern was expressed that performance measures related to control of such stimulants and their precursors were not established. Concern was also expressed that performance measures were not established for Indicators of achievement (a) and (e) (i) in table 17.17. 295. The Programme's experience in money-laundering and lessons learned in this regard were noted; however, the absence of a statement of expected accomplishment on this issue was observed. 296. Concerns were expressed regarding the statement that the availability of extrabudgetary resources was an external factor that might affect the achievement of expected accomplishments. A view was expressed that some normative activities were funded by extrabudgetary resources. 297. The view was expressed that UNDCP should endeavour to improve upon its utilization of extrabudgetary resources for 2004-2005. In table 17.7 (ii), the current target is for 90 per cent, which is the same as in 2002-2003, and below the 95 per cent rate of 2000-2001. 298. In connection with performance measures (d) in table 17.12, the Committee observed that if the value of the annual consultation mechanisms is recognized, then the target for 2004-2005 should be higher than the estimate for 2002-2003. 299. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 17, International drug control, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications, as well as provisions in the foreword and the introduction: Table 17.7 Indicator of achievement (ii): after the word "full", add the words "and efficient". Table 17.10 Indicator of achievement (c): Replace the words "timely receipt by" with the words "availability of information for". Table 17.12 Performance measure (c) (i): Under "target 2004-2005", replace the words "an average rating of `fully satisfactory'" with the words "a 75 per cent rating `fully satisfactory'"; Delete indicator of achievement (c) (ii), and delete the symbol "(i)" in indicator of achievement (c) (i); Performance measure (f): Under "target 2004-2005", replace the words "an average rating of `fully satisfactory'" with the words "a 75 per cent rating `fully satisfactory'"; Performance measure (h): Under "target 2004-2005" replace the words "an average rating of `fully satisfactory'" with the words "a 75 per cent rating `fully satisfactory'". Table 17.13 Expected accomplishment (b) should read as follows: "Enhanced treaty adherence, at the request of Governments". Indicator of achievement (b) should read as follows: "Number of Member States that received support from the Secretariat to become party to one of the three drug control treaties". Indicator of achievement (c): insert the words "with the assistance of the Secretariat" after the word "Governments". Table 17.15 Indicators of achievement (a), (b), (c) and (d): insert the words "with the assistance of the Secretariat" after the words "Member States". Table 17.17 Objective 1 Replace the text in indicator of achievement (a) with the following text: "Enhanced assistance by UNDCP to Member States to establish or strengthen national strategies to reduce and eliminate illicit cultivation, including comprehensive measures such as programmes in alternative development, law enforcement and eradication". Indicators of achievement (b), (c) and (d): insert the words "with the assistance of the Secretariat" after the word "countries". Indicator of achievement (e) (i): insert the words "with the assistance of the Secretariat" after the words "Member States". Objective 2 Indicator of achievement (a): insert the words "with the assistance of the Secretariat" after the words "transit States". 300. The Committee requested that programme managers within section 17 comply fully with Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. 301. At its 16th meeting, on 20 June 2003, the Committee considered section 18, Economic and social development in Africa, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 18)). 302. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 18 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 303. Support was expressed for the programme of work under this section. Satisfaction was expressed with the clear presentation of the detailed programme of work, including the results-based budgeting narrative. 304. The view was expressed that the document reflected the priorities identified in the United Nations Millennium Declaration and in the New Partnership for Africa's Development. The inclusion of a new subprogramme 8, Development planning and administration, was welcomed. 305. The view was expressed that the priorities and goals of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action should also be a priority of the entire programme. 306. The view was also expressed that the programme, especially some expected accomplishments, was very ambitious, but still could be implemented by the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA). It was pointed out that the scope of some expected accomplishments exceeded those of the medium-term plan. The view was expressed that several expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement should be refined to reflect better the Millennium Declaration Goals and those of NEPAD. The view was also expressed that some indicators of achievement and performance measures did not seem to relate to the expected accomplishments. It was stated that indicators of achievement should reflect the impact of the activities and not be based only on quantitative measurement. 307. It was noted with appreciation that ECA had reoriented its work programme to reflect the goals of the Millennium Declaration and was integrating planning, budgeting and evaluation measures more effectively into its operations through the establishment of the Office of Planning and Programme Coordination, the Human Resources Management and Finance Division and the Conference and General Services Division. The view was expressed that it should be done within existing resources or with extrabudgetary resources. 308. The view was expressed that more attention should be given to regional cooperation and to coordination with other United Nations entities. It was suggested that a mechanism for evaluation of ECA publications should be established, and that the prospective establishment of an ECA trade development centre should be reflected in the document. 309. Concern was expressed at the continuing high vacancy rate at ECA, which could affect programme implementation. 310. Concern was expressed at the perceived lack of coordination between the regional commissions and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the possible duplication of work. 311. The Committee reiterated the role of ECA in promoting and facilitating, in partnership with African States, the attainment of the goals set by NEPAD. 312. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly suggest that ECA, in future, include proposed programme budget figures in addition to the proposed programme narratives in discussions at the intergovernmental level in ECA. 313. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 18, Economic and social development in Africa, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Paragraph 18A.25, second sentence After the words "This goal" add a comma and the words "while taking into account the new organization and programme of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development with regard to the regional implementation forum,". Table 18A.10 Expected accomplishment (a) should read: "Improved capacity of member States to design, implement and monitor development policies and strategies that address the needs of the poor, taking into account the goals of the Millennium Declaration and the priorities of NEPAD". Table 18A.12 Expected accomplishment (a) should read: "Increased awareness of policy makers of the interrelationship between and the need for integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development". In indicator of achievement (a), replace the words "the number of citations of" with the words "the number of times reference was made to". In the performance measures, replace the word "citations" with the word "references". Expected accomplishment (c) should read: "Effective incorporation of the interrelated issues of food security, population, environment and human settlements into sustainable development policies". In indicator of achievement (a), replace the words "trained by ECA" with the words "with the assistance of ECA". Section 19 Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific 314. At its 16th meeting, on 20 June 2003, the Committee considered section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 19)). 315. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 19 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 316. The importance of the programme of work of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), as well as its being a well-run regional commission, was recognized. Continued support for the role of ESCAP in the Asian and Pacific region was reiterated. The view was expressed that ESCAP should facilitate strategic policy and collaboration among member States in the region. The view was also expressed that there is room for revitalizing and reorienting activities in the programme of work. 317. Regular review of common priority areas was recommended. The necessity of maintaining activities in the entire region was expressed. It was noted with concern that some countries in the region were excluded from activities undertaken by ESCAP. 318. It was noted with satisfaction that ESCAP is pursuing social and economic development through the three themes, namely, poverty reduction, managing globalization and addressing emerging social issues, and through the seven cross-cutting subprogrammes which will address major problems in the region. 319. It was noted with appreciation that ESCAP had reoriented its work programme and resources to support implementation of the Millennium Declaration and the outcomes of global conferences. Further, ESCAP was commended for its comprehensive review of outputs and, in this regard, its proposed 57 outputs for deletion, mainly relating to publications. It was noted, however, that more could be done to further rationalize resources. 320. Concern was expressed at the perceived lack of coordination between the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with the regional commissions and duplication of activities. 321. It was noted with appreciation that gender dimension had been successfully mainstreamed by ESCAP into five of its seven subprogrammes. 322. The consultative process for the preparation of the proposed programme budget was appreciated. 323. It was also noted that the proposed programme budget was well prepared and clearly reflected the key international conferences, the Doha Development Agenda and the Millennium Development Goals. Exploration of the follow-up to the Monterrey Conference in the ESCAP region was recommended. The view was expressed that the programme of work was aligned with the Millennium Development Goals, which had not been endorsed by the General Assembly, and that only the Millennium Declaration had been endorsed. 324. It was suggested that ESCAP should focus on assisting Member States to implement the follow-up to global conferences and the Millennium Declaration Goals. Support for technical cooperation and advisory services to achieve the relevant Millennium Development Goals was expressed. Clarification on the use of resources under section 23, Technical cooperation, was requested. 325. The view was expressed that, to avoid duplication and to identify common practices, a proper division of labour was required between the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the regional commissions, as well as among the regional commissions. Statistics was pointed out as an area of possible overlap. 326. The view was expressed that the expected accomplishments in the fascicle were directly related and consistent with the medium-term plan. Satisfaction with the expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures in all seven subprogrammes was expressed. Expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement were measurable. Concern was expressed that some expected accomplishments in the medium-term plan were not included in the proposed programme budget. It was also noted that a few performance measurements did not include baseline data. The absence of performance measurements under Executive direction and management was also noted in the budget fascicles of ESCAP and the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE). 327. The discontinuation of 57 outputs and the streamlining of publications were appreciated. More rigorous review of outputs was recommended. Clarification was requested on the criteria for the deletion of outputs. Concern was expressed that the reduction in outputs affected work relating to agriculture, which plays a primary role in the region. The view was also expressed that end user surveys of publications should be made in all the regional commissions. 328. It was suggested that, in future, ESCAP should participate in Committee for Programme and Coordination meetings by videoconference. 329. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Subprogramme 7 Replace the title with "Social development, including persistent and emerging issues". Paragraph 19.7 In the second and third lines replace the words "least developed and landlocked countries as well as other developing countries" with the words "the developing countries and countries with economies in transition, particularly the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States". Paragraph 19.40 (c) (ii) In the second and third lines and in the last two lines replace the words "in the least developed countries and the countries with economies in transition" with the words "especially in the developing countries and countries with economies in transition, particularly in the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States". Paragraph 19.48 (c) (ii), (iii), (iv) Add the words ", advanced fossil fuel technology" after the words "energy efficiency". Table 19.22 Under expected accomplishment (a), replace the words "social issues" with the words "social development issues". Delete indicator of achievement (a) (i). 330. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly: (a) Recognize that there exists a mandate for assisting national capacities and no mandate for either reporting or monitoring on the indicators of the goals of the Millennium Declaration at the regional level; (b) Urge that the new subprogramme on environment and sustainable development function in conformity with decisions taken by the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session; (c) Welcome the emphasis on combating the spread of HIV/AIDS in the Asian and Pacific region and urge coordination with similar activities in the United Nations system; (d) Suggest that ESCAP, in future, include proposed programme budget figures in addition to the proposed programme narratives at discussions at the intergovernmental level in ESCAP; (e) Urge closer coordination of programmes and activities with other organizations of the United Nations system and the Secretariat so as to avoid duplication of effort; (f) Urge that under indicators of achievement, ESCAP enumerate cases where it developed specific projects and programmes for implementation in the various areas of work, rather than listing how many countries' policies have been positively affected by ESCAP activities, given the absence of any obvious correlation between the two. Section 20 Economic development in Europe 331. At its 16th meeting, on 20 June 2003, the Committee considered section 20, Economic development in Europe, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 20)). 332. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 20 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 333. Support was expressed for the programme of work of the Economic Commission for Europe, in particular in the field of fostering development and integration of the countries with economies in transition in the context of the enlargement of the European Union. The focus on supporting and facilitating the efforts of this group of countries for their integration into the global economy was welcomed. It was suggested that ECE should continue to strengthen its role of providing technical assistance to this group of countries. It was also suggested that the enlargement of the European Union should lead ECE to consider refocusing its work. 334. It was mentioned that ECE should set up regional mechanisms to ensure effective follow-up to United Nations international conferences, such as the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the International Conference on Financing for Development. 335. The efforts of ECE to streamline its activities, in particular its meetings and publications, were welcomed, but it was suggested that a lot more could be done. It was noted that 75 outputs were proposed for deletion. 336. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 20, Economic development in Europe, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 337. The Committee recommended that the Economic Commission for Europe further streamline its work in the light of the enlargement of the European Union in subprogrammes such as statistics, trade and investment, transport, tourism and the environment, and coordinate its work with the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development and the European Commission in order to avoid duplication and overlap. 338. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly seek a much clearer formulation of how the establishment, growth, enlargement and cooperation partnerships of the European Union have affected the role and functions of ECE. 339. At its 16th meeting, on 20 June 2003, the Committee considered section 21, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 21)). 340. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 21 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 341. Support was expressed for the work programme of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). The view was expressed that the logical framework of the programme as presented in the document had improved. Support was expressed for the three priority areas that ECLAC intends to emphasize during the 2004-2005 biennium, namely: equity and poverty reduction policies in the region; national policies to improve the links between economic and social development and the current globalization process; and the mainstreaming of environmental concerns in public policies in the region. The view was also expressed that the thrust of the proposals was in line with the Millennium Development Goals, the 2002-2005 medium-term plan, the relevant outcomes of major United Nations conferences and summits and the reform process endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002. 342. The development of a common system and a database for the regional follow-up to all United Nations conferences, including those related to the Millennium Development Goals, was welcomed. The view was expressed that every time there is a reference to follow-up to the Millennium Development Goals, the corresponding paragraph of the Millennium Declaration (see General Assembly resolution 55/2) should be cited. 343. A question was raised on current plans to strengthen the mobilization of extrabudgetary funds at ECLAC in support of its technical cooperation programme in the biennium 2004-2005 so as to reduce uncertainty in the level of resources that would be available to carry out the programme. It was noted with satisfaction that no technical cooperation activity was earmarked for discontinuation as part of the efforts to streamline the programme. 344. It was noted that in some instances expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement had been modified from those in the 2002-2005 medium-term plan. The discontinuation of 37 recurrent outputs of marginal utility, consisting mainly of servicing of meetings and publications approved by ECLAC resolution 589 (XXIX), as well as the overall reduction of outputs, referred to in paragraphs 21.6 and 21.7, respectively, was commended. Concern was expressed regarding the discontinuation of the up-to-date report on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States from the Caribbean perspective. 345. The importance of subprogramme 3 was underscored, as the area of macroeconomic policy was important for achieving sustainable long-term growth. 346. The importance of subprogramme 4 was emphasized, as it aimed at policies promoting social equity and the alleviation of poverty in the region. 347. The importance of subprogrammes 7, 8 and 12 was underlined. The view was expressed that Agenda 21 and the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development should be emphasized in the formulation of the objective of subprogramme 8 (see table 21.24). 348. The view was expressed that external factor (c) in paragraph 21.60 should not be considered an external factor since it relates to work of the Commission to increase its commitment to further gender mainstreaming. 349. It was considered that indicators of achievement cited under subprogrammes 8 and 9 provided clear indications of the results intended. In particular, indicators of achievement (c) and (d) in table 21.24 were highlighted as an effective way of establishing the usefulness of training courses given by ECLAC. 350. Support was expressed for the inclusion of the subject of natural disasters in the work programme and the encouragement of regional cooperation in the area of risk reduction and vulnerability. Views were expressed on the institutional constraints that had affected the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States in the past. ECLAC was encouraged to ensure that the regional preparatory process for the 2004 conference on small island developing States received all the assistance needed for its success. 351. Concern was expressed at the perceived lack of coordination and the duplication of activities between the regional commissions and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 352. It was noted with appreciation that upon completion of a comprehensive review of ECLAC's programme of work and operations, undertaken by the member States of the Commission in the light of General Assembly resolution 57/300 and the Millennium Declaration, the Commission had reoriented its work programme to focus on three priority areas and found 37 outputs of marginal utility, especially in the area of technical cooperation. 353. Regarding ECLAC's request for the deployment of a P-4 at its subregional headquarters in Mexico City to be the focal point for evaluation and vulnerability reduction in connection with natural disasters, it was asked who is currently conducting this activity and what the roles of UNDP and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs are in this area. 354. The Committee recommended that the 2004-2005 proposed programme budget for section 21, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, take into account, besides the Millennium Declaration and the 2002-2005 medium-term plan, as revised, the outcomes of major United Nations conferences and summits. 355. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 21 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Table 21.10 Add indicators of achievement (d) and (e) of paragraph 17.9 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised. Table 21.12 Add the indicators of achievement of paragraph 17.13 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised. Table 21.14 In expected accomplishment (c), after the words "Enhanced regional", insert the word "technical". Add indicators of achievement (a) and (b) of paragraph 17.18 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised. Table 21.16 In indicator of achievement (c), after the word "guidelines" insert the words "with the assistance of ECLAC". Paragraph 21.60 Replace paragraph 21.60 with the following: "The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) gender mainstreaming in the region continues to receive full support from the countries of the region; and (b) member States continue to support the activities of the subprogramme." Table 21.20 Add indicators of achievement (a) and (c) of paragraph 17.33 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised, as indicators of achievement (a) (iv) and (a) (v). Add to the end of each the words "with the assistance or collaboration of ECLAC". Table 21.22 Add indicator of achievement (b) of paragraph 17.37 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised, as indicator of achievement (b) (ii) . Table 21.24 Add expected accomplishment (a) of paragraph 17.41 and indicator of achievement (a) of paragraph 17.42 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised, as expected accomplishment (e) and indicator of achievement (e). In indicator of achievement (a) (ii), after the words "coding systems", add the words "with the assistance and/or collaboration of ECLAC". Add indicators of achievement (d) and (e) of paragraph 17.50 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised, as indicators of achievement (a) (iii) and (a) (iv). Table 21.30 Add expected accomplishments (a), (c) and (d) of paragraph 17.54 and indicators of achievement (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 17.55 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised. Table 21.32 Add indicator of achievement (b) of paragraph 17.59 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised, as indicator of achievement (c) (ii) in table 21.32 and renumber indicator of achievement (c) (ii) as (c) (iii). Section 22 Economic and social development in Western Asia 356. At its 17th meeting, on 20 June 2003, the Committee considered section 22, Economic and social development in Western Asia, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 22)). 357. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 22 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 358. Support was expressed for the proposals under section 22. It was stated that the programme of work reflected the goals of the Millennium Declaration and the reform programme endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/300. Satisfaction was expressed with the results-based format and specific and well-defined expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and outputs. Satisfaction was also expressed with the rationalization of the number of outputs in 2002-2003, resulting in a 15 per cent reduction and a further 12 per cent reduction in 2004-2005. It was also noted that further steps, in that direction, should be taken in 2004-2005. 359. The view was expressed that the programme of work included very important areas, such as the digital divide and economic cooperation in managing globalization. The integration of industry and agriculture as well as energy and water activities to take advantage of synergies was welcomed. 360. The view was expressed that ESCWA should be involved in the preparation by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) of the Arab Human Development report and that UNDP should be encouraged to seek the cooperation of ESCWA in that respect. 361. Concern was expressed with the perceived lack of coordination between the regional commissions and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, UNDP, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the possible duplication of work. 362. The view was expressed that ESCWA electronic publications should be made available in a hard-copy format. The intention of ESCWA to issue all its publications in 2004-2005 also in the Arabic language was welcomed. 363. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 22, Economic and social development in Western Asia, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the modifications that appear below as well as the provisions in the foreword and introduction. 364. The Committee emphasized the need for programme managers of this section to comply with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. 365. The Committee reiterated that the Secretary-General should submit to the General Assembly, at its fifty-eighth session, the report requested in its resolution 57/283 B. Section 23 Regular programme of technical cooperation 366. At its 15th meeting, on 19 June 2003, the Committee considered section 23, Regular programme of technical cooperation, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 367. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 23 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 368. Support was expressed for the proposals under this section. It was emphasized that this section played an important role in supporting national development efforts of developing countries. The recognition of the role of the regional commissions in the provision of important technical cooperation services to the developing countries was also expressed. 369. The view was expressed that technical cooperation activities should be funded through extrabudgetary resources and implemented by specialized agencies and other entities and funds of the United Nations. It was also pointed out that technical cooperation, advisory services and capacity-building should be implemented by regional commissions and specialized agencies. The view was also expressed that the engagement of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs in providing technical cooperation services detracted from its primary mission of providing substantive support to intergovernmental processes. 370. The Committee reaffirmed the importance of the role of the regional commissions in, and their capacity to deliver, effective and efficient technical cooperation. 371. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 23, Regular programme of technical cooperation, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications, as well as the provisions in the foreword and introduction: Paragraph 23.35 (a) (i) In the first sentence, replace the words "especially in least developed, landlocked and island developing countries and countries with economies in transition" with the words "especially in the developing countries and countries with economies in transition, particularly least developed, landlocked and island developing countries"; (e) (i) In the tenth line, after the word "developing", insert the words "energy efficiency, advanced fossil fuel technology and"; (e) (ii) In the fifth line, replace the words "renewable energy" with the words "implementation of paragraph 20 of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, on energy"; (f) (i) In the second line, replace the words "particularly of least developed, landlocked and island developing countries and countries with economies in transition" with the words "especially of the developing countries and countries with economies in transition, particularly least developed, landlocked and island developing countries"; (g) (iii) Replace paragraph 23.35 (g) (iii) with the following: "Field project on addressing social development including emerging social issues". Section 24 Human rights 372. At its 18th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Committee considered section 24, Human rights, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 24)). 373. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 24 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 374. The importance of the promotion and realization of human rights and of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights was reiterated. Great attention was given to the programme, which is one of the main areas of work of the Organization as stated in the Charter of the United Nations. The importance of the right to development and of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families were underlined. Strong support for the High Commissioner was expressed. 375. The importance of strengthening the management of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, as stated in General Assembly resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002 and in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (A/57/488), was emphasized. The view was expressed that the proposals in section 24 should be considered in line with the Secretary-General's efforts to strengthen the United Nations. The need to ensure the success of management reform and to support the human rights apparatus was underlined. 376. Concern was expressed regarding the increased reliance of the Office on extrabudgetary resources. Views were expressed that priorities and mandated activities should be guaranteed with commensurate regular budget resources. 377. A view was expressed that some proposals contained in the section went beyond the provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/300. 378. The reduction in the number of outputs was welcomed. It was noted that some outputs were being discontinued owing to new technologies. It was considered that the Office should ensure that Member States that did not have such new technologies continue to receive the documentation in an appropriate format. 379. A view was expressed that the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights should make every effort to promote collaboration as well as division of labour with other United Nations organs, institutes and specialized agencies and ensure consistency in their respective policies. 380. The proliferation of human rights machinery was noted with concern. 381. The following amendments were proposed to section 24, Human rights, of the proposed programme budget for the period 2004-2005: Paragraph 24.2 At the end of the paragraph, add ", in full compliance with the principles of impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity, in the spirit of constructive international dialogue and cooperation". Paragraph 24.8 (a) (ii) In the second line, delete "and rights-based approaches". Table 24.7 Add a new expected accomplishment reading: "Systematic action is taken to reclassify all posts in the new organizational structure according to their levels and types of service and to decide whether they belong to the 100 or the 200 series". Add a new measurement of achievement reading: "The reduction in the number of staff under the 200 series of staff rules performing core functions of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights". Paragraph 24.35 Delete the paragraph. Table 24.11 "(e) Strengthened efforts that contribute to the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance"; Add a new indicator of achievement reading: "(e) An increased number of activities carried out to fulfil the mandates". Paragraph 24.37 Table 24.13 "(c) The appropriate support to the States parties to the human rights treaties and the respective treaty bodies to review the reporting procedures of treaty bodies with a view to developing a more coordinated approach and to streamlining the reporting requirements under these treaties"; "(c) Satisfaction of participants with the quality of services provided by the Office of the High Commissioner". Paragraph 24.42 Table 24.15 Under objective 2, add a new measurement of achievement reading: "The number of recommendations of special rapporteurs and representatives and expert and working groups endorsed in relevant resolutions"; Under objective 3, add a new measurement of achievement reading: "The number of United Nations country field operations supported by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop training programmes and materials for human rights field staff". Paragraph 24.51 382. The Committee recommended that the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus be discontinued owing to its long-standing lack of consensus on how to proceed with its programme of work and its inability to fulfil its mandate. 383. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly, at its fifty-eighth session, carefully review section 24, Human rights, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, including the programme content in the light of all relevant mandates of the General Assembly. Section 25 Protection of and assistance to refugees 384. At its 19th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Committee considered section 25, Protection of and assistance to refugees, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 25)). 385. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 25 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 386. General support was expressed for the activities undertaken by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and for the leading role that the Office is playing in providing protection and assistance to refugees. 387. Concern was expressed that the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005 for section 25 was once again presented in the form of a grant, although the General Assembly had requested in its resolution 56/253 that the proposals be more transparent and that the resource requirements be presented by object of expenditure. It was felt that the information was insufficient to ensure proper oversight. 388. The view was expressed that section 25, Protection of and assistance to refugees, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 should have included the information as stipulated in Regulation 5.3 and Rule 105.3 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. In that connection, it was stated that the section should comply with paragraphs 133 to 136 of General Assembly resolution 56/253, in which the General Assembly deeply regretted that some amounts previously funded under posts, other staff costs, general operating expenses and supplies and materials had been presented in a less transparent manner under the provision of grants and contributions; requested the Secretary-General to reinstate resource requirements by object of expenditure with provisions other than grants and contributions; and also requested the Secretary-General to review the funding of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from the regular budget in a transparent manner. 389. The representative of the Secretary-General explained that the proposed programme budget of UNHCR was presented in the form of a grant in order to streamline the relationship between the Office and the Secretariat and to provide for more flexibility. It was recalled that in accordance with article 20 of the Statute of UNHCR, only administrative expenditures relating to the functioning of the Office of the High Commissioner should be borne by the regular budget, and that all other expenditures relating to the activities of the High Commissioner should be financed by voluntary contributions. Since the regular budget share of UNHCR represented only 5.4 per cent of the total budget available to it and approximately, half of its administrative costs, it was important to provide for some flexibility. 390. Concern was expressed that only one output was proposed for discontinuation, and the office was encouraged to review its programme of publications. 391. In connection with the reference to the publication on microfinance under subprogramme 2, the view was expressed that the Office should not be involved in development activities. 392. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 25, Protection of and assistance to refugees, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the following modifications: Paragraph 25.4 In the last sentence, replace the words "programme of work will" with the following words: "subprogramme of work on protection will also". Table 25.5 Add subparagraph (g) to subparagraph (c) to form one subparagraph. Replace the sentence in expected accomplishment (d) with the following sentence: "Progress towards durable solution through formulation, facilitation and active implementation of voluntary repatriation operations in conditions of safety and dignity, followed up by the monitoring of the situations in countries to which the refugees return". Under indicator of achievement (d), at the end of the paragraph add the words "in the framework of voluntary repatriation operations". Replace expected accomplishment (e) with the following: "The promotion of local integration as a possible durable solution, where feasible, in accordance with the High Commissioner's strategy of development through local integration". Under indicator of achievement (f) (ii), add the following performance measures: "2000-2001: not available"; "Estimate 2002-2003: to be determined"; and "Target 2004-2005: to be determined". To indicator of achievement (f), add a new subsection (iii) containing the following: "The extent to which tools to improve monitoring and oversight of resettlement have been adopted". Add the following performance measures under indicator of achievement (f) (iii): "2000-2001: not available"; "Estimate 2002-2003: to be determined"; and "Target 2004-2005: to be determined". Merge subparagraph (g) with subparagraph (c). After the words "refugee exploitation" in expected accomplishment (c), insert a full stop and the sentence from expected accomplishment (g). Merge indicator of achievement (g) with indicator of achievement (c), producing two subsections containing the following: (i) "Decrease in the number of incidents related to sexual and gender-based violence reported to health clinics in refugee camps"; and (ii) "The number of UNHCR country operations plans reflecting the five priority categories and key sectors". Under indicator of achievement (c), add a new subsection (iii) containing the following: "Development of measurable indicators corresponding to the High Commissioner's five commitments". Under performance measure (c) (iii), add: "2000-2001: not available"; "Estimate 2002-2003: to be determined"; and "Target 2004-2005: to be determined". Table 25.6 Replace the sentence in indicator of achievement (b) (i) with the following sentence: "The number of initiatives incorporating quality of life of refugees and the surrounding local communities into national development plans"; Under indicator of achievement (b) (ii), delete the words "against core standards"; Under indicator of achievement (b) (iii), replace the word "microfinance" with the word "self-reliance"; Under expected accomplishment (d), replace the word "protect" with the word "assist"; Under expected accomplishment (d), add, at the end of the paragraph, the words "through provision of sufficient voluntary contributions by the international community, in a spirit of burden-sharing and international solidarity"; Under indicator of achievement (d) (ii), delete the words "as well as in the development through local integration strategy"; Under indicator of achievement (d), add a new subsection (iii) reading: "Increase in the level of voluntary contributions provided by the international community". Under performance measures for this indicator of achievement insert "To be determined". 393. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly be provided, in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, with the information as stipulated in Regulation 5.3 and Rule 105.3 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation and in the relevant General Assembly resolution. 394. The Committee emphasized the need for programme managers in the section to comply with the above-mentioned Rules and Regulations. Section 26 Palestine refugees 395. At its 21st meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Committee considered section 26, Palestine refugees, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 26)). 396. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 26 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 397. Support was expressed for the overall objectives and for the activities undertaken by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) in the Near East. The work done in the field was considered to be very important, and the critical role played by the Agency in the search for peace and stability in the Middle East was recognized. 398. Appreciation was expressed for the results-based budgeting narrative of the fascicle which was considered to be a model. 399. A view was expressed that the reason for proposing the discontinuation of one output was solely the result of a lack of funding and not because the output was obsolete or of marginal value. A view was expressed that the secretariat should redouble its efforts towards mobilizing additional extrabudgetary resources and expand the UNRWA donor base. 400. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 26, Palestine refugees, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. Section 27 Humanitarian assistance 401. At its 21st meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Committee considered section 27, Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 27)). 402. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 27 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 403. The Committee expressed appreciation for the critical and effective coordination role the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has played in responding to various humanitarian emergencies related to natural disasters and complex emergencies. The Committee also noted the difficult tasks that the Office has in managing a very complex structure but stated that the Office was nevertheless successful in organizing and strengthening its capacity and presence in the field. It was pointed out that donors have noted the improvements in the functioning and the efficiency of the Office, in particular the efficiency with which the Office has coordinated efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the need to strengthen the coordination among the various humanitarian partners. With regard to the coordination of operations of the Iraq crisis through New York, the Committee expressed the view that every effort should be made to avoid any duplication of efforts between New York and Geneva. 404. Support was also expressed for the mandate of the Office. It was pointed out, however, that measures need to be taken to address surge capacities and the large gap between the resources provided under the regular budget vis--vis voluntary contributions. 405. Satisfaction was expressed with regard to the significant role played by the Office in mitigating the Chernobyl disaster and the initiative by the Office to establish the International Chernobyl Research and Information Network, which will assist in facilitating the transition from relief to development in the States affected by the Chernobyl disaster. 406. It was noted that there were improvements in the workings of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC). The Committee encouraged the secretariat of the IASC to continue to strengthen inter-agency coordination and to keep Member States informed of its work and increase coordination and consultation with the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations regarding United Nations responses to countries in or emerging from humanitarian crises. 407. The heavy dependence of the Office on extrabudgetary resources was noted. That dependence reflected the pattern of an inappropriately small share of the regular budget being devoted to human rights and humanitarian affairs. The situation put key functions at risk. 408. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 27, Humanitarian assistance, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. 409. The Committee, in reviewing section 27, noted the importance of extrabudgetary resources for administrative functions and recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to submit a report defining administrative functions. Section 28 Public information 410. At its 20th and 21st meetings, on 24 June 2003, the Committee considered section 28, Public information, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 28)). 411. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 28 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the programme. 412. The significant accomplishments, both substantive and organizational, were acknowledged. It was observed that presentation of the report was improved. The intention to strengthen performance-based management through an annual programme performance review, the Office of Internal Oversight Services-assisted self-evaluation project over three years and staff training opportunities was welcomed, although the protracted length of the evaluation period was queried. 413. The view was expressed that the Secretary-General would be encouraged to expeditiously implement those elements of reform under his sole authority, in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions and decisions already adopted. Support was expressed for the restructuring of the Department of Public Information and for the measures for the improvement of the Dag Hammarskjld Library. It was suggested that the resources for all libraries should be transferred to section 28. 414. Clarification of the meaning of "client departments" was sought. The Committee was informed that the client departments were the operational clients of the Department, and therefore close collaboration within the Secretariat was essential to implement effectively the mandates of the General Assembly. 415. The discontinuation of 26 outputs reported in the annex was welcomed, and further review of the outputs was encouraged. The view was expressed that determination of output discontinuation should be based on the issues of priority and impact, and clarification was requested on the reasons why some outputs were discontinued for "inadequate resources". The Committee was informed that the outputs listed in the annex of the report were indeed identified as having low impacts and low priorities; and that in some cases there was duplication. 416. Diverging interpretations were offered of the meaning of paragraph 15 of resolution 57/300, which addressed the rationalization of the United Nations information centres around regional hubs. The Committee was informed that paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 57/300, requesting a progress report on the implementation of the proposal, constituted the authority to proceed. As the Western European hub was focusing on the European Union member countries, a question was raised on how Eastern European members would fit in the model. It was also indicated that consultations on applying the regional approach to information centres in other regions had not yet taken place. 417. It was stated that the concept of regional hubs was a valid one from the viewpoint of improving efficiency. It was also stated that it was important to weigh what would be lost by closing existing information centres against the benefits from the reinforced activities through regional hubs. In that connection, it was further stated that the overall support of a host Government should be reflected in the action plan to implement the proposal of the Secretary-General to rationalize the network of United Nations information centres around regional hubs. It was also suggested that countries without information centres should be consulted to see if they thought they could be better served by the regional approach. 418. The view was expressed that the regionalization of information centres around regional hubs did not represent a consensus of the General Assembly and that the process could jeopardize the accomplishment of the objectives of the Department, particularly in developing countries. In that connection, it was also said that the General Assembly should decide on the issue once the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the proposal in Western Europe had been submitted. 419. The Committee took note of the fact that details on the consolidation of the United Nations information centres in Western Europe into a regional hub had not been finalized at the time of the preparation of the proposed programme budget and indicated that the matter should be discussed further at the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, after consultation with concerned Member States had taken place. 420. It was indicated that a new expected accomplishment entitled "Successful implementation of the regional hub initiative in all regions" and a new indicator of achievement, "Number of information centres consolidated into regional hubs", should be added to table 28.10. 421. Some Member States noted that the words "Latin America and the Caribbean" should be added after the words "Middle East" in the last sentence of paragraph 28.33. 422. The view was expressed that information in the local languages had the strongest impact on the local population, and that paragraph 28.30 of section 28 should reflect this important element in accordance with paragraph 37 of General Assembly resolution 57/130 B. 423. The Committee took note of the programme narrative of section 28, Public information, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 and recommended that the General Assembly further consider section 28, taking into account the following modifications: Paragraph 28.3 Replace the first two sentences with the following sentence: "The overarching mandate of the Department of Public Information is in General Assembly resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946, and its primary mission is to provide, through its outreach activities, accurate, impartial, comprehensive and timely information to the public on the tasks and responsibilities of the United Nations in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization with the greatest transparency, respecting existing mandates and in line with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, to focus its message and better concentrate its efforts and, as a function of performance management, to match its programmes to the needs of its target audiences, on the basis of improved feedback and evaluation mechanisms as set out in General Assembly resolution 57/130 B". In the last sentence, after the words "has been formulated", insert the words "as welcomed by the Committee on Information". Paragraph 28.4 The second sentence should read as follows: "Its core message, with the medium-term plan priorities as the main guide, and taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 55/2 (the Millennium Declaration), will focus on the eradication of poverty, conflict prevention, sustainable development, human rights, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the battle against international terrorism and the needs of the African continent (see resolution 57/130 B) as well as on international cooperation, the transfer of technology, and transparency in international trade". Paragraph 28.11 After the words "in Western Europe" in the third sentence, add the words "in accordance with resolution 57/130 B and resolution 57/300, in particular paragraphs 44 and 15 respectively". Table 28.7 At the end of the sentence in Objective, add the words "and assessing that impact through annual programme reviews". Under indicator of achievement (d), add "(d)" at the beginning of the sentence, and at the end of the sentence add the words "in the implementation of the results of the Department's annual programme impact reviews". Paragraph 28.29 In the first sentence, delete the words "and established by the Secretary-General". In the second sentence, replace the words "using the Millennium Declaration as its guide" with the words "of the medium-term plan and of the Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2)". Paragraph 28.30 Replace the second sentence with "Under the guidance of the Information Centres Service at Headquarters, the United Nations information centres and information components and regional hubs, as applicable, will play a significant role in disseminating information about the work of the Organization to the peoples of the world, including the areas outlined in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, with the information centres as the `field voice' of the Department of Public Information, and will work through local intermediaries to promote public awareness of and mobilize support for the work of the United Nations at the local level, bearing in mind that information in the local languages has the strongest impact on the local populations". Paragraph 28.31 After the words "regional information hubs in strategic locations" in the first sentence, add the words "in accordance with resolution 57/130 B and resolution 57/300, in particular paragraphs 44 and 15 respectively". Paragraph 28.33 Delete the last sentence. Table 28.10 In expected accomplishment (a), replace the words "on priority issues" with the words "in accordance with priorities established by the General Assembly". In the Objective, after the words "on priority issues" add the words "of the medium-term plan and the Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2)". Paragraph 28.50 At the end of the first sentence, replace the words "the Member States" with the words "intergovernmental organs in collaboration with the Member States". Table 28.18 The expected accomplishment becomes "(a)"; the indicator of achievement becomes "(a)". Add the following words to indicator of achievement (a): "the number of hits on the United Nations web site, sorted by official languages; and the number of radio programmes broadcast, by language". Add a new expected accomplishment (b): "Timeliness in submission of photographic and video material". Add a new indicator of achievement (b): "Period of time within which photographic and video material is available to news organizations and media after an event takes place". Table 28.22 Under indicator of achievement (a), at the end of the sentence add the words "number of joint and/or coordinated projects by the Dag Hammarskjld Library and other United Nations libraries; and number of hits on the Dag Hammarskjld Library web sites, sorted by official language". Paragraph 28.66 In the first sentence, after "on priority issues", delete the rest of the words and replace them with the following words: "using the priorities of the medium-term plan as main guide and taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 55/2 (the Millennium Declaration)". Table 28.24 In the Objective after the words "using", replace the words "the Millennium Declaration as a guide" with the words "the priorities of the medium-term plan and taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 55/2 (the Millennium Declaration)". Add the following words to the Indicators of achievement: "the number of readers of the UN Chronicle, sorted by the official languages; and the number of times articles appearing in the UN Chronicle are cited in newspapers and journals". 424. The Committee observed that the General Assembly, in its resolution 57/300, took note of the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in action 8 of his report (A/57/387 and Corr.1) to rationalize the network of United Nations information centres around regional hubs, where appropriate, in consultation with concerned Member States, starting with the Western European hub. 425. The Committee noted the steps taken by the Secretary-General to create a regional hub in Western Europe and recalled that the General Assembly had requested the Secretary-General to present a progress report on its implementation as mandated in paragraph 15 of its resolution 57/300. 426. The Committee recommended that the proposal of the Secretary-General to transfer the functions and resources of the Cartographic Section from the Department of Public Information to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should not negatively affect the services currently provided to users outside the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and recalled that the proposals should be considered in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 in accordance with resolution 57/300. 427. The Committee recommended that in this fascicle, section 28, efforts should be made to indicate against each output the origin of the resources proposed, as was done in other fascicles. Section 29 Management and central support services 428. At its 18th, 19th and 20th meetings, on 23 and 24 June 2003, the Committee considered section 29, Management and central support services, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 29A) to (Sect. 29G)). 429. The representatives of the Secretary-General introduced section 29 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 430. General support was expressed for the programme of work proposed under section 29 (A-G) for the biennium 2004-2005. Views were expressed in support of focusing the management practices of the Department of Management on accountability and for the proposals for investment in training and development of staff and in information and communications technology. On the other hand, views were expressed that the reform of the Secretariat should be implemented without an increase in resources and that the efficiency gains from the system improvements and the resources released from the discontinuation of obsolete and ineffective outputs and activities should be utilized for reform. The crucial role of information and communications technology in improving the functioning of the Secretariat, being the backbone of the Organization and the global link in bringing duty stations together, was specifically emphasized. Satisfaction was expressed for increased use of teleconferencing as a management tool, in view of its impact on productivity and reduction in operational costs. The importance of the sharing of best management practices among duty stations and the realization of the potential of common services arrangements in increasing the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the support services were emphasized. 431. The introduction of performance measures to the results-based budgeting framework was noted and generally supported. It was pointed out that some indicators of achievement were somewhat vague or imprecise in formulation, and that some established targets reflected only marginal improvement over the performance in prior bienniums. It was also pointed out that some indicators of achievement were too generic to measure the expected accomplishments and that they should focus not only on client satisfaction or utilization of resources, but also on cost efficiency and effectiveness of services. It was suggested that indicators of achievement within section 29 should be further refined so as to constitute measurable guidelines that would allow achieving a higher level of efficiency and performance, and that the possibility of using indicators targeting expected efficiency savings could also be considered. It was noted that no performance measures were proposed in the results-based budgeting framework in the area of executive direction and management of the section. Views were expressed that some of the identified external factors, in particular those reflecting interdepartmental interaction, were, in fact, internal factors and, as such were within the prerogative of the Secretary-General to manage. 432. Concern was expressed about the matter of whether cooperation of departments and offices of the Secretariat could be considered an external factor. 433. Deep disappointment was expressed about the fact that programme managers for the management and central support services budget sections had not implemented fully regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation by deleting from their proposals outputs and activities that are obsolete, irrelevant, ineffective, or marginally useful. In this context, the view was expressed that the repatriation grant provided to retiring United Nations staff members had become obsolete after 50 years and needed to be reviewed. 434. Appreciation was expressed for the incorporation into budget section 29 of the Secretary-General's reform initiatives, including the discontinuance of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and the transfer of the secretariats of the Fifth and the Sixth Committees to the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management. On the other hand, views were also expressed that the discontinuance of those activities was not mandated by the General Assembly. 435. With regard to section 29A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, it was pointed out that the Management Policy Office seemed to have a limited role to play in improving the administration processes, and it was suggested that the Office should be more proactive. The proposed measures for strengthening the area of administration of justice were generally welcomed, but with the indication that the programme narrative relating to the administration of justice should be revised to reflect the provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/307 of 15 April 2003. 436. With regard to section 29C, Office of Human Resources Management, a view was expressed that the focus of the programme of work on staff training, although seen as positive, was not endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002 and that the issue should be considered by the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. Views in support of the proposed measures for intensifying training and development of staff were also expressed. Strong support was expressed for the goals towards gender balance and equal geographical representation of staff in the Secretariat. Views were expressed that those goals should be reflected in the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement, and that non-representation and underrepresentation of countries by staff in the Secretariat should be measured not only in terms of number of countries, but also in terms of level of representation. The view was also expressed that a performance measure of indicators of achievement should be added to reflect fully the provisions of General Assembly resolutions 55/258 of 14 June 2001 and 57/305 of 15 April 2003 on human resources management. A view was further expressed that not all the six indicators of achievement approved in the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised, were reflected in the results-based budgeting framework under section 29C, and that accountability and vacancy planning should be more clearly taken into account. It was also noted that the actions taken by the Office of Human Resources Management in response to the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as outlined in table 29C.15 were too general in nature. 437. With regard to section 29D, Office of Central Support Services, support was expressed for the efforts towards ensuring wider participation of developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the United Nations procurement process. A view was expressed that a corresponding accomplishment should be included in the logical framework with its own quantitative performance indicator, and that the indicator should express a measure of the value that wider representation of those countries would add to the procurement process. With regard to the provision of information technology services proposed for 2004-2005, it was pointed out that the measurement of return on investment to the proposed activities, and the status of implementation of information technology projects in the context of the information technology strategy could be better reflected in the programme narrative. It was also pointed out that the programme budget proposals under section 29D did not sufficiently reflect the scope of benefits arising from proposed technological upgrades. Views were expressed that the mandated reductions in the area of information technology had long-term negative implications on the functioning of the Organization and they should be avoided in the future. A view was also expressed concerning the need to review the United Nations travel policy arrangements regarding business-class travel. 438. With regard to section 29E, Administration, Geneva, section 29F, Administration, Vienna, and section 29G, Administration, Nairobi, the need for periodic self-evaluation of activities by the respective administrative units with a view of benefiting from the lessons learned was pointed out. Views were expressed that the administrative services of the United Nations Office at Geneva, the United Nations Office at Vienna and the United Nations Office at Nairobi should be more proactive in expanding and improving common services arrangements with respect to the administrative services provided within a duty station. 439. With regard to section 29G, the Committee welcomed the efforts by the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations Office at Nairobi, noting that those measures would allow the release of extrabudgetary resources of UNEP and UN-Habitat from the administrative activities, for reprogramming for their substantive activities. Views were expressed that those efforts should continue on a consistent and comprehensive basis in line with relevant General Assembly resolutions. 440. It was noted that the total regular budget component of resources under section 29G would, for the first time since the establishment of the Office, exceed the amount of extrabudgetary resources. It was recognized that that approach was in line with General Assembly resolutions 54/249, 56/253 and 57/292, as well as with the expressed intention of the Secretary-General to strengthen the Office in order to ensure that it was able to execute its mandated programmes and activities. It would further ensure that the financial and related arrangements of the Office would be steadily brought into line with those of other United Nations administrative offices, as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997. Views were also expressed that the United Nations Office at Nairobi should continue to intensify its efforts to facilitate the holding of all meetings of the Nairobi-based bodies in Nairobi, as directed in paragraphs 9 to 11 of section II of resolution 57/283 B, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the General Assembly or the Committee on Conferences acting on behalf of the General Assembly. 441. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 29, Management and central support services, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the modifications set out below, as well as the provisions contained in the report of the Committee in the foreword and introduction: Table 29A.5 In indicator of achievement (c), add the word "efficient" before the words "support services". Table 29A.8 In objective 1, replace the words "Secretary-General's vision for reform" with the words "reforms in the United Nations". In objective 1, add a new indicator of achievement reading: "Level of satisfaction expressed by the intergovernmental organs", with a new corresponding performance measure reading: "Periodic surveys among Member States". Table 29A.10 Under expected accomplishments, after the word "cases", add "related to disciplinary affairs, claims and appeals of the staff". Table 29B.5 In the objective, after the word "procedures", insert the words "contained in the Financial Regulations and Rules and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation". Table 29B.8 Under objective 1, add a new expected accomplishment, reading: "Better implementation and compliance by departments and offices of the Secretariat of Financial Regulations and Rules and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation", and a corresponding new indicator of achievement reading: "Fewer findings by the oversight bodies of non-compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation and other approved budgetary procedures and guidelines for the regular budget, peacekeeping budgets, extrabudgetary resources and budgets of the Tribunals". Under objective 2, in indicator of achievement (a), after the words "travel claims", add the words "payroll, insurance, invoices and claims processing"; and add a new indicator of achievement reading: "The availability of financial reports by the required dates". Table 29B.10 Under objective 1, change indicator of achievement (b) to (b) (i), and add a new indicator of achievement reading: "(b) (ii) Availability of budgetary documents by the required dates". Under the expected accomplishments of objective 1, insert a new expected accomplishment (c) reading: "(c) Improved compliance with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation". After indicator of achievement (b) (ii), insert a new indicator of achievement reading: "(c) Number of sections of the proposed programme budget for 2006-2007 that reflect a number of outputs deleted because they are obsolete, irrelevant, or of marginal usefulness". Paragraph 29B.31 Under subparagraph (a) (ii) after the words "measures to encourage payment of assessed contributions and related issues", add the words "if mandated". Table 29C.9 At the end of the expected accomplishment, after the word "information", add the words "taking into account Article 101 of the Charter". At the end of indicator of achievement (ii), add the words "taking into account Article 101 of the Charter". Under indicator of achievement (iii), performance measures, before "Number of unrepresented Member States", add a new performance measure, reading "Level of underrepresentation of Member States: to be determined". Paragraph 29C.22 Under subparagraph (a) (ii), after the words "gender balance," add the words "geographical representation,". At the end of subparagraph (b) (i) e, add the words "and taking into account planning for replacement of retiring staff". Table 29D.5 At the end of expected accomplishment (a), add the words "improving application of the Financial Regulations and Rules and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation". In indicator of achievement (a) (iii), replace the word "Full" with the words "Effective and efficient". Table 29D.12 The objective should read: "To ensure efficient, effective, diversified procurement opportunities and high-quality procurement services for the Organization." Add a new expected accomplishment (c) reading: "Improvement in efforts to diversify United Nations suppliers", and a corresponding new indicator of achievement reading: "Number of new suppliers registered". Table 29E.12 At the end of expected accomplishment (f), add the words "and improvement in efforts to diversify United Nations suppliers". Paragraph 29F.20 At the end of subparagraphs (a) and (b), after the words "issues" and "staff", respectively, add the words "observing the principle of geographical representation, taking into account Article 101 of the Charter". Table 29G.12 Tables 29E.6 (Objective), 29E.8 (Objective 1), 29F.7 (Objective), 29F.9 (Objective 1), 29G.6 (Objective), 29G.8 (Objective 1) At the end of the objectives, add "with the goal of achieving greater efficiency and effectiveness of operations". Add a new indicator of achievement reading: "Savings achieved from efficiency measures". 442. The Committee took note of the proposal to integrate the technical secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees into the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management and recommended that the proposal be further considered by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session in the context of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005. 443. The Committee recommended that at its fifty-eighth session the General Assembly be provided with information on performance measures relating to table 29C.9 on the level of underrepresentation of Member States. 444. The Committee urged an increased level of simplicity, transparency and effectiveness of administrative procedures in procurement activities at the United Nations Office at Vienna. 445. The Committee reiterated that the sound administration and management of the United Nations Office at Nairobi should help in strengthening the presence of the United Nations in Africa. Section 30 Internal oversight 446. At its 21st meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Committee considered section 30, Internal oversight, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 30)). 447. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 30 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 448. Satisfaction was expressed for the work of the programme, and the introduction of the results-based budgeting format for executive direction and management was welcomed. 449. The need for more analysis on marginal outputs in accordance with the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation was stressed. It was pointed out that internal oversight should lead by example and that a reduction of 4 out of 70 outputs was not considered sufficient. 450. Questions were raised on the value of triennial reviews, the status of the thematic evaluations, and the status of self-evaluation by programme managers. 451. Concern was expressed about the fact that management consulting falls under the purview of an oversight body and a question was raised as to whether any safeguards against conflict of interest in that regard had been implemented. 452. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 30, Internal oversight, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, subject to the modifications set out below. Table 30.8 In indicator of achievement (a), after "non-compliance" add "by programme managers". In expected accomplishment (b), after "the Organization" add "and increased efficiency". In indicator of achievement (b), replace "recommendations calling for formal" with "on". Indicator of achievement (c) should become (c) (i); add a new indicator reading: "(c) (ii) The level of recovery of erroneous or unauthorized expenditures"; and add under corresponding performance measures "To be determined". In indicator of achievement (d), delete "and assignments". Table 30.10 At the end of expected accomplishment (a), add "in accordance with the mandates". Table 30.12 Add a new indicator of achievement reading: "(iii) Number of cases resolved" and "Performance measures: To be determined". Annex, para. 28.22 (a) (ii) b, Reason for discontinuation After "of the Organization", add "included in the medium-term plan and to enhance support for self-evaluation by other departments and offices". Section 31 Jointly financed administrative activities 453. At its 20th meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Committee considered section 31, Jointly financed administrative activities, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 31)). 454. The representatives of the Secretary-General introduced section 31 (A-D) and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. The Controller clarified that Regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation was not applicable to the activities proposed under section 31 owing to the fact that those activities had not been programmed in the biennium 2002-2003, given their inter-agency nature. 455. Support was expressed for the activities proposed under section 31 (A-D). The presentation of the activities in the section in the results-based format for the first time, using the logical framework and the introduction of quantitative targets for performance measurement, was noted. It was pointed out that the objective and expected accomplishments should be more results-oriented. With respect to the indicators of achievement, views were expressed that they should be further refined in future to constitute measurable guidelines that would make it possible to establish targets for achieving a higher level of efficiency and performance by each organizational unit programmed under section 31. 456. Deep disappointment was expressed about the fact that programme managers for the International Civil Service Commission, the Joint Inspection Unit, the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator had not implemented fully the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, by deleting from their proposals outputs and activities that were obsolete, irrelevant, ineffective, or marginally useful. 457. With regard to section 31A, International Civil Service Commission, while recognizing the role of the Commission within the framework of the policy-making process on the issues of the international civil service, views were expressed that the programme of work of the Commission should reflect more fully the emerging issues and problems of the United Nations common system under the Commission's purview and also the specific needs of the participating organizations. In that context, it was pointed out that the Commission should periodically review its working methods, in line with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/285 of 20 December 2002. 458. The view was expressed that the repatriation grant provided to retiring United Nations staff members had become obsolete after 50 years and needed to be reviewed by the International Civil Service Commission. 459. With regard to section 31B, Joint Inspection Unit, the need for an inter-agency oversight and inspection mechanism within the United Nations common system was generally recognized. Views were expressed in support of the activities of the Joint Inspection Unit. The importance of its reports as thought-provoking instruments that stimulated the debates on specific issues and problems of the common system was acknowledged. Views were also expressed that the Joint Inspection Unit often fell behind the developments taking place within the common system, that the Unit in its programme of work was not always focused on the most critical and vitally important issues of the functioning of the common system and that its reports were too general, theoretical and academic in nature and often missing a focus on vital operational aspects of system functioning. It was recalled that in the past, the General Assembly had expressed its concern about the working methods of the Joint Inspection Unit and requested the Unit to review those methods. Views were expressed that the Unit should centre its attention on core issues of the United Nations common system. Views were also expressed that the time had come to review the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit and revise it in order to adapt it to the present realities and current objectives of the common system. It was also pointed out that Member States should provide more guidance to the Unit in the formulation of its annual programmes of work and in identifying the emerging issues of the common system requiring its attention. 460. The view was expressed that the Joint Inspection Unit had become a deeply flawed and dysfunctional body that delivered little value to Member States and the United Nations system overall. The time had come for a comprehensive review of the Unit's continuing relevance and usefulness. 461. The view was also expressed that accomplishments of the Joint Inspection Unit should be more results-oriented. In that connection, it was noted with appreciation that indicators of achievement in table 31.9 included the number of recommendations endorsed by the legislative bodies of participating organizations and the number of recommendations actually implemented. It was emphasized that the setting of priorities for the reports requested by the participating organizations in the annual programme of work of the Unit was important for strengthening the functions of the Unit. 462. With regard to section 31D, Inter-organizational security measures, general support was expressed for the continuous efforts by the United Nations Security Coordinator towards the establishment of the United Nations security management system in the field. Progress achieved so far in the operation of the security management system in the field was noted and commended. 463. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 31, Jointly financed administrative activities, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, with the following modifications, as well as the provisions in the foreword and introduction: Table 31.24 Under objective 1, add a new expected accomplishment as follows: "Ensuring adequate coordination among United Nations agencies to provide for the safety and security of staff". Add new indicators of achievement as follows: "Reduction in the number of preventable security incidents in the field". "Increase in attendance at joint security training sessions run by the United Nations Security Coordinator in the field". "Compliance by all Resident Coordinators/Humanitarian Coordinators with their responsibilities as `designated officials' for security". 464. The Committee recommended that the Joint Inspection Unit undertake an in-depth review of its statute, working methods and proceedings and present to the Fifth Committee at the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly concrete proposals on how best the actual weaknesses can be addressed in the context of its consideration of the annual programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit. 465. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly, in the context of the annual programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit, request the Unit to indicate the number of reports of the Unit actually considered by the legislative bodies of participating organizations, and the number of recommendations endorsed by those legislative bodies. Table 31.9 Under indicator of achievement (a), add performance measures as follows: Target 2004-2005: to be determined" 466. The Committee welcomed the focus of the Chief Executives Board on developing concerted approaches by the United Nations system to the follow-up to recent conferences and summits to help to maximize mutual reinforcement among the new round of trade negotiations launched at Doha, and the follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development to optimize the contribution of these processes towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 467. The Committee noted the goal of the consolidated CEB secretariat to ensure a more integrated and coordinated United Nations system response to the policy directives and mandates of Member States and looks forward to the implementation by the Chief Executives Board of the relevant parts of General Assembly resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits at the national, regional and international levels. Section 35 Development account 468. At its 19th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Committee considered section 35, Development account, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 469. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced section 35 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the budget section. 470. Support was expressed for the proposals under this section. It was emphasized that this section played an important role in supplementing development activities in accordance with its mandate. It was felt that the proposals were well defined and in line with the objectives contained in the medium-term plan for the period 20022005. 471. A view was expressed that, in order to avoid duplication, it would be preferable that some projects be implemented by relevant specialized agencies. It was considered that while many projects were well formulated and valuable, others did not seem to be of great value. Conclusion and recommendation 472. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of section 35, Development account, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. Programme 7 473. At its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003, the Committee considered the proposed revisions to programme 7, Economic and social affairs, of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (A/58/84). 474. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the proposed revisions and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of them. 475. Support was expressed for the proposed revisions to subprogramme 4, Sustainable development and for the inclusion of the new subprogramme 10, Financing for development. 476. Appreciation was expressed for the focus of activities in subprogramme 4, Sustainable development, on the implementation of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. The view was expressed that the Secretariat should ensure that the themes of the multi-year programme of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development and its role were aligned in the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005. Appreciation was expressed for the emphasis put on the support to be provided to the 10-year review of progress in implementing the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 477. The view was expressed that all references in the narrative of the programme to "the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development" should be replaced by "the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation". Clarification was sought on the interactions between the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, referred to in paragraph 7.5. 478. The view was expressed that some of the narrative proposed for deletion, particularly in paragraphs 7.20 and 7.21 (b) should be retained, and that a reference to General Assembly resolution 47/191 should be included in paragraph 7.21. 479. The inclusion of the phrase "supporting efforts to promote new partnerships" in paragraph 7.21 (e) was questioned since consensus had not been reached on the question in the Second Committee. Queries were raised on how the United Nations provided advisory services to Governments and why specific mention was made to some of the sectors in Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and not others. 480. The view was expressed that paragraph 7.22 (a) should be split into two separate paragraphs, one addressing the "effective implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development" and the other dealing with "strengthening of the Commission on Sustainable Development and its reorientation to support implementation of sustainable development at all levels". 481. With regard to the new subprogramme 10, the view was expressed that the Monterrey International Conference on Financing for Development was one of the most successful and important endeavours of the United Nations in recent years. The establishment of the Financing for Development Office, within the Department of Economic and Social Affairs was considered as an important measure for ensuring that the consensus agreement reached in Monterrey would be followed up effectively. It was considered that the success of the follow-up work to be carried out would depend on a continuing spirit of cooperation with the Bretton Woods institutions and other institutional and non-institutional "stakeholders", as foreseen in the Monterrey Consensus and pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly. 482. Attention was drawn to the need to correct an error in the Spanish version of paragraph 7.44 and to align the Spanish text of paragraph 7.46 (a) with the English version. 483. The Committee welcomed the consideration of the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development in the proposed revisions to programme 7 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005. 484. The Committee stressed the need for urgent measures to be taken to ensure the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. 485. The Committee emphasized the need for adequate substantive and effective support to be provided to the Commission on Sustainable Development as the high-level body within the United Nations concerned with sustainable development and in view of its role in the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. 486. The Committee stressed the need for effective support to be given to the 10-year review of progress in the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. 487. The Committee reiterated the important role of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination in promoting system-wide inter-agency cooperation and coordination to enhance the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. 488. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the revisions proposed by the Secretary-General to programme 7, Economic and social affairs, of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, with the following modifications: Overall revisions Replace all references in the narrative of the programme to "the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development" with "the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation". Paragraph 7.2 Delete the words "and further initiatives" in the fifteenth line. Revise the paragraph to read: "Accordingly, in supporting the implementation of agreed development goals and in line with General Assembly resolution 57/300, special attention will be given to advancing the implementation of development goals embodied in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, resolution 52/2 and related elements of the programmes of action of the above-mentioned international conferences within the purview of the Department, and particularly to promoting effective follow-up of the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development. The mandates emerging from these conferences, and the need to support the calls by the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly for an integrated and coordinated follow-up to and implementation of the United Nations conferences and summits, imply enhanced responsibilities for the programme, including the requirement to provide Member States, on request, with macroeconomic analyses and statistical and demographic analysis and information that can support coherent and effective policy formulation and implementation and assist the international community in its overall implementation effort;". Paragraph 7.6 Delete the words "and/or expert". Paragraph 7.20 Retain the words "decisions of the Commission on Sustainable Development as well as resolutions and decisions adopted by the Economic and Social Council on the recommendation of bodies responsible for energy and natural resources". Paragraph 7.21 (a) Replace the words "and coordinated" with the words ", coordinated and integrated" in the first line. Replace the word "from" by the word "of" in the fifth line and delete the words "both within and outside" in the fifth and sixth lines. Delete the word "partnerships" in the sixth line. Insert the word "relevant" before the word "stakeholders" at the end of the paragraph. Paragraph 7.21 (b) Retain the word "substantive" after the word "providing" in the first line and insert the word "and" after the word "substantive", so that the phrase reads "substantive and effective". Replace the word "gaps" with the word "obstacles" throughout paragraph 7.21 (b). Revise the paragraph to read: "Supporting implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development in all areas of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation while focusing on the thematic clusters contained in the multi-year programme of the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development through strengthening of the knowledge base of sustainable development; technology transfers, making more effective use of national and regional reports and other information on progress in the implementation of sustainable development; and using contemporary methods of data collection and dissemination, including broader use of information technologies;". Paragraph 7.21 (d) At the end of the paragraph add the words "in accordance with the rules of procedure established in that context". Paragraph 7.21 (e) Revise the paragraph to read: "Setting up a transparent and accessible database system for making information available on sustainable development partnerships, involving Governments, international organizations and major groups, and supporting partnership as one of the supplementary means of supporting the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, according to the modalities which were agreed upon by the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session;". Paragraph 7.21 (g) At the end of paragraph 7.21 (g) add the words "upon their request". Delete the words ", including indicators of sustainable development" in the sixth and seventh lines. Paragraph 7.21 (i) Insert the word "and" after the word "regional" and retain the word "international". Add a new paragraph 7.21 (j) reading: "Supporting efforts at the regional level aimed at the implementation of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation in accordance with the decisions of the Commission on Sustainable Development;". Paragraph 7.22 (a) Revise the paragraph to read: "Effective implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development at all levels, inter alia, through partnership initiatives according to the modalities agreed upon by the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session that support implementation of the commitments agreed to at the World Summit on Sustainable Development;". Insert a new paragraph 7.22 (a) bis, reading: "Strengthening of the Commission on Sustainable Development and its reorientation to support the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;". Paragraph 7.22 (b) After the words "Better integration" insert the words "and coordination". Paragraph 7.22 (c) After the words "Improvement in the" insert the words "support extended to the Commission on Sustainable Development in reviewing" and delete the words "monitoring of". Paragraph 7.22 (d) Delete the words "and other mandates in the area of sustainable development" after the words " World Summit on Sustainable Development" at the end of the paragraph. Paragraph 7.22 (e) Revise the paragraph to read "Enabling the Commission on Sustainable Development to effectively review and facilitate the partnerships that support the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session, and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;". Paragraph 7.22 (f) Replace the words "in particular" in the first line with the word "including". Paragraph 7.22 (g) Paragraph 7.23 (b) (i) Revise the paragraph to read: "Progress in the achievement of United Nations objectives and goals on sustainable development, and in particular those related to water, sanitation and human settlements and the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production". Paragraph 7.23 (b) (ii) Insert a new paragraph 7.23 (b) (ii) reading: "The extent to which international organizations have provided support for the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, based on the feedback provided by Member States;". Renumber old paragraph 7.23 (b) (ii) as 7.23 (b) (iii) and revise the text to read: "The number of collaborative arrangements and partnerships in the area of sustainable development involving organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with their mandates, as well as the relevant decisions of the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session in the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;". Paragraph 7.23 (e) Revise the paragraph to read "Provision of information and summary reports on partnership in a transparent, participatory and credible manner, in accordance with the decisions of the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eleventh session;". Paragraph 7.45 (a) Replace the words "relevant bodies" at the end of the paragraph with "institutional stakeholders". Paragraph 7.46 (e) Revise expected accomplishment (e) to read: "Enhanced capacity of Governments, in particular those of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, to participate actively in the financing for development process;". Add a new expected accomplishment (f): "Fuller engagement of Governments to ensure proper follow-up to the implementation of agreements and commitments reached at the Conference and to continue to build bridges between development, finance and trade organizations and initiatives within the framework of the holistic agenda of the Conference." Legislative mandates Insert the following resolutions under programme 7, Economic and social affairs, General Assembly resolutions: 57/249 Culture and development 57/265 Establishment of the World Solidarity Fund 57/266 Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006) Programme 8 489. At its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003, the Committee considered the narrative of the proposed revisions to programme 8 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (A/58/83). 490. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the proposed revisions to the medium-term plan and responded to questions raised during the Committee's consideration of these revisions. 491. Full support was expressed for the programme, which was mandated by the General Assembly in its resolutions 57/2 and 57/7. The view was expressed that the new office should be provided with adequate resources to fulfil its responsibilities. 492. Questions were raised regarding the role of the office, its organization and the coordination and division of responsibilities between subprogrammes. The view was expressed that the major responsibility for the programme should be with the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa. 493. It was felt that the narrative under overall orientation should include a reference to the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development (Monterrey, Mexico, March 2002) and to the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, August-September 2002) in support of the New Partnership for Africa's Development. The view was expressed that the programme should address the problems of capital flight and brain drain. It should also seek to integrate the efforts of African countries and the international community in support of the New Partnership. 494. It was mentioned that the objective of subprogramme 1 should include a reference to sustainable development. Regarding subprogramme 2, it was felt that the strategy should take into account the decision of the Commission on Sustainable Development. The subprogramme should propose an integrated and coordinated follow-up on international conferences as they related to Africa. 495. Regarding subprogramme 3, it was felt that the subprogramme did not put enough emphasis on the need to make use of all the services available in the Department of Public Information. It was mentioned that the strategy of the subprogramme should be expanded to include awareness of the three pillars of sustainable development. It was also felt that the subprogramme should target not only the privileged individuals who had access to Africa Recovery and the Internet, but also all the other actors who might be in a position to help to promote the New Partnership in Africa. 496. The view was expressed that the indicators of achievement of subprogrammes 1 and 2 seemed to be too broad and vague. The indicators should measure the quality and the relevance of the activities carried out under the subprogrammes. The indication of the number of meetings held or of the percentage of recommendations made was not meaningful. What would be more meaningful would be an indication of the outcome of the meetings or an indication of the issues on the agenda of the meetings, which determined the outcome. It was also mentioned that it would be desirable to limit the number of meetings and that the proliferation of workshops, seminars and meetings, the results of which were often not implemented, was not in itself a meaningful measure of success. 497. It was proposed that the following indicators of achievement be added to subprogramme 1: concrete indicators of the level of capacity-building achieved; and steps taken and results obtained in improving market access. 498. The Committee noted that the question of the debt of the African countries constituted an important obstacle to the implementation of NEPAD. 499. It was noted that subprogramme 3 of programme 8 concentrated on public information activities in support of NEPAD. In this regard, the view was expressed that the efforts of the Department of Public Information would be further enhanced through the use of United Nations Radio and the United Nations News Service, in addition to the use of quarterly publications, brochures and web-only articles. 500. The Committee welcomed the Secretary-General's proposals in response to the General Assembly's mandates elaborated in resolutions 57/2, 57/7 and 57/300, culminating with the recognition of the New Partnership for Africa's Development as the framework within which the international community, including the United Nations system, should concentrate its efforts to support Africa's development. 501. The Committee recommended that indicators of achievement should reflect action, results and value achieved. 502. The Committee recommended that the Bretton Woods institutions and donors should continue to be adequately sensitized to the need to address the issue of the debts of African countries, so as to ensure that it would not hinder the effective implementation of NEPAD. 503. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly should approve the revisions proposed by the Secretary-General to programme 8, United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development, of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, with the following modifications: Paragraph 8.4 In the second sentence, after "debt overhang," insert "capital flight, brain drain,". Paragraph 8.5 (a) After the word "mobilization" replace the word "and" with a comma and after the word "coordination" insert the words "and harmonization". Paragraph 8.5 (b) Insert the word "collaboration" after the word "coordination,". Paragraph 8.6 Replace the text of the paragraph with the following: "The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa provides overall coordination and leadership of the programme while the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) and the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat will each play a role at the regional and global levels respectively". Paragraph 8.9 (a) After the word "development", add ", including through the relevant frameworks for South-South cooperation". Paragraph 8.13 Add the following words at the end of the paragraph: ", taking into account the decision of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its new organization and programme of work, especially with regard to the organization of a regional implementation forum". Paragraph 8.17 In the third sentence, after the words "Africa Recovery" add the phrase ", utilizing the daily output of the United Nations News Service, the United Nations web site, United Nations Radio and United Nations Television, and also" and delete the words "along with". In the last sentence, after the words "academic institutions" add the words ", for example, through essay competitions in institutions of learning and other appropriate forums on Africa-related issues to promote awareness within and outside the African continent". At the end of the last sentence replace the words "economic progress" with the words "sustainable development". Under General Assembly resolutions, add: 57/253 World Summit on Sustainable Development 57/273 Ensuring effective secretariat support for sustained follow-up to the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development 56/210 B International Conference on Financing for Development Programme 23 504. At its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003, the Committee considered the proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005. It had before it proposals in respect of programme 23, Public information (A/58/90, annex). 505. The representative of the Secretary-General introduced programme 23 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the programme. 506. Support was expressed for the revised operating model for the Department of Public Information, which aims to improve its ability to deliver effective and targeted information programmes. The view was expressed that the mandate of the Department is complemented by a new mission statement, which will assist the Department to operationalize the mandate. Appreciation was expressed for the usefulness of the information disseminated by the Department through the United Nations web site. 507. The view was expressed that the Secretary-General should be encouraged to expeditiously implement those elements of reform under his sole authority, in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions and decisions already adopted. In that regard, support was expressed for the concrete initiatives taken in recent months concerning the restructuring of the Department of Public Information and the improvement of the United Nations library services. 508. Significant interest was shown in the rationalization of the United Nations information centres around regional hubs. Some delegations expressed strong support for that initiative and urged that the momentum be maintained for progress in other regions. A regional hub would be created in Western Europe to replace nine country-level offices. Concern was also expressed that decisions had been taken without prior consultations with concerned Member States as stated in paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 57/300. Doubt was expressed that the rationalization of the information centres could be implemented before the prior approval of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005 for the Department of Public Information. The Committee was informed that that initiative had been mandated in resolution 57/300 and that the intention to proceed accordingly had been made well known. Views were expressed, however, that regionalization should not result in people in the developing countries being denied access to United Nations information. Clarification was sought on the interpretation of paragraph 15 of resolution 57/300, in which the Assembly, inter alia, took note of the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in action 8 of his report (see A/57/488), to rationalize the network of United Nations information centres around regional hubs. The Committee was informed that the Assembly's request for a progress report on the implementation of the proposal constituted authority to proceed. That was the basis for the proposal contained in the proposed revision to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 and the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. Regionalization in Western Europe would be applied, and the objective of applying that initiative in other regions had been set out in resolution 57/300. It was indicated that there had been no discussion related to a similar arrangement in any other region. 509. With regard to the United Nations information centres, it was stated that the concept of regional hubs was a valid one from the viewpoint of improving efficiency. It was also stated that, in considering a system of regional hubs, it was important to weigh what would be lost by closing existing information centres against the merits created through the reinforced activities. In that connection, it was further stated that the overall support of a host Government should be reflected in plans to implement the proposal of the Secretary-General to rationalize the network of United Nations information centres around regional hubs. 510. Concerns were also expressed, on the other hand, regarding the negative implications of the process of regionalizing the information centres for, it was stated, it could worsen the delivery of adequate information in regions, such as Latin America, where distances and difficulties in access to new technologies made the presence of information centres necessary. 511. Views were expressed that priority areas for the work of the Department should be guided by the revised medium-term plan as well as by the Millennium Declaration. 512. The view was also expressed that expected accomplishments and indicators of achievements were not well formulated, did not cover major areas of work and presented very little useful information on the outcomes. The objectives concerning improving the management of library operations and revitalizing the Publications Board should have been set out, for example. It was observed that the description of the overall orientation of the Department omitted any reference to the progress of changes promised in the reform process, such as an evaluation of all activities. It was suggested that the responsibility of the Dag Hammarskjld Library for implementing subprogramme 3, in coordination with other United Nations libraries, should be discharged within the framework of the recommendations of the Steering Committee for the Modernization and Integrated Management of United Nations Libraries. 513. The importance of multilingualism was stressed, and strong support was expressed for the Department's effort in that area. The importance of the dissemination of information in local languages for local populations was stressed. The view was expressed that multilingualism should be included in the indicators. 514. The view was expressed that information in local languages had the strongest impact on the local population, and that paragraph 23.11 of the proposed revisions should reflect that important element in accordance with paragraph 37 of General Assembly resolution 57/130 B. 515. It was noted that the Department intended to conduct guided tours and briefing programmes in New York, Geneva and Vienna, as outlined in paragraph 23.8 of the proposed revisions. The importance of ensuring equal treatment of public information activities in all United Nations Offices was stressed. Concerns were expressed that the Department's intentions for activities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi were not reflected in the revised medium-term plan. 516. It was noted that the efforts were made to include the provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 in the revised medium-term plan, more specifically in subprogramme 1. Views were expressed that the advocacy role and public information activities in support of Africa's development should not be limited to subprogramme 1, but should also be reflected in subprogramme 2. In that context, it was suggested that the Department's efforts would be further enhanced by utilizing United Nations Radio and United Nations News, in addition to the use of quarterly publications, brochures and web-only articles. 517. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session give further consideration to the proposed revisions to programme 23, Public information, of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, subject to the following modifications: Paragraph 23.1 Replace the first two sentences with the following: "The overarching mandate of the Department is in General Assembly resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946 and its primary mission is to provide, through its outreach activities, accurate, impartial, comprehensive and timely information to the public on the tasks and responsibilities of the United Nations in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization with the greatest transparency, respecting existing mandates and in line with rules 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, to focus its message and concentrate its efforts better and, as a function of performance management, to match its programmes with the needs of its target audiences, on the basis of improved feedback and evaluation mechanisms as set out in the General Assembly resolution 57/130 B." In the last sentence, after the words "has been formulated", insert the words "as welcomed by the Committee on Information,". Paragraph 23.2 In the fourth sentence, after the words "by the reform efforts of the Secretary-General," insert the following: "as approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/300." In the fifth sentence, before the words "laid down by the General Assembly", add the words "in the medium-term plan." Paragraph 23.7 In the third sentence, after the words "around regional hubs", insert the words "where appropriate, in consultation with concerned Member States". Paragraph 23.9 After the words "on priority issues", add the words "drawing on the broad framework set out in the medium-term plan". Paragraph 23.10 In the second sentence, delete the words "and established by the Secretary-General". In the last sentence, after the words "on priority issues", add the words "drawing on the broad framework set out in the medium-term plan and the Millennium Declaration, which was endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/2". In the last sentence, delete the words "as its guide". Paragraph 23.11 Replace the second sentence with "Under the guidance of the Information Centres Service at Headquarters, the United Nations information centres and information components, and regional hubs, as applicable, will play a significant role in disseminating information about the work of the Organization to the peoples of the world, including the areas outlined in the Untied Nations Millennium Declaration, and the information centres, as the `field voice' of the Department of Public Information, and will work through local intermediaries to promote public awareness of and mobilize support for the work of the United Nations at the local level, bearing in mind that information in the local languages has the strongest impact on the local populations." After the words "communication strategies on those issues;", delete the word "and" and add the words "enhanced capacity of the Department to collaborate usefully and actively with clients to deliver the messages of the United Nations; and". Paragraph 23.14 After the words "regional hubs", add the words "where appropriate, in consultation with concerned Member States." Paragraph 23.15 Replace the words "the percentage of clients" with the words "the number and percentage of clients, including media and civil society,". Paragraph 23.17 After the last sentence, add: "The subprogramme will support the efforts of the Strategic Communications Division to strengthen the advocacy role and public information activities of the United Nations in support of Africa's development initiatives, as outlined in General Assembly resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002". Paragraph 23.20 After the word "strengthened", add the words "with the goal of achieving full parity among the six official languages of the United Nations and enhancing the capacity of other languages". Paragraph 23.21 After the words "would include", add the words "(a) a high level of". Add a comma after the words "United Nations" and replace the words "in addressing the priority issues before the Organization." with the words "drawing on the broad framework set out in the medium-term plan; and (b) the availability of all relevant information in various languages, in particular, the six official languages of the United Nations web site.". Paragraph 23.22 After the words "would include the", insert the words "(a) number and". Delete the period at the end of the sentence and add the following: "; and (b) the percentage of the pages of the web site available in the six official languages of the United Nations.". Paragraph 23.24 Replace the first sentence with following: "Within the Department of Public Information, the responsibility for implementing the subprogramme lies with the Outreach Division, within which Dag Hammarskjld Library has the responsibility for coordination with other United Nations libraries and libraries of the wider United Nations system." Paragraph 23.30 At the end of the paragraph, replace the words "the Millennium Declaration as a guide" with the words "the medium-term plan as a guide and taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 55/2 containing the Millennium Declaration". 518. The Committee recommends that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to make proposals, as a matter of priority, to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, through the Committee on Information, in order to ensure the application of common principles and criteria for the provision of guided tours and briefing programmes at all United Nations duty stations, in order to ensure a common approach that places all duty stations on the same footing. C. Evaluation 1. Proposed evaluation themes 519. At its 2nd and 3rd meetings, on 9 June 2003, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the proposed evaluation themes (E/AC.51/2003/2). 520. The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report. Representatives of the Office responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report. 521. The proposal to conduct thematic evaluations on a pilot basis was welcomed as innovative and valuable. The evaluations would fill a gap by providing a systematic review of activities that required concomitant actions by several programmes of the organizations. Agreement was expressed on the criteria for selecting the thematic evaluations, which follow the criteria used for selecting in-depth evaluations. It was noted that the criteria could be refined with experience. The consultative approach to choosing the themes to be considered by the Committee was also welcomed. It was noted that the two themes proposed, namely, integrated water management and post-conflict peace-building, were of high priority and interest. 522. Diverse views were expressed on which theme to select. It was observed that any of the topics listed in table 1 of the report could be selected. Strong interest was expressed in favour of choosing the topic of integrated water management, in light of the recent priority accorded the subject in the United Nations Millennium Declaration and the World Summit on Sustainable Development. 523. Substantial interest was also expressed in the second topic, post-conflict peace-building. As the Office of Internal Oversight Services could not undertake two thematic evaluations at the same time, it was suggested that this topic could be resubmitted for consideration by the Committee at a later date. 524. The view was expressed that water is only one of many issues and that there might be merit to considering a topic such as poverty. 525. Concern was expressed at the possibility that the pilot thematic evaluation report might not be available in time for review by the different relevant intergovernmental bodies and processes before the report was considered by the Committee, should the Committee consider that report at its forty-fourth session in 2004. Clarification was requested as to the specifics of the regulations and rules that govern the timing of the Committee's consideration of evaluation reports, in relation to their consideration by the intergovernmental bodies concerned with the specific programme areas. 526. It was noted that in recent years, the Millennium Summit, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the Monterrey Consensus, the Third World Water Forum and Ministerial Conference held in Japan in March 2003 and the G-8 action plan on water had addressed the issue of water. The view was expressed that water was essential to life and human security and that it was important for all countries to promote good governance and capacity-building to pursue an appropriate water policy. Integrated water management was seen as a cross-cutting theme that would contribute to the attainment of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development. 527. It was also noted that the issue of water was critical to pursuing the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration. Since it was a basic service and, as stated in the report, since progress in the management of freshwater had been neither sufficient nor comprehensive, measures needed to be enhanced in order to achieve the goal. 528. The view was expressed that the evaluation would be taken into account in the deliberations of the Commission on Sustainable Development which would take up water as a main agenda item in 2004. To the extent possible, the evaluation should, in turn, take account of the deliberations at the Commission. 529. The Committee decided to defer to its forty-fourth session the selection of a topic for thematic evaluation, for submission to the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-fifth session and subsequently to be reviewed for its usefulness at its forty-sixth session. 530. The Committee also decided to request the Office of Internal Oversight Services to further develop topics by elaborating the precise and comprehensive context, objective, scope, methodology and intended utilization of the findings of proposals for a pilot evaluation project. 2. In-depth evaluation of the programme on the law of the sea and ocean affairs 531. At its 2nd and 3rd meetings, on 9 June 2003, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the in-depth evaluation of the law of the sea and ocean affairs (E/AC.51/2003/3). 532. The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report. Representatives of the Secretary-General responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report. 533. General satisfaction was expressed with the report and the performance of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. The view was expressed that it was essential to promote the universal acceptance of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and its agreements. In that respect, support was expressed for the recommended review by the Division of its capacity to discharge its different functions. Strong support was expressed for the active participation of the Division in decisions made to establish the new inter-agency mechanism requested by the General Assembly in 2002. 534. As regards the proposal to further synthesize the information received from the competent organizations in the annual report, that was not considered necessary. On the efforts undertaken by the Division to study State practice, concern was expressed that to supplement the low response rate to surveys sent to Member States, the Division was using information gathered by other competent organizations. It was stated that there were no other competent organizations to provide information on the regulatory practices of States since only Member States were in a position to do so. 535. It was also noted that the quality of the comprehensive annual report on oceans and the law of the sea should be maintained. 536. It was observed that the Division had an important role to promote consensus and foster greater acceptance of the international legal regime for the ocean in terms of sustainable development, which should not be limited to the analysis of the economic benefits expected from participation in the regime. 537. Clarifications were requested on who was responsible for preparing the internal assessments mentioned among the categories of information used for the in-depth evaluation. Details were also requested on the specific benefits that had been outlined to States to encourage their submissions of claims on outer limits of the continental shelf and on the status of the related course manual prepared by the Division. Questions were raised about which countries had benefited from training and the award of fellowships. Clarification was requested on the meaning of reconciling environmental boundaries with administrative or political boundaries. 538. The Committee recommended approval of recommendations 1 to 7 of the in-depth evaluation of the programme on the law of the sea and ocean affairs (E/AC.51/2003/3), subject to the observations set out below. 539. The Committee highlighted the important role played by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea in promoting universal participation of the Member States in the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea. In that regard, the Committee emphasized the need to ensure the adequate capacity of the Division to carry out its functions, and that the Division should be encouraged to actively participate in regional cooperation activities on matters relating to oceans and seas. 540. The Committee understands that the International Seabed Authority will be involved in the consultations envisaged in recommendation 1 since some of the issues dealt with at such consultations fall within the mandate of the Authority. 541. Concerning recommendation 4, the Committee considered that the annual report on oceans and the law of the sea should not include assessments of the overall impact of the efforts of the competent organizations and make suggestions for future activities but rather should focus on the issues pertinent to oceans and seas in a systematic and integrated fashion. 3. Triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of global development trends, issues and policies, global approaches to social and microeconomic issues and policies, and the corresponding subprogrammes in the regional commissions 542. At its 2nd and 3rd meetings, on 9 June 2003, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of global development trends, issues and policies, global approaches to social and microeconomic issues and policies and the corresponding subprogrammes in the regional commissions (E/AC.51/2003/4). 543. The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report. Representatives of the Office responded to questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report. 544. Satisfaction was expressed that progress had been made on several of the recommendations. It was noted that some recommendations -- for example, recommendation 4 -- had been partially implemented. There was concurrence with the view of the Office of Internal Oversight Services that the review of the capacity of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to carry out better its analysis of socio-economic development trends, recommended by the Committee for Programme and Coordination, should have proceeded sooner. 545. Comments were made regarding the World Economic and Social Survey. Given the low profile of that publication, it was suggested that a more rigorous comparison be made with the marketing and distribution of similar publications elsewhere. Considering the greater resonance of similar publications of the World Bank and the United Nations Development Programme, the value of the World Economic and Social Survey was questioned. It was suggested that the Department should not be issuing that report, and that it should focus on providing secretariat functions to the intergovernmental processes rather than formulating its own solutions to global economic issues. While the triennial review mentioned improvements made to the content and presentation of the Survey, it did not make it clear whether there was a real effort to reach a wider range of government officials to whom the content of the Survey would be of interest. It was suggested that readers should be charged a fee for the Survey. 546. Regarding recommendation 4, on better integration of analytical and operational activities of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, it was noted that changes in the form of reorganization did not occur until early 2003. The progress made by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in strengthening its survey was proof that integration could take place. However, this progress raised questions about the state of affairs at the other regional commissions, in particular at the Economic Commission for Africa. 547. Regarding the recommended exchange of information among the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the regional commissions (recommendation 5), it was observed that the selection of mutually convenient meeting dates was an important factor for obtaining a better exchange. 548. Regarding the implementation of recommendation 8, on mailing lists, there were concerns that the report contained little detail on progress achieved by ECA. A question was posed about the status of efforts by the regional commissions to sell their publications at a price that the regional markets can bear and about what progress could be achieved regarding the tiered pricing strategy set at Headquarters. 549. The Committee recommended approval of the conclusions and the recommendation of the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of global development trends, issues and policies, global approaches to social and microeconomic issues and policies, and the corresponding subprogrammes in the regional commissions (E/AC.51/2003/4). 550. The Committee felt that the importance of the World Economic and Social Survey was not fully evaluated in the triennial review. The Committee recommended that the relevant departments consider further ways of enhancing its role as a reference tool and requested that its dissemination be promoted as widely as possible, as appropriate. 551. The Committee stressed the need for regional commissions to redouble their efforts in establishing strong linkages with regional and national institutions that are end-users of the outputs of the commissions' work on regional socio-economic analysis, in order to ensure that the findings of such studies can be taken into account at the country and regional levels. 4. Triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of the advancement of women programme 552. At its 2nd and 3rd meetings, on 9 June 2003, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of the advancement of women programme (E/AC.51/2003/5). 553. The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report. Representatives of the Secretary-General responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report. 554. The Committee expressed satisfaction with the quality of the concise report and its informational thrust. The Committee appreciated the number of results already in evidence due to the joint efforts of the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and the Division for the Advancement of Women to implement the recommendations made by the Commission three years ago. 555. The reduction of the backlog (recommendation 1 (a)) in the consideration of State parties' reports by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (from 48 to 17) was applauded. It was observed that the reduction was attributed to ad hoc exceptional measures, and questions were raised on whether consideration had been given to developing a permanent system to deal with this issue. A question was raised about the expected timing of the consideration of the remaining 17 reports. 556. The measures to reduce the outstanding reporting obligations (recommendation 1 (b)) by States parties to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women were commended. The question of how many States had outstanding reporting obligations was raised, and the hope that all States would participate was expressed. 557. The efforts to ensure that non-governmental organizations were informed (recommendation 1 (c)) of a State party's presentation of its report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women were appreciated. At the same time, it was noted that some non-governmental organizations were still unaware of the procedures for submitting reports to the Committee. Further efforts in that respect were required. 558. Support was expressed for the implementation of recommendation 2 since it was preferable for users to access information on the work of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women directly from the Internet rather than relying on documentation published with a 10-year delay. 559. The Committee stressed its interest in the quick implementation of recommendation 3 on achieving gender balance in the United Nations Secretariat, and requested that the effectiveness of the new recruitment, promotion and placement system be evaluated as soon as it was deemed feasible. 560. Regarding mention of a conference to be held in 2005 to review progress achieved 10 years after the Fourth World Conference on Women, the Committee observed that current proposals envisaged holding the 10-year review of the Conference in the context of the annual session of the Commission on the Status of Women. 561. The Committee commended the efforts of the Division for the Advancement of Women and other United Nations programmes and entities to discuss strategies and share work plans (recommendation 5). 562. The Committee commended and encouraged the determination of the Division to facilitate the increased participation of non-governmental organizations in the work of the Commission on the Status of Women. 563. The Committee commended the efforts of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women to develop a strategy for an ombudsman for gender issues. 564. The Committee recommended approval of the conclusions of the triennial review. 565. The Committee recommended that the triennial review and its conclusions thereon be submitted to the Commission on the Status of Women for review and action, as appropriate. A. Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 566. At its 6th meeting, on 11 June 2003, the Committee considered the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 (E/2003/55). The representative of the Secretary-General introduced the report and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the report. 567. It was noted that the annual overview report of the United Nations Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 provided a good general overview of CEB activities, especially with respect to the follow-up to the Millennium Summit and the reporting on progress in the implementation of the Millennium Declaration, as well as the United Nations system's support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development. However, the observation was made that the report should provide adequate data or evidence on results or outcomes of inter-agency coordination. Efforts should be made to avoid repetitive and vague reporting by providing more specific examples of actual accomplishments of CEB. Although the reform and restructuring of the Board and its subsidiary bodies were highly appreciated, it was felt that more needed to be done in regard to follow-up action. 568. The Chief Executives Board was asked to elaborate on the outcomes of its efforts in inter-agency coordination in future reports, providing more analysis to show visible results. It was observed that the report did not fully reflect the work of CEB and that the focus of reporting should relate more to its action-oriented work. It was also suggested that a performance and evaluation regime to measure CEB achievements would prove helpful. 569. The view was expressed that CEB should make further efforts in the area of collaboration in investments in information and communications technology, as suggested by the Board of Auditors (A/57/5 (Vol. I), para. 177). As for staff security and safety, it was noted that a new inter-agency cost-sharing agreement had already been reached. It was explained that the United Nations Security Coordinator was independently responsible for managing the inter-agency cost-sharing arrangements. CEB efforts were focused primarily on the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS in the United Nations workplace. 570. In 2002, for the first time, CEB had considered the possible roles its member organizations could play in the prevention of armed conflict. An integrated approach to preventing armed conflicts was suggested in order to incorporate political, economic and social dimensions. The issue of refugees was also addressed and it was felt that coordination of efforts in that area should be given more attention. Care should also be exercised in linking refugees and terrorism, as refugees were usually victims of conflicts, and were escaping social, political and economic tensions and dangerous circumstances in their home countries. 571. The report reflected the continued support of the Chief Executives Board for NEPAD and the need for greater system-wide support and coordination, particularly at the country level, was stressed. Consultations held by CEB with the NEPAD countries and ECA were welcomed. It was pointed out that the section on NEPAD in the report on inter-agency cooperation should be expanded, given the importance of NEPAD to the United Nations system. It was observed that doubling official development assistance for Africa was not enough; attention needed to be given to debt relief, capital inflows, market access and stopping brain drain. Satisfaction was expressed at CEB according priority attention to Africa's development. The need to focus United Nations system support so as to produce concrete results was emphasized. 572. The World Summit on the Information Society was seen as an opportunity to discuss the interrelated aspects of the information society, including its social, economic and cultural aspects. The importance of the preparatory measures with respect to documents was stressed. 573. Regarding the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the need to implement its goals as a whole was stressed. CEB was urged to ensure that the commitments arrived at in Johannesburg were reflected in renewed political focus on the implementation of Agenda 21. 574. In the area of assistance to countries invoking Article 50 of the Charter, it was noted that the report recounted actions taken by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, but should also cover inter-agency work on the subject. 575. It was stated that the effort of CEB in coordinating inter-agency cooperation at the headquarters level should be better reflected at the country levels. 576. The view was also expressed that the key role played by CEB was that of ensuring the security and safety of United Nations staff and, in this regard, it was suggested that CEB should report on measures being taken to protect staff from the hazards of second-hand smoke on United Nations system premises. 577. The Committee took note of the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 (E/2003/55). 578. The Committee requested that future annual overview reports should be results-oriented, incorporating, among other things, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and progress made towards their accomplishment. 579. The Committee called on CEB to further strengthen coordination among United Nations agencies at the country level in harmonizing and streamlining their practices and procedures. 580. The Committee recommended that CEB should facilitate the exchange of information on practices in measuring programme performance and results, in measuring productivity in service functions and in collaborating on conference management. 581. The Committee recommended that CEB play a role in better coordinating the analysis of the problems of the countries invoking Article 50 of the Charter, and the development of new methodologies to identify the damage to affected States and new mechanisms to determine the appropriate compensation for them. 582. The Committee also emphasized the continued importance of the role of CEB in its system-wide coordination functions with respect to NEPAD. In this regard, the Committee stressed the need for CEB to keep under regulated review the issue of inter-agency coordination on NEPAD. 583. The Committee reiterated the importance of CEB as an invaluable tool in ensuring successful inter-agency cooperation within the United Nations system and, in particular, recalled the appeal made to the Secretary-General to utilize CEB to promote system-wide coordination on sustainable development and to ensure collaboration between the United Nations system and international financial institutions for the implementation of the outcomes of the Johannesburg Summit. 584. The Committee recommended that CEB include, in the part of its annual report devoted to inter-agency cooperation in the area of management, information on coordination and cooperation in the fields of human resources and finances. B. New Partnership for Africa's Development Future engagement of the United Nations system with the New Partnership for Africa's Development 585. At its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 9 and 10 June 2003 the Committee considered the report of the Secretary-General on the future engagement of the United Nations system with the New Partnership for Africa's Development (E/AC.51/2003/6). 586. The Director of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa introduced the report and responded to questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report at the 3rd and 5th meetings. The representative of the Economic Commission for Africa provided clarifications in response to questions. The Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Africa responded to the questions raised by the Committee at its 5th meeting, on 10 June 2003. 587. Much appreciation was expressed for the report on the future engagement of the United Nations system with the New Partnership for Africa's Development, which was considered as useful in highlighting the evolving nature and scope of the activities of the United Nations system in support of the New Partnership for Africa's Development. 588. It was noted, that in its resolution 57/7, the General Assembly had welcomed NEPAD as the framework around which the international community, including the United Nations system should organize its support for Africa's development. It was an African-designed and African-led initiative, based on the principles of ownership and partnership, owned by African Governments and peoples. It also required international partnership for its successful implementation. NEPAD was a vehicle for Africa's economic and social development and integration. 589. The United Nations system had an important role to play in realizing the objectives of NEPAD. Noting General Assembly resolution 57/7, in particular paragraphs 24 to 33, delegations emphasized the need for the agencies of the United Nations system to enhance the coherence of, and their collaboration and coordination in their work. In this regard, satisfaction was expressed at the use of existing programming and coordination tools at the national, regional and global levels. Satisfaction was also expressed at the important coordinating role of the Economic Commission for Africa in the regional consultative meetings of United Nations agencies working in Africa. 590. Note was taken of the cluster approach adopted by the regional consultative meetings as a vehicle for coordinated response by the United Nations system, and the role envisaged for conveners of the relevant clusters. Questions were raised about some of the agencies assigned to convene certain clusters. It was suggested that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should have been the convener of the cluster for agriculture, trade and market access; and the United Nations Environment Programme for the cluster on environment, population and urbanization. It was also stressed that the scope of the cluster on peace and security should be widened to include mass education and literacy of the poor. It was stated that care should be taken so that inter-agency rivalry should not be allowed to hinder inter-agency cooperation in support of the implementation of NEPAD. Clarification was provided to the effect that conveners were considered facilitators rather than lead agencies. It was pointed out that UNCTAD was the lead agency for the sub-cluster on market access and UNEP for the sub-cluster on environment. 591. It was widely acknowledged that African countries should take a lead role in mobilizing resources for the implementation of NEPAD. They should adopt policies and measures to stimulate domestic savings, as well as to attract foreign direct investment and portfolio flows. At the same time, Africa's development partners could play an important supportive role, by increasing official development assistance and reforming the modalities for its disbursement, by granting debt cancellation and by providing trade concessions. In that regard, action to lift customs duties and quantitative restrictions on imports from, and to cancel the debt of, the least developed countries was noted. 592. One of the most significant impediments to the development of Africa was the persistence of conflicts in Africa. More effort needed to be exerted by African countries, as well as the international community, at conflict prevention, resolution and management in the region. Weak economic growth was another constraint. A preliminary report on the economic performance of Africa in 2002 showed that out of the 53 countries in the region only five had achieved a growth rate of 7 per cent and five had registered a negative growth rate. Such uneven performance foreshadowed the difficulty that Africa would have in attaining the Millennium Development Goals. 593. The establishment of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa was welcomed as an important secretariat support structure for NEPAD at United Nations Headquarters, as envisaged in resolution 57/7. The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa would assist the Secretary-General in his advocacy role, facilitate coherence and coordination in the work of the United Nations at Headquarters and complement coordination at the national and regional levels. It was observed that the Office of the Special Adviser should be strengthened through the provision of adequate human and financial resources. 594. The view was expressed that ownership of development processes by African countries played a critical role in their success. It was noted that, at the end of September 2003, Japan would hold the third Tokyo International Conference on African Development to support NEPAD by mobilizing international resources and expanding global partnership. The hope was expressed that the deliberations there would further strengthen international efforts for African development. 595. The view was expressed that there was a need to align some clusters more closely with those United Nations agencies that had the technical and institutional comparative advantage on particular issues, and that the possibility should be considered of involving additional agencies, such as UNCTAD with regard to trade-related issues and UNEP with regard to the Action Plan of Environment Initiative of NEPAD. 596. The Committee took note and welcomed with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on future engagement of the United Nations system with the New Partnership for Africa's Development (E/AC.51/2003/6). 597. The Committee also stressed that NEPAD was an initiative designed and owned by African Governments and peoples and was a genuine call for a new relationship based on constructive partnership, and emphasized that NEPAD is a holistic and integrated initiative for the social and economic development of Africa. 598. The Committee welcomed the implementation of NEPAD as a work in progress. It also noted that the United Nations system had demonstrated a strong commitment to NEPAD and had developed an operational framework to support NEPAD at the national, regional and global levels. 599. The Committee also welcomed the establishment of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, at the level of Under-Secretary-General. It further stressed that the mandate of the Office of the Special Adviser should be matched with adequate resources, in accordance with paragraph 26 of General Assembly resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002, to enable the Office to function efficiently and effectively, as well as to have a positive impact on the implementation of NEPAD. 600. The Committee reiterated that support for NEPAD, as mandated by the General Assembly in paragraphs 7 and 29 of its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002, required that all organizations of the United Nations system work together in partnership with the African Union and other regional and subregional organizations to ensure the full and effective implementation of the objectives of NEPAD. 601. The Committee recommended that relevant organizations of the United Nations system should assume the role of convener, consistent with their fields of competence and capacity, while complying with the need to avoid inter-agency rivalry, strengthening coordination and collaboration, in order to ensure their effective involvement in providing added value to the implementation of NEPAD. In this regard, the Committee stressed that the coordination function should be carried out at the regional and subregional levels by the Economic Commission for Africa and should be closely coordinated by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa. 602. The Committee also emphasized the continued importance of the role of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination in its system-wide coordination functions with respect to NEPAD. In this regard, the Committee stressed the need for the Board to keep under regular review the issue of inter-agency coordination on NEPAD. 603. The Committee further recommended that, in order for it to continue monitoring work in progress in support of NEPAD, the General Assembly should request the Secretary-General to report to the Committee at its forty-fourth session on further future engagement of the United Nations system with NEPAD. 604. The Committee also recommended that the General Assembly requests the Secretary-General to submit, annually, a progress report on the implementation of NEPAD, for consideration by the General Assembly under the relevant agenda item. Results approach in the United Nations: implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration 605. At its 2nd meeting, on 9 June 2003, the Committee considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled "Results approach in the United Nations: implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration" (A/57/372 and Corr.1), as well as the comments of the Secretary-General and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon (A/57/372/Add.1). 606. Inspector Doris Bertrand introduced the report and responded to questions raised during its consideration by the Committee. A representative of the CEB secretariat introduced the report containing the comments of the Secretary-General and CEB thereon. 607. The Committee recalled that, in its resolution 57/303, the General Assembly had taken note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit and had referred it to the Committee for its consideration. It was pointed out that part I of the report, dealing with results-based management, results-based budgeting and planning in the context of the programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 and the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 had been discussed by the Fifth Committee at the resumed fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly. 608. The Committee appreciated the effort made by the inspector, noting that the report highlighted important conceptual elements and that it was timely and the issues relevant. Inspector Bertrand was congratulated for having taken up extremely complex issues in a wide-ranging report, addressing a multiplicity of issues, including results-based budgeting for implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration; achieving better system-wide coordination at the country level; more effective follow-up of the outcomes of summits and conferences; mutual accountability issues; and monitoring and reporting processes. 609. The Committee felt that the report was nevertheless complex and not readily accessible, and put forward recommendations that were too sweeping and ambitious and not practical. 610. Part I of the report, dealing with results-based management of the United Nations, raised the question of the efficacy of the current results-based budgeting, planning and programming instruments, and recommended steps that needed to be taken to improve them. Interest was shown in elements of recommendations 1 and 2, especially as they pertained to improving the capacity of the Secretariat for implementing results-based budgeting through training and related measures. Reference was made to the need to fully implement General Assembly resolution 55/231 on results-based budgeting. 611. The view was expressed that the exact meaning of the words "programmes and activities" in paragraph 12 of the report was not clear and that paragraphs 28 and 29 also seemed to dilute the value of the concept of "results" itself. The view was expressed that, taking into account paragraphs 8 and 9 of General Assembly resolution 55/231, the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement should be properly stated as those attainable by the Organization. 612. The Committee, while recognizing the need to further improve the strategic value of the medium-term plan, considered that it remained the principal programmatic policy directive of the United Nations, which could not be replaced by the new instruments proposed by the inspector since the Organization needed a strategic framework linked to the budget process. The view was expressed concerning the relevance of maintaining the medium-term plan and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. It was recalled that results-based budgeting had been the subject of exhaustive examination in the Committee for Programme and Coordination and had led to revision of the Regulations and Rules. That process had culminated in the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 55/231, which was the legislative mandate for its implementation. 613. As to part II of the report and its recommendations, the Committee was of the opinion that those issues did not warrant further action but contained elements that could be drawn upon by Member States and secretariats as they addressed related issues. The Committee concurred with the statement of CEB that the report would influence future thinking within the United Nations system on the wide range of issues and concerns it covered. 614. Delegations emphasized the merit of applying a results-based approach in the context of the biennial budget, and stressed the importance of expressing accomplishments and measures of achievement in less general terms in order to make them more specific in terms of what the Secretariat was accountable for. 615. The view was expressed that recommendations 3 to 8 required caution and seemed to be too ambitious. In particular, concerning recommendation 3 one delegation shared the observation of CEB in paragraph 11 of its report (A/57/372/Add.1). As to recommendation 8, the delegation pointed out that option l of recommendation 8 contradicted with the direction taken in the initiative by the Secretary-General presented in 2002. 616. The need for the Joint Inspection Unit to provide more focused reports was emphasized. It was questioned whether the Unit's method of work was conducive to meeting the expectation of Member States and suggested a need for independent assessment of whether the system produced results commensurate with its cost. 617. The Committee recommends that the General Assembly: (a) Take note of recommendations 1 and 2, while recognizing the shared responsibility of the Secretary-General and Member States in the design of a results-based budgeting format and the prerogative of the General Assembly to approve any change to the results-based budgeting format in the medium-term plan. In that regard, the Committee recognizes the need for further training for programme managers to better implement the results-based budgeting approach in the United Nations system; (b) Take note of recommendations 3 to 8; the Committee considers that they are not appropriate at this stage for further action, bearing in mind doubts about their feasibility and practicability. 618. The Committee recommends that the Joint Inspection Unit be urged to make additional efforts to improve the presentation and formats of its reports in order to make them more focused, concise and reader-friendly, and also recommends that the General Assembly review those ongoing efforts during its fifty-eighth session. 619. The Committee notes that the General Assembly has taken note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit and the comments of the Secretary-General and CEB thereon. 620. In its resolution 57/282 of 20 December 2002, the General Assembly requested the Committee for Programme and Coordination to continue to observe its methods of governing the drafting and format of its reports. The Assembly also encouraged the Committee to continue its discussions on improving its working methods and procedures within the framework of its mandate with a view to further enhancing its effectiveness and continued relevance. 621. The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002, entitled "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change", reaffirmed the roles of the Fifth Committee, the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in the intergovernmental consideration of the planning, programming and budgeting process. The Assembly invited the Committee for Programme and Coordination to continue to improve its working methods. 622. The request of the Assembly was welcomed and views were expressed about the need to examine practical measures for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the Committee's work. Measures for improving the working methods of the Committee should be pragmatic and realistic. Terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and Coordination 623. It was suggested that the Committee recommend reaffirmation of its terms of reference as set out in Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX), as well as its function as the main subsidiary organ of the Council and the General Assembly for planning, programming and coordination, as well as the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation. 624. Problems of documentation, conference rooms and interpretation in meetings, which affect the work of the Committee, need to be resolved. The need for documentation to be submitted to it in accordance with the six-week rule was emphasized, as was the need for proper conference resources for its sessions. Streamlining the work of the Committee 625. Since three bodies are involved in the budgetary process, it was noted that measures should also be taken to streamline the work of the Committee and to avoid duplication with other bodies. The suggestion was made that the Committee should consider programmatic aspects of the programme budget and refrain from addressing budgetary issues, including figures and resources. The discussions should be strategic and policy-oriented. As a practical matter, the Committee should strive to add value in its mandated areas of work. 626. It was suggested that a strategic segment for a maximum period of three or four days at the beginning of each session of the Committee was needed to provide a forum for members to focus on strategic issues, the policy direction of the medium-term plan or the budget proposal, and results achieved. For high-level representatives from capitals, it would be impossible to attend a session of the Committee of four or six weeks' duration. On the other hand, it was felt that guidance at the political level was necessary in order to cope with the tasks entrusted to the Committee. Consequently, sessions should consist of two parts: an introductory high-level segment and an additional segment for a more detailed discussion at the working level. Duration of the session and focus of its work 627. It was proposed that the Committee's session be shortened to not more than three weeks every year and that the Committee concentrate on items that concern subsidiary organs whose main task is to give guidance for planning, programming and coordination. Therefore, the Committee should limit its work to the review of the medium-term plan and the proposed programme budget. Another view was expressed that given the heavy programme of work, the shortening of the Committee's session would not be realistic. 628. It was suggested that the Committee devote more attention to the assessment of programme performance and evaluation. This would be useful for both Member States and programme managers. Evaluation identifies the added value of programmes and activities. It can make a concrete contribution to future planning and budget cycles by providing comments on the outcomes achieved in past cycles. In this connection, the Committee would need to draw not only on in-depth and thematic evaluations, but also on the outcomes of self-evaluation by programme managers and of the programme performance reports. Formal meetings 629. In order to make optimal use of time, it was proposed that the formal meetings be concise. In the same vein, rather than a section-by-section consideration of the programme budget, it could be discussed part-by-part. Time limits on interventions and deadlines for the submission of proposals for conclusions and recommendations are useful and should be observed. While recognizing that deliberations of the Committee provide a unique opportunity for direct interaction with programme managers, it could be useful to focus the discussion more on the practical outcomes of the Committee's work. It is important that in planning meetings every effort be made to ensure that the relevant programme managers, and not officers-in-charge, participate in formal meetings of the Committee. This is especially relevant when it comes to the consideration of the relevant sections of the budget or programmes of the medium-term plan. The provision for the rollover of items within a day is a sound practice and should be observed. Informal consultations 630. It was pointed out that the format of intergovernmental negotiations word by word is not optimal for all aspects of the work of the Committee. In addition to being very time-consuming, it tends to dilute the weight of good ideas. 631. Formal negotiations on texts should be kept to the minimum necessary. An effort should be made to work on the basis of texts prepared by the Chair. In trying this process, the Committee should decide not to spend time on the negotiation of the evaluation and coordination items; instead, the Chairman should be entrusted with preparing their conclusion. 632. Informal consultations of the Committee should focus strictly on the drafting of its conclusions and recommendations. They should not be viewed as yet another opportunity for the continuation of the debate from the formal meetings. Interaction with the representatives of the Secretariat in the informal consultations should be limited to receiving information indispensable for a particular delegation for taking a position with respect to specific conclusions and recommendations being drafted. Delegations should participate in the informal consultations in a spirit that is different from that of the formal meetings with a view to preparing the report of the Committee. The Committee should not spend time on formalities in the informal consultations. In view of the subsidiary nature of the Committee and its technical role for the parent bodies, delegations should participate in a spirit of technical contribution. The participation of observers is welcome in the formal meetings. But it was suggested that, in the informal meetings, where the decision-making takes place, active participation in the discussion should be limited to the elected members of the Committee. When the members are in agreement on a decision, they can proceed with that action and should not wait until the observers are accommodated. In other words, observers cannot impede the progress of the work of the members of the Committee. Report of the Committee 633. The report of the Committee is too long and needs streamlining. A useful introduction should be prepared at the beginning of the report, addressing cross-cutting issues. These would be the Committee's strategic observations on the programme budget and evaluation issues. Therefore, the section-by-section comments should be presented in clear narrative form, rather than the present unreadable "delete sentence two and add ..." form. 634. The treatment of the report of the Committee in the Economic and Social Council by simply taking note of it is not productive. The Council should be requested to provide its assessment of and expectations for the reports of the Committee. 635. A letter from the Chairman to the Presidents of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly should accompany the report of the Committee, highlighting the main issues. 636. The successful introduction of videoconferencing to the Committee was frequently welcomed as a satisfactory operational and cost-effective tool for intergovernmental activity. This method should be developed further. 637. It was suggested that the Committee consider discontinuing its consideration of the triennial reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and focus instead on thematic evaluation reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and on greater attention to the results and follow-up to evaluation reports of the Joint Inspection Unit. Conclusions and recommendation 638. The Committee considered the issue of its working methods and decided to remain seized of the matter. 639. The draft provisional agenda, as set out below, for the forty-fourth session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, has been prepared on the basis of existing legislative authority, and in the light of recommendations adopted by the Committee at its forty-third session: 1. Election of officers. 2. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work. 3. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations. Outline of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 4. Programme questions: (a) Programme planning: Programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium Report of the Secretary-General on the programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium 2002-2003 (b) Proposed medium-term plan for the period 2006-2009; Report of the Secretary-General on the proposed medium-term plan for the period 2006-2009 (in fascicle form) (c) Evaluations. Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the role of evaluation findings in programme design, delivery and policy directives (see A/57/16, para. 256) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the further development of topics for a pilot evaluation Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the in-depth evaluation of public administration, finance and development (see A/57/16, para. 259 (b)) Note by the Secretary-General (E/AC.51/2001/2) transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-first session on the in-depth evaluation of sustainable development (see A/56/16) Note by the Secretary-General (E/AC.51/2001/3) transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-first session on the in-depth evaluation of the population programme (see A/56/16) 5. Coordination questions: (a) Report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination; Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2003 (b) New Partnership for Africa's Development. Report of the Secretary-General on further future engagement of the United Nations system with the New Partnership for Africa's Development (see E/AC.51/2003/L.5/Add.43, para. 19) 6. Report(s) of the Joint Inspection Unit. 7. Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate. 8. Provisional agenda for the forty-fifth session. 9. Adoption of the report of the Committee on its forty-fourth session. Agenda of the forty-third session of the Committee 3 Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations. (a) Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005; (b) Proposed revisions to the medium-term for the period 2002-2005; (c) Evaluation. (b) New Partnership for Africa's Development; 6. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit. 8. Provisional agenda for the forty-fourth session. 9. Adoption of the report of the Committee on its forty-third session. List of documents before the Committee at its forty-third session A/57/372 and Corr.1 Report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled "The results approach in the United Nations: implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration" A/57/372/Add.1 Comments by the Secretary-General and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled "The results approach in the United Nations: implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration" A/58/6 Report of the Secretary-General on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (Foreword and Introduction) A/58/6 (Sect. 1) Overall policy-making, direction and coordination A/58/6 (Sect. 2) General Assembly affairs and conference services A/58/6/ (Sect. 3) and Corr.1 Political affairs A/58/6 (Sect. 4) Disarmament A/58/6 (Sect. 5) Peacekeeping operations A/58/6 (Sect. 6) Peaceful uses of outer space A/58/6 (Sect. 8) Legal affairs A/58/6 (Sect. 9) Economic and social affairs A/58/6 (Sect. 10) Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States A/58/6 (Sect. 11) United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development A/58/6 (Sect. 12) Trade and development A/58/6 (Sect. 13) International Trade Centre (UNCTAD/WTO) A/58/6 (Sect. 14) Environment A/58/6 (Sect. 15) Human settlements A/58/6 (Sect. 16) Crime prevention and criminal justice A/58/6 (Sect. 17) International drug control A/58/6 (Sect. 18) Economic and social development in Africa A/58/6 (Sect. 19) Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific A/58/6 (Sect. 20) Economic development in Europe A/58/6 (Sect. 21) Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean A/58/6 (Sect. 22) Economic and social development in Western Asia A/58/6 (Sect. 23) Regular programme of technical cooperation A/58/6 (Sect. 24) Human rights A/58/6 (Sect. 25) Protection of and assistance to refugees A/58/6 (Sect. 26) Palestine refugees A/58/6 (Sect. 27) Humanitarian assistance A/58/6 (Sect. 28) Public information A/58/6 (Sect. 29) Management and central support services A/58/6 (Sect. 29A) Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management A/58/6 (Sect. 29B) Office of the Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts A/58/6 (Sect. 29C) Office of Human Resources Management A/58/6 (Sect. 29D) Office of Central Support Services A/58/6 (Sect. 29E) Administration, Geneva A/58/6 (Sect. 29F) Administration, Vienna A/58/6 (Sect. 29G) Administration, Nairobi A/58/6 (Sect. 30) Internal oversight A/58/6 (Sect. 31) Jointly financed administrative activities A/58/6 (Sect. 35) Development account A/58/70 Report of the Secretary-General on the progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures A/58/83 Note by the Secretary-General on the proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005: Programme 8: United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development A/58/84 Note by the Secretary-General on the proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005: Programme 7: Economic and social affairs A/58/90 Note by the Secretary-General on the proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005: Programme 23: Public information E/2003/55 Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 E/AC.51/2003/1 and Add.1 Annotated provisional agenda E/AC.51/2003/2 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on proposed evaluation themes E/AC.51/2003/3 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the indepth evaluation of the programme on the law of the sea and ocean affairs E/AC.51/2003/4 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of the global development trends, issues and policies, and global approaches to social and microeconomic issues and policies, and the corresponding subprogrammes in the regional commissions E/AC.51/2003/5 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fortieth session on the in-depth evaluation of the advancement of women programme E/AC.51/2003/6 Report of the Secretary-General on the future engagement of the United Nations system with the New Partnership for Africa's Development E/AC.51/2003/7 Letter dated 23 May 2003 from the Chairman of the Working Party on the Medium-term Plan and the Programme Budget of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development addressed to the Chairman of the Committee for Programme and Coordination E/AC.51/2003/L.1/Rev.2 Note by the Secretariat on the status of documentation for the forty-third session E/AC.51/2003/L.2 Note by the Secretariat containing the proposed programme of work for the forty-third session E/AC.51/2003/L.3 Note by the Secretariat on the current notional costs of documentation and meeting services; utilization of conference-servicing resources E/AC.51/2003/L.4 Note by the Secretariat on the draft provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-fourth session of the Committee E/AC.51/2003/L.5 and Draft report of the Committee on its forty-third Add.1-40 and 42-44 session E/AC.51/2003/INF.1 List of delegations E/AC.51/2003/CRP.1 Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate 