%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|TIMOR-LESTE|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|EAST TIMOR SITUATION|

Fifty-eighth session Agenda item 140 Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Summary The present report provides information on the proposed donation of assets of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) to the Government of Timor-Leste. The inventory value of the assets proposed for donation amounted as at 30 June 2003 to some $35.3 million and represents 67 per cent of the total inventory value of UNMISET assets. The donation of the Mission's assets has been guided by the principles endorsed by the General Assembly in section VII of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994. The action to be taken by the General Assembly is set out in section III of the report. 1. The United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) was established by Security Council resolution 1410 (2002) of 17 May 2002 for an initial period of 12 months. By the same resolution, the Council decided, inter alia, that the Mission would fully devolve all operational responsibilities to the East Timorese authorities over a two-year period. The mandate entrusted to the Mission was subsequently extended by the Council by its resolution 1480 (2003) of 19 May 2003 until 20 May 2004. 2. In the context of its downsizing and progressive devolution of operational responsibilities to the Government of Timor-Leste and in order to provide maximum assistance to the East Timorese authorities in achieving an acceptable level of sustainable government administration, UNMISET has identified for donation to the host Government, on a free-of-charge basis, assets with inventory value of $35,262,900 (corresponding residual value of $15,879,900), representing 67 per cent of the total inventory value of the Mission's assets as at 30 June 2003. The donation of those assets would significantly enhance the operational capabilities of the Government of Timor-Leste, in particular of the National Police (PNTL), support the rehabilitation process in the country and contribute to the successful completion of the Mission's mandate. 3. The selection of assets proposed for donation has been guided by the principles endorsed by the General Assembly in section VII of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and is based on a determination that the assets are not required, nor are they suitable for transfer to other missions or for temporary storage at the United Nations Logistics Base in Brindisi, Italy. Furthermore, owing to the remote location of the Mission, the cost of dismantling, refurbishing, packing and shipping the assets would render such transfer largely uneconomical. 4. The asset disposal plan formulated by the Mission provides for the progressive release of fully functional facilities and equipment to the Government of Timor-Leste commencing in October 2003, in advance of the formal liquidation of the Mission and in concert with its drawdown plan. Information on the implementation of the asset disposal plan of the Mission and on the actual disposition of the donated assets will be provided in the context of the final disposition of assets report of UNMISET upon completion of the Mission's liquidation. A summary of assets proposed for donation to the Government of Timor-Leste is shown in the table below and detailed in section II of the present report. Summary of assets proposed for donation to the Government of Timor-Leste (Thousands of United States dollars) Category of assets proposed for donation Quantity Inventory value Residual Communications, information technology and office equipment Vehicular equipment Prefabricated buildings Miscellaneous equipment Generators, petrol, water and septic tanks Accommodation, refrigeration and medical equipment Security equipment (weapons) Total II. Assets proposed for donation to the Government of Timor-Leste: supplementary information 5. UNMISET assets shown in the preceding table have been proposed for donation to the Government of Timor-Leste based on the following considerations: (a) Communications, information technology and office equipment. The assets proposed for donation under this category include telephone, radio, broadcasting, satellite and complementary communications equipment and workshop tools; desktop, laptop and palmtop computers, printers, monitors, servers and data-processing workshop tools, as well as photocopiers, safes and various office equipment. Those assets are currently deployed at local police stations in support of the National Police operations, or will be progressively transferred to the Government of Timor-Leste as part of the fully functioning facilities to support the establishment of government administrative offices in the country. The removal of those assets would significantly reduce the command, control and communications capability of the National Police and hinder the effective functioning of government administration; (b) Vehicular equipment. The assets proposed for donation under this category include 716 light, 13 medium, 3 heavy and 7 specialized (forklifts and airfield support) vehicles as well as workshop tools and equipment. The vehicles are mainly right-hand drive, have been subject to the poor road conditions in East Timor and will be over four years old at the end of the Mission's mandate, approaching the age at which they would be presented for write-off. The Government of Timor-Leste has requested the donation of the vehicles for use by PNTL and other government departments; Prefabricated buildings. The assets proposed for donation under this category have been received from peacekeeping and other missions and include hard-wall and soft-wall accommodation facilities, ablution, kitchen and storage units as well as tentage. They have been used to establish the facilities for the Mission headquarters, UNMISET Force headquarters and military accommodation in Dili and Cova Lima, two military hospitals, office accommodation and warehouses in regions and support bases. The donation of those items in situ would accelerate significantly the speed at which the Government of Timor-Leste will be able to establish support bases for the National Police and central and regional offices for various branches of the Government; (d) Miscellaneous equipment. The assets proposed for donation under this heading include construction equipment and tools, electrical and lighting fixtures, water pumps and sewage equipment, binoculars and night observation devices, audio-visual and photographic equipment, security screening equipment, surveying tools, various furniture items, sea containers, warehousing equipment and general purpose tools, as well as airfield meteorological stations and bridges installed on Mission supply routes. The donation of those assets would support the establishment of fully functional facilities for PNTL and government administration offices and significantly improve the road infrastructure of the country; (e) Generators, petrol, water and septic tanks. The assets proposed for donation under this heading are currently deployed in UNMISET locations to be handed over to the Government of Timor-Leste as fully functional facilities, in PNTL stations and other government infrastructure. The donation of those assets, particularly the generators, would significantly enhance operational capabilities of the government administration and the National Police in areas where local electrical power supply does not exist or is erratic and the sanitation infrastructure remains undeveloped; (f) Accommodation, refrigeration and medical equipment. The assets proposed for donation under this heading include air conditioners, household appliances and kitchen equipment, refrigerators and refrigeration containers as well as a fully equipped surgical theatre and medical laboratory equipment. Those assets are in use mainly at local PNTL stations and in the two UNMISET military hospitals equipped with United Nations-owned equipment. The donation of those assets would support the normal operation of police stations and contribute to the improvement of the national medical infrastructure; (g) Security equipment (weapons). The assets proposed for donation under this heading include side arms (pistols) and gas canister launchers currently used by the National Police exclusively for training purposes. The donation of those assets would enable the National Police College to continue training new recruits in the use of small arms and basic riot control equipment and would have a significant impact on the improvement of basic training programmes. A precondition of the donation of weapons will be the assurance by the Government of Timor-Leste that the donated items will only be used for training purposes and will remain with the National Police College until their final destruction. 6. The action to be taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session in connection with the financing of UNMISET is to approve the donation of assets with an inventory value of $35,262,900 and corresponding residual value of $15,879,900 to the Government of Timor-Leste on a free-of-charge basis. 