%%%TRAINING PROGRAMMES|PROJECT ACTIVITIES|EXPERTS|UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES|INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE|LEADERSHIP|KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT|PARTNERSHIP|RESIDENT COORDINATORS|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS|AIDS|HUMAN RIGHTS|GOVERNANCE|HUMAN RESOURCES|CAPACITY BUILDING|

Fifty-eighth session * A/58/150. Item 101 (b) of the provisional agenda* Training and research: United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy Report of the Director of the United Nations System Staff College on its work, activities and accomplishments Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General transmits herewith to the General Assembly the first report by the Director of the United Nations System Staff College on its work, activities and accomplishments pursuant to General Assembly resolution 55/207. Summary The report outlines the objectives of the College and sets out its outputs, activities and projects since the new statute of the College, approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/278, came into force on 1 January 2002. It also deals with the College governance and structure, and outlines its future directions. In May 2003, a new Director was appointed to lead the Staff College into its new phase as a distinct entity within the United Nations system, building upon the work accomplished by its first Director to create the foundation and infrastructure for the College over a period of five years. The report highlights the very considerable progress made by the College in its first 18 months as a distinct institution within the United Nations system. The General Assembly may wish to reiterate its support for the objectives of the College and call upon it to further strengthen its contribution to the effectiveness and cohesion of the system at the service of Member States. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Historical background Objectives Outputs Promoting a learning culture Developing leadership and management capacity Strengthening knowledge management Developing collaborative partnerships Activities Projects Expert services College governance and structure Human and financial resources Future developments Full-service capability Client responsiveness Decentralized delivery Collaboration with other providers Internal capacity-building Concluding remarks 1. The present report is the first on the United Nations System Staff College since it became a distinct institution within the United Nations system on 1 January 2002. 2. The report, submitted in accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 55/278 of 12 July 2001, covers the 18-month period from 1 January 2002, when the statute came into effect, to 30 June 2003. II. Historical background 3. The idea of establishing a Staff College to serve the United Nations system was a direct response to long-standing perceptions of the need to strengthen the coherence and effectiveness of the international civil service. The first investigations into the feasibility of creating a Staff College were begun in 1969. The College itself began operations as a project entrusted to the International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization in 1996. 4. Towards the end of the project, in August 2000, an independent evaluation was carried out. The Independent Evaluation Team recommended establishment of a full-fledged United Nations Staff College and a draft statute was prepared. In December 2000, the General Assembly authorized the establishment of a United Nations System Staff College and extended the Staff College project by one year, to allow for a smooth transition to its new status. 5. In July 2001, the General Assembly formally approved the statute of the new United Nations System Staff College (see resolution 55/278, annex). The Board of Governors held its first session in Geneva in November 2001 and the College began operations as a distinct institution within the United Nations system on 1 January 2002. III. Objectives 6. According to its statute (article II), the College is to serve as a distinct system-wide knowledge-management and learning institution and provide strategic leadership and management development for international civil servants, with a view to strengthening collaboration within the system, increasing operational effectiveness, enhancing cooperation with stakeholders inside and outside the United Nations system and developing a more cohesive system-wide, management culture. This broad and ambitious mandate effectively means that the College is expected to play the role of an in-house change agent. 7. The immediate objectives or purposes of the College are to implement programmes and projects consistent with its overall objective, with special reference to programmes and projects in the areas of economic and social development, peace and security and internal management, based on needs expressed by the agencies of the United Nations system and implemented in close cooperation with training and learning institutions and similar bodies within the United Nations system and outside. 8. The Secretary-General has stated that the Staff College should play an important role in supporting a common culture of learning in the United Nations system in order to build on staff capacity to meet the challenges that the United Nations system faces. Indeed, in its resolution 55/162 of 14 December 2000, the General Assembly specifically requested the Secretary-General to ensure that system-wide coordination was available to assist with implementation of the United Nations Millennium Declaration. It was envisaged that the Staff College's work should cover the fields of economic and social development, peace and security and internal management. IV. Outputs 9. In order to achieve these broad and ambitious objectives, four outputs, or results (thematic areas of activity) to be achieved in its first biennium (2002-2003) were identified, as follows: (a) Promoting a "learning culture" within the United Nations system; (b) Developing leadership and management capacity within the United Nations system; (c) Strengthening knowledge management; (d) Developing collaborative partnerships within the United Nations system and between the United Nations system and civil society. A. Promoting a learning culture 10. In line with the growing importance of learning within the United Nations system, a transversal training audit of the management of staff training at the United Nations and its funds and programmes was carried out in the first half of 2003. The auditors stated that the College should have a more central role in terms of the sharing of knowledge, information and materials across the system. This presents various opportunities, including for example, for developing an assessment tool to determine the learning needs of different United Nations entities and for setting out system-wide monitoring and evaluation policy. 11. In recognition of its role in promoting a learning culture, the College was once again the focal point for the organization of the Learning Managers Forum, held in June 2003. This provided an opportunity for learning managers throughout the United Nations system to network and discuss the current practices in staff training and learning across the system. 12. A key feature of the College's approach has been its emphasis on assessing needs before the learning event and assessing impacts afterwards. Often the tendency is to assume that the needs are self-evident (learning is perceived as inherently a "good thing"), and that impacts can be assessed by measuring perceptions and attitudes at the time of delivery. The College has been trying to take a different approach. 13. Prior to learning activities, participants and their organizations are encouraged to make explicit needs assessments and to exchange commitments as to how the new learning is expected to lead to improved job performance. Similarly, the College has developed a monitoring and evaluation system to assess behaviour and results at various points in time after delivery of the learning services is completed. Internet technology is used to heighten interest and increase response rates. The system has already had a number of significant effects: (a) An increased participation rate in the evaluation exercise: in the case of one project, the participation rate rose from 1 per cent in a workshop held in 2001 to 47 per cent for a similar workshop held at the end of 2003; (b) More systematic sharing of results with participants; (c) Better and more significant results for both learning managers and participants; (d) Increased perception of evaluation as an integral part of the learning process. B. Developing leadership and management capacity 14. In the 18 months covered by the present report, the College organized and/or participated in 97 different learning events. Some 2,456 people participated in these events, which provided about 7,700 participant-days of training and learning. Participants came from nearly all organizations of the United Nations system, including regional commissions and other related entities. 15. Figure 1 below shows the regional distribution of the learning events organized by the College during the reporting period. This reflects the geographical distribution of United Nations system staff by duty station, and other factors. Similarly, many of the learning events were organized at the headquarters level, mainly because that is where most United Nations system staff are located. Nevertheless, the College will continue its efforts to provide a fully diversified and decentralized programme of learning services in the next biennium. 16. The gender distribution of participants in College learning events was approximately two women participating for every three men. 17. Learning services provided by the College were further enhanced in the biennium 2002-2003 by the increased use of e-learning. The College web site was completely redesigned in mid-2002. Improvements were also made to many project-specific pages on the web site. Since then, the number of recorded hits had increased roughly threefold. 18. One online learning programme has enrolled 1,140 members to date. By providing them with tools for practising what they have learned and facilities for sharing experiences with others, these Internet learning systems enable participants to continue learning beyond the end of the workshops or seminars they attended. Such systems give meaning to the term "continuous learning". C. Strengthening knowledge management 19. The College contributed to strengthening knowledge management in the United Nations system by providing a variety of small-scale, expert services, mainly in the area of facilitation, networking and knowledge-sharing. For example, the College made a key contribution to facilitation of the United Nations Development Group Office retreat held in 2002. With participation ranging up to 56 participants at a single such event, a relatively large number of United Nations system staff benefited from those services. 20. The College has also made further developments in the use of information and communication technology. For example, the College distributed or sold its CD-ROM entitled "Welcome to the UN System", during the reporting period. Similarly, the College produced a publication entitled "Communication as a Reform Tool for the United Nations" and is currently discussing production of updated and expanded versions of both learning products. D. Developing collaborative partnerships 21. The College promotes inter-agency collaboration in all its learning events. More specific examples of this can be found in the resident coordinator system project. Team building is used during learning events in order to strengthen working relationships within the country team where members may not work together on a regular basis. Events at the country and the regional levels in both the resident coordinator system project training and that of early warning and preventive measures have also enabled participants to collaborate with a wider range of United Nations system organizations. 22. As far as learning and training are concerned, just over 30 per cent of participants in College learning events during the reporting period came from outside the United Nations system. Joint activities such as these can serve to enhance collaboration between the United Nations system and other sectors of civil society. For example, the early warning and preventive measures project adopted this approach in direct support of the policy that the United Nations system must engage civil society and work with new partners in the field of peace and security. The humanitarian action plan for Colombia for 2002-2003 used a methodological tool from the project. 23. Similarly, learning activities related to the Global Compact included a critical component on how to work effectively with current and potential partners outside the United Nations system. The partnerships project, for example, includes a learning event which brings together the United Nations family and the local business community as an integral part of its training. This activity brings the two communities together with the objective that they should agree on a concrete proposal for an area of collaboration. For instance, in Bulgaria in April 2003, the agreed topic for collaboration was waste management. V. Activities 24. College activities during the reporting period were organized within the context of 10 projects and various ad hoc expert services provided to clients. Details of the 10 projects and the expert services are provided below. A. Projects 1. Resident coordinator system 25. The resident coordinator system project focuses on providing training to United Nations country teams and their partners to improve inter-agency cooperation. Specifically, the College trains participants on the common country assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) mechanisms. In 2002, the project gave direct training to the five United Nations Development Group Office priority countries embarking on their harmonized cycles for CCA/UNDAF. For 2003, there are 19 priority countries. Five received training during the reporting period, with the remaining workshops scheduled for the second half of 2003. In addition, the resident coordinator system project responds to requests from other country teams for training in the above-mentioned areas. 2. Early warning and preventive measures 26. The early warning and preventive measures project was established in line with the Secretary-General's statement, in his report on reform dated 14 July 1997 (A/51/950) that the United Nations of the twenty-first century should focus more on conflict prevention. Project learning events have taken place at the country and regional levels, where Governments, non-governmental organizations, and other civil society partners have been involved. 3. HIV/AIDS 27. The HIV/AIDS project was jointly developed by the College and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) to test a blended approach to learning related to HIV/AIDS. 28. Theme groups in 15 pilot countries were selected and have participated in learning activities via videoconference, online learning and a face-to-face workshop. 4. Human rights 29. The College has developed this project on a rights-based approach in collaboration with the United Nations Development Group Working Group on human rights and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Summary of project profiles, January 2002-June 2003 Project Objective Phase Methodology Beneficiaries Participants Client External Funds Resident coordinator system To deliver enhanced country team programme cooperation Fully operational Field-based workshops United Nations country teams UNDGO UK DfID Early warning and preventive measures To strengthen the United Nations ability to prevent violent conflict Field-based workshops, Internet learning United Nations field staff and civil society partners HIV/AIDS To build capacity to respond to the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDSa Pilot Headquarters workshops, videoconferences, Internet United Nations theme groups UNAIDS Human rights To develop a rights-based approach to CCA/UNDAF Common services To improve common services in the administrative and operations areas Leadership and management development To build a common management culture and cultivate future leaders Internal Under development Middle to senior level United Nations staff members Partnerships To build the commitment and capability of the United Nations system to develop effective networks of partnerships United Nations country teams and counterparts in Governments, private sector and civil society Switzerland Knowledge management To achieve greater efficiency and collaboration within the United Nations system For discussion with United Nations learning managers Strategic communication To improve United Nations advocacy for its programmes, policies and values Headquarters and field-based workshops, Internet learning United Nations communications specialists and external relations Compagnia di San Paolo, Italy Development of a learning culture To increase the use of learning across the United Nations system Headquarters-level workshops United Nations learning managers Source: United Nations System Staff College Management Information Database System. a Resolution S/26/2 of 27 June 2001. Abbreviations: UNDGO, United Nations Development Group Office; UK DfID, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Department for International Development; UNAIDS, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS; CCA/UNDAF, common country assessment/United Nations Development Assistance Framework. 5. Common services 30. This project serves to enable United Nations country teams to implement common services initiatives. There have so far been nine field-based workshops in the pilot phase, and the final evaluation meeting is planned for the end of September 2003. 6. Leadership and management development 31. The focus of this project is to provide a cohesive, management training and learning programme that can be used across the United Nations system. Although still in the initial stages of development, events are planned to encompass middle to senior management training. 32. The College is pursuing alliances with academic institutions and further inter-agency collaboration in connection with the project. 7. Partnerships 33. The project provides training to initiate partnership projects between United Nations country teams and local business communities, non-governmental organizations and civil society to support the implementation of the Global Compact structures and mechanisms and adapt Global Compact concepts and structures to developing countries. 34. Six country teams have received this training during the reporting period. 8. Knowledge management 35. In the reporting period, the College has researched and documented current knowledge-management practices within the United Nations system and several approaches to knowledge management have been developed. 36. The College is now offering learning and consultancy services in knowledge management, and has pilot workshops planned for the second half of 2003 and 2004. Lessons learned from this activity are also helping the College to strengthen its own internal knowledge-management systems. 9. Strategic communication 37. This project has so far focused on two areas. Firstly, the College delivered the series of workshops on communication as a reform tool for the United Nations, in conjunction with the Department of Public Information. They trained high-level staff from across the United Nations system in how to communicate more effectively with the media. 38. Secondly, the College has developed a new series of pilot workshops focusing on communication and the Millennium Development Goals. The first three workshops will take place in the second half of 2003. 10. Development of a learning culture 39. The development of a learning culture project has seen two major areas of activity since January 2002. First, the College has coordinated the Learning Managers' Network, which is a community consisting of heads of learning and training at United Nations organizations and affiliated international organizations worldwide. 40. Second, the College has worked with the Learning Managers Community to develop the Organizational Learning Framework, which includes a set of six principles for good learning practice in organizations. These principles provide a diagnostic assessment tool, allowing organizations across the United Nations System to assess and strengthen the state of their capacity for learning. The Organizational Learning Framework was approved by the United Nations Human Resources Network in July 2003 and will be considered by the High-Level Committee on Management in October 2003 for endorsement on behalf of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB). B. Expert services 41. The College recognizes that United Nations agencies and organizations have different needs and priorities. Through its current staff group and its extended range of associates, it is able to offer support advice and a range of services in the field of adult learning and training. Activities under this service area include acting as resource person(s), co-delivering learning events, undertaking a training needs analysis, helping to develop a training strategy and training trainers and distance learning tutors to deliver agency-specific requirements. Table 2 below lists selected expert services provided by the College during the reporting period. Table 2 Selected expert services provided by the College, January 2002-June 2003 Activity title Entities involved Country Date Number of participants UNICEF Guinea-Conakry February 2002 UNDGO retreat United States Experience of local actors in peace-building United Nations system and partners Singapore March 2002 CCA/UNDAF workshop (only for UNFPA) UNFPA Ethiopia April 2002 Unknown Peace-building conference at United Nations Foundation June 2002 Peacekeeping budget workshop United Nations system Italy July 2002 Expert group meeting DESA/DPEPA/IASIA September 2002 United Nations country team retreat Sri Lanka October 2002 OHCHR and rights-based approaches to development OHCHR December 2002 Workshop on action plan for children affected by armed conflict April 2003 Abbreviations: UNICEF, United Nations Children's Fund; UNDGO, United Nations Development Group Office; CCA/UNDAF, common country profiles/United Nations Development Assistance Framework; UNFPA, United Nations Population Fund; DESA/DPEPA, Division of Public Economics and Public Administration of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat; IASIA, International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration; OHCHR, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. VI. College governance and structure 42. The College has a Board of Governors made up of senior-level representatives of all of the organizations on the Chief Executives Board. According to the College's statute (article IV.3), the Board is responsible for: (a) formulating general policy for the activities of the Staff College; (b) considering the work programme and budget ... and making recommendations thereon to CEB; (c) considering ways and means of enhancing the financial resources of the Staff College; (d) evaluating the activities of the Staff College and their impact; and (e) submitting an annual report to CEB. 43. The Board is chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General and meets twice a year. 44. The College is headed by a Director and is divided into two divisions (Programmes and Administration and Management). The internal structure has evolved over the reporting period, to the point where each division is headed by a Deputy Director. The Programmes Division, comprises two programmes, each headed by a programme manager. The Systems Programme is responsible for organizing training and learning events related to specific, field-level interventions and is aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations system. The Learning Programme is concerned with enhancing managerial competencies at both field and Headquarters levels, with a view to improving individual performance, strengthening inter-agency coordination and promoting collaboration with external partners. The basic structure of the College is shown in figure 2 below. 45. As required under the statute (article IV.4), the Board of Governors established an expert technical review panel, the main functions of which are "to advise on the development of the activities of the Staff College, to review its performance and to report thereon to the Board". 46. The review panel consists of expert staff selected from 12 of the organizations represented on the Board, namely, the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, the World Food Programme, the International Labour Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the World Bank and the World Meteorological Organization. The Secretary of CEB serves as Chairperson of the Panel. The review panel met four times during the reporting period: in January, April, and September 2002, and in June 2003. Organizational structure of the United Nations System Staff College VII. Human and financial resources 47. The total staff of the College as at the end of the reporting period consisted of 37 full-time personnel. The College would like to acknowledge the generosity of organizations that have provided staff to the College on secondment. 48. The College receives funding from a variety of sources. First, it receives a core contribution from the member organizations of the Chief Executives Board, based on a cost-sharing formula decided by the Board. During the reporting period, this amounted to a total of about $0.5 million per annum. 49. The host Government, Italy, also made a generous contribution to the College throughout the reporting period. In addition to providing office facilities for the College at the United Nations centre in Turin, the Government of Italy contributed about $1 million to supporting College activities in 2002 and a further $0.5 million for 2003. 50. Bilateral donors provided additional funds. The Government of Sweden contributed over $0.4 million for general programme support, while the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland provided $1.2 million for the early warning and preventive measures and the resident coordinator system projects. The total bilateral contribution was $1.6 million in 2002, with a further $1.1 million received by the end of the reporting period in 2003. 51. Project funding from the United Nations system amounted to a further total of $0.6 million (17 per cent), with most of it coming from the United Nations Development Group Office, UNAIDS and the Office of Human Resources Management of the Secretariat. Expert services generated additional income from various entities of the United Nations system. A small amount of income came from course fees and from sales of College products, such as the CD-ROM entitled "Welcome to the UN System". Finally, a generous contribution was received from the Italian bank, the Compagnia di San Paolo. 52. One further source of resources for the College during the reporting period has been the various partnerships, alliances and joint ventures that it has formed. Details of some of these institutional linkages are given in table 3. VIII. Future developments 53. The College is currently planning for the next biennium, which begins in January 2004. During this period, its priority will be to consolidate the position it has established and develop it into a more broadly based and more proactive resource for the system as a whole. In particular, the future development of the College is likely to be marked by the following features: :: Full-service capability :: Responsiveness to client needs :: Decentralized delivery :: Collaboration with local and global providers :: Internal capacity-building A. Full-service capability 54. To date, the College has concentrated on providing products and services related primarily to training and learning. In the future, it will supplement these initiatives with a broader range of activities designed to build management capacity across the United Nations system. Particular emphasis will be put on promoting careful pre-training and post-training assessments, including training needs assessment in relation to job requirements, and impact assessment in relation to performance. In addition, the College will expand its non-training activities, including awareness-raising (with special reference to the Director's own reform programme), research and development, and expert services in relation to organizational development, information and communication systems, financial reform and other aspects of capacity-building. In short, the College will try to become an in-house, consultancy service for management development. B. Client responsiveness 55. The College will work closely with clients across the United Nations system in order to identify needs and provide best practices solutions. As noted above, the College has an ambitious mandate as a change agent within the United Nations system. It cannot possibly achieve that objective without the active involvement of the organizations, programmes, funds and other entities that make up the United Nations system. In other words, participation is not just a luxury; it is a vital component of any strategy for changing the management culture of the United Nations. In this context, the Board of Governors, which represents some 28 different entities from across the United Nations system, has a vital role to play in strengthening links between the College and its clients. Table 3 College partnerships, alliances, and joint ventures, January 2002-June 2003 Organizations Case studies on training effectiveness in relation to common country assessments/ United Nations Development Assistance Framework Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, United States University of Turin, Italy Asociación de Investigación y Estudios Sociales, Guatemala National University of Rwanda National University of Singapore Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies Leadership development Consultation for programmatic input Cranfield University, United Kingdom Development of training modules John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, United States University of Twente, Netherlands Hurbert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs, University of Minnesota, United States School of Journalism, Aarhus, Denmark Helsinki Institute of Technology, Finland Development of course content Business Humanitarian Forum, Geneva, Switzerland International Business Leaders Forum, London Updating academic content and delivering training, advocating for the project through publications in academic journals University of Bilbao, Spain Interworks, University of Madison, United States Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation, South Africa Centre for Conflict Resolution, South Africa Conflict Analysis Development Unit of the London School of Economics, London International Peace Academy, New York, United States Asian Institute for Management, Manila, Philippines Communication and Management Institute, Kathmandu International Development and Research Centre, Ottawa Saferworld, London Swiss Peace, Bern C. Decentralized delivery 56. The College has to be prepared to deliver its products and services on a decentralized basis, that is, to go to where the needs exist. The Internet and Web technology can play a key role in enhancing distance learning, videoconferencing and other management services, and the College will continue to emphasize the development of its capacities in those areas. But it must also be prepared to go to its clients, not only at Headquarters but also in regional and country offices. D. Collaboration with other providers 57. The College will seek to collaborate with training and research agencies inside and outside the United Nations system, thereby creating a "virtual faculty" of expertise, whose resources can be procured quickly and easily on behalf of College clients across the system. For example, in Italy, the College has signed a comprehensive memorandum of understanding with the University of Turin, and various collaborative arrangements have been discussed with academic institutions in Milan, Florence and Rome. 58. Within the United Nations system, there is also scope for collaboration with other institutions concerned with learning and training. The College is already working with the International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization on developing a common curriculum for training in procurement, in association with the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group and other United Nations agencies. The College is also keen on expanding its cooperation with the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and the United Nations University, and will take steps accordingly. 59. In accordance with article VI of its statute, the College has also taken steps to strengthen its own capacities in three key respects, namely, to establish: (a) A resident scholars programme, which provides for university sabbaticants and other researchers to spend 6 to 12 months working at the College; (b) A senior associates programme, which will enable the College to retain a core of 12 to 18 experienced professionals from the public and private sectors to work on College projects; (c) A consultants roster, which will provide a database of management consultants who have worked and/or are interested in working in the United Nations system. 60. Not all of these will become operational before 2004, but they should enable the College to play a significant role in providing expert management services to the United Nations system. E. Internal capacity-building 61. A fifth priority for the College in the coming biennium (see para. 9 above) will be to strengthen its own internal management policies and practices. For one thing, the College has very limited resources, so it is critical for it to use them as efficiently and effectively as possible. It is also important for the College to be seen to be practising what it preaches. In that sense, the College is an important "laboratory" for its own remedies. Therefore, it will make a point of improving its own management systems and procedures, including its information systems, its knowledge-management procedures, its monitoring and evaluation systems, its financial management, its staff-development practices, etc. IX. Concluding remarks 62. The present report concludes by noting the very considerable progress made by the College in its first 18 months as a distinct entity within the United Nations family. 63. In particular, the College would like to acknowledge the generous support provided by the Government of Italy, with which it will (in September 2003) sign a formal, host-country agreement. The active support of the Italian Government will continue to play a critical role in the development of the College. 64. Core contributions from key organizations, programmes and entities within the United Nations system have also been vital for the financial health of the College. Contributors can capitalize on their investment by participating at an operational level in its programmes and projects. 65. Finally, the College is grateful to Member States and various other sources for the direct support that they have provided to College activities. No doubt, the College will be glad of further interest and support from Member States at the fifty-eighth session of the Assembly. 66. The next report on the United Nations System Staff College will be presented to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session, in October 2005, and will cover the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2005. 