%%%CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|CONFERENCE FACILITIES|INTERPRETING|DOCUMENTATION|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|OBSERVER STATUS|STATISTICAL DATA|LANGUAGE SERVICES|CONSULTATIONS|

United Nations Report of the Committee on Conferences for 2003 General Assembly Official Records Fifty-eighth Session Supplement No. 32 (A/58/32) United Nations * New York, 2003 Report of the Committee on Conferences for 2003 A/58/32 ISSN 0255-1535 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. Contents Chapter Page Organizational matters Membership Officers Organization of work Programme of work Participation of observers Biennialization of the item entitled "Pattern of conferences" in the agenda of the General Assembly Calendar of conferences and meetings Matters related to and intersessional departures from the approved calendar for 2003 Adoption of the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004-2005 Improved utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities Meeting statistics of United Nations organs and consultations with and/or letters to bodies concerning utilization of the conference services available to them Provision of interpretation services to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States Improved utilization of conference facilities United Nations Office at Nairobi Conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa Improving the performance of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management Requests for exceptions to section I, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 40/243 Documentation- and publication-related matters: submission, availability and distribution of documentation Translation- and interpretation-related matters Review of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Information technology Annexes I. Draft resolution II. Draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations and of the principal organs of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and treaty bodies established under the auspices of the United Nations for 2004-2005 Chapter I A. Membership 1. The General Assembly, in its resolution 43/222 B, decided to retain the Committee on Conferences as a permanent subsidiary organ. Pursuant to the provisions of that resolution, in 2003 the Committee was composed of the following Member States: Argentina, Austria, Benin, Bolivia, Congo, Ethiopia, Finland, France, India, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Nepal, Peru, Russian Federation, Sierra Leone, Tunisia, United States of America and Zambia. B. Officers 2. At its organizational session for 2003, the Committee elected the following officers to serve in 2003: Chairman: Mohammad Tal (Jordan) Vice-Chairpersons: Guillermo E. Kendall (Argentina) Mikael Raivio (Finland) Rafla M'Rabet (Tunisia) Rapporteur: Andrius Namavičius (Lithuania) 3. At the same meeting, the Committee agreed in principle that the Chairman would undertake informal consultations with a view to determining the composition of the Committee's Bureau in 2004. C. Organization of work 4. At its organizational session (449th meeting), the Committee agreed to follow the guidelines adopted in 1994 and 1995 with regard to consideration of intersessional departures from the approved calendar of conferences and to meet, as required, to review proposals affecting the schedule of conferences and meetings during sessions of the General Assembly. 5. The Committee convened its substantive session on 8, 10 and 12 September 2003 (451st through 456th meetings). 6. The Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management addressed the Committee at the opening of its organizational and substantive sessions. At the substantive session, he introduced the report of the Secretary-General on reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (A/58/213) and the proposed programme budget of the Department for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 2)). 7. The report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences (A/58/194) was introduced by a representative of the Secretariat. The consolidation into one report of all matters of a technical nature, an innovation in 2002, was continued in 2003. D. Programme of work 8. At its organizational session for 2002, held on 22 March 2002, the Committee had requested the Secretariat to submit a draft agenda for 2003 to the Committee at its organizational session for 2003. At the 449th meeting, on 22 April 2003, the Committee adopted the proposed agenda (A/AC.172/2003/1) and requested the Secretariat to submit a draft agenda for 2004 to the Committee at its organizational session for 2004. 9. In order to provide more relevant advice to the General Assembly, the Committee decided to recommend for adoption by the General Assembly elements of a draft resolution reflecting the substantive discussion that took place in the Committee, thereby facilitating the consideration of the item by the Assembly (see A/AC.172/2003/CRP.2/Add.12). E. Participation of observers 10. The following States Members of the United Nations were represented as observers: Algeria, Belgium, Canada, China, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Germany, Ireland, Kenya, Morocco, Nigeria, Portugal, Romania, South Africa, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 11. At its 454th meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the question of participation of observers. The question was given particular attention during the informal drafting meetings of the Committee. Some delegations held the view that the widest possible participation was desirable and that it would be reasonable to allow observers to present drafting proposals during informal consultations. Other delegations held the view that the distinction between Committee members and observers should be maintained and that a drafting group confined to members would be more efficient and appropriate. 12. Interested delegations were encouraged to consider seeking membership in the Committee. F. Biennialization of the item entitled "Pattern of conferences" in the agenda of the General Assembly 13. At its 454th meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Committee considered the possibility of biennializing the item entitled "Pattern of conferences" in the agenda of the General Assembly. 14. Delegations expressed interest in the idea and some supported it. At the same time, it was noted that since the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management was in the midst of an important reform that warranted annual monitoring by the General Assembly, the time was not ripe. It was also stressed by some delegations that given the importance and wide scope of the activities in this area, an annual review of the item was considered necessary. It was concluded that possible biennialization of the agenda item would require further thought. Conclusions 15. The Committee concluded that its current procedures should be retained, on the understanding that observers could present their proposals in formal meetings. The Committee welcomed the active participation of observers. A. Matters related to and intersessional departures from the approved calendar for 2003 1. The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/283 A, approved the revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2003 as submitted by the Committee on Conferences and amended by subsequent decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. The calendar was issued as document A/AC.172/2003/2. 2. At its 373rd meeting, on 26 August 1994, the Committee had decided that requests for intersessional departures submitted to the Committee should in future be reviewed by the Bureau, in consultation with the Secretariat, for subsequent action. 3. At its 379th meeting, on 23 March 1995, the Committee had agreed that proposed changes to the calendar that did not have programme budget implications could be dealt with by the Secretariat, in consultation with the Bureau of the Committee. 4. At its substantive session of 1995, the Committee had decided that requests for intersessional departures submitted to the Committee that involved a change of venue should be referred to the members for approval. Departures that involved other types of changes, as the Committee had decided at its substantive session of 1994, should be reviewed by the Bureau, in consultation with the Secretariat, for subsequent action. 5. The requests submitted in 2003 for changes of venue or additional sessions/ meetings and the action taken by the Committee are set out below. Organ Request Action taken Commission on the Status of Women To convene one additional meeting on 25 March 2003 to conclude the work of its 47th session. Owing to time constraints on the scheduled final day of the session, the Commission was not able to take action on one proposal or elect the new Bureau for the following session. Request approved United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund Committee of Actuaries To hold its session from 2 to 4 June 2003 in Geneva instead of New York. The Fund has an office in Geneva and meetings have been held there in the past. Conference Services in Geneva were able to accommodate the request. Fifth Committee To hold two additional meetings of the Committee, one informal and one formal, on 2 and 4 June 2003, respectively, to take action on the draft proposals before it and to conclude its work for the session. Group of Governmental Experts on Tracing Small Arms and Light Weapons To convene its first session in Geneva from 1 to 5 July 2003 rather than in New York from 20 to 24 May 2003. Since some members of the Group were to participate in the meeting of the Open-Ended Group of Governmental Experts of States Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons scheduled in Geneva from 20 to 24 May 2003, it would have been impossible for them to also attend the meeting in New York. Conference Services in Geneva confirmed that they could accommodate the meeting on the dates requested in July. Committee for Programme and Coordination To hold one additional formal meeting on 9 July 2003 to conclude its work for the session. Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters To convene the forty-first session of the Board from 16 to 18 July 2003 in Geneva rather than New York in order to give members the opportunity to confer with participants in the Conference on Disarmament. Moreover, since the Board also serves as the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, the Geneva venue permits the Board members to be in close contact with the staff of the Institute. Group of Governmental Experts on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development To hold its first session from 17 to 21 November 2003 in Geneva. Owing to scheduling conflicts in the substantive office, the session could only be held on those dates, which fall during the regular session of the General Assembly when services could not be confirmed in New York. Conference Services in Geneva were able to accommodate the request. Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters To hold their eleventh meeting in Geneva from 15 to 19 December 2003. The Group of Experts often meets in Geneva to accommodate its members and observers based there, as well as to enable a larger participation at a lower cost. International Civil Service Commission To hold its fifty-sixth session at FAO headquarters in Rome, rather than Bangkok, which itself constituted an exception to General Assembly resolution 40/243 but had been approved when the calendar was compiled. The venue was changed again owing to concerns of participants about the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in the South-East Asia region. B. Adoption of the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004-2005 Introduction and overview 6. At its 452nd meeting, on 8 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences reviewed the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004-2005 (A/AC.172/2003/CRP.1 and Add.1), which was introduced by a representative of the Secretariat. The Committee was informed that the calendar had been prepared in accordance with all the principles established for its design. With regard to General Assembly resolution 53/208 A, in which the Assembly decided that United Nations bodies should be invited to avoid holding meetings on Orthodox Good Friday, only one body, the Commission on Human Rights, had found it necessary to schedule a meeting on Orthodox Good Friday during the biennium in order to be able to complete the work of its session. Although reminded of the relevant General Assembly rule pertaining to the venue of meetings, specifically as it relates to Nairobi, and the desirability of fuller utilization of Nairobi conference facilities, the United Nations Environment Programme had accepted the offer of the Republic of Korea to host the eighth special session of the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum in 2004, in keeping with its decision 20/17 of 5 February 1999 to hold the session in alternate years in different regions on a rotating basis. Consideration of the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of subsidiary organs of the Economic and Social Council for 2004-2005 7. At its 450th meeting, on 26 June 2003, during its organizational session, the Committee on Conferences had considered the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of subsidiary organs of the Economic and Social Council for 2004-2005 and had submitted its observations to the Council accordingly. Conclusions and recommendations 8. On the understanding that the budgetary implications of certain items, such as the decisions and recommendations of the Economic and Social Council adopted at its 2003 substantive session and included in the calendar, would be reviewed by the responsible legislative bodies, and that any adjustments to the calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004-2005 that might become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session would be made, the Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the calendar. 1. Meeting statistics of United Nations organs and consultations with and/or letters to bodies concerning utilization of the conference services available to them 9. At its 452nd meeting, on 8 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences reviewed the statistical data given in section II.B(1) and annex I of the Secretary-General's report on pattern of conferences (A/58/194 and Corr.1 and Corr.2) on the planned and actual utilization of conference resources allocated to a core sample of bodies that had met in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi in 2002, and considered an oral report by the Chairman of the Committee on his consultations with bodies concerning utilization of the conference services available to them. In keeping with section II.A, paragraph 16, of General Assembly resolution 57/283 B, 12 bodies had been identified that had consistently utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure of their allocated resources during their previous three sessions. The Chairman and the Department had held consultations with or sent letters to the chairpersons and secretariats of those bodies in an effort to resolve the problem. 10. Underutilization of conference-servicing resources resulted in some cases from meetings being cancelled too late to schedule another meeting into the time slot, often a sign that planning accuracy could be improved. A persistent pattern of cancellations could be resolved either by shortening the duration of the body's session or reducing the scheduled number of meetings within the same time frame. That solution had been successful, for example, with the Committee on Contributions. 11. For some of the organs concerned, however, late starts or early endings were the main cause of low utilization. In some cases, the problem could be resolved by convening meetings in a timely manner, without a quorum, if necessary, and having ready additional items if consideration of an agenda item should be concluded sooner than anticipated. The Sixth Committee had been successful with those methods. 12. In accordance with decisions of the Committee on Conferences, the time utilized for informal meetings or consultations held before the start or after the adjournment of officially scheduled meetings, when utilizing the same services and with due notification given to the Secretariat, was not included as time lost. However, several of the bodies had stressed that, given the sensitive and political aspect of their work, the capacity to hold informal consultations utilizing conference room facilities was also important. If time used in that manner were not deducted from time lost due to early adjournment in calculating the utilization factor, they would be hard pressed to raise their statistics above the benchmark figure. The Chairman suggested that the Committee should give serious consideration to certain mitigating factors in methodology. Discussion 13. Delegations expressed satisfaction with the efforts to hold discussions with underutilizers, since expensive resources were being wasted. A number of delegations felt that it was best to seek a solution tailored to the specific body, on a case-by-case basis, without necessarily changing the general methodology. Although reservations were expressed about being more lenient to some bodies than to others, it was also said that it was a matter of being adaptable, rather than lenient. The view was expressed that it was important to respect the principle of using all official languages, and it was not ideal to hold consultations without interpretation. It was also stated that, as much as possible, the time released from cancelled meetings or early adjournments should be made available to regional groups. 14. A representative of the Secretariat explained that, although there were as yet no benchmarks established for the planning accuracy factor, the Department had found it to be a useful tool in its discussions with underutilizers since, given sufficient notice, it was easier to reschedule a whole block of meeting time than a fragment. 15. The Committee noted that the overall utilization factor for the four United Nations offices in 2002, 75 per cent, was one percentage point higher than in 2001, but still six percentage points lower than in 2000. The slight improvement in 2002 was reflected in three of the duty stations and was due solely to a decrease in time lost owing to late starts and early endings, the sharp increase in this figure having been the cause of the 7 per cent drop in utilization from 2000 to 2001. There was very little change in the number of cancellations. 16. The Committee also noted that the 75 per cent utilization factor was five percentage points lower than the benchmark figure established by the General Assembly and was still an unacceptable loss of resources. The Chairman of the Committee again conducted consultations with the chairpersons and/or secretaries of the bodies that had underutilized for three years in a row, urging them to consider changes in their programme of work and to introduce more discipline into the way they conducted their business. In 2003, however, several bodies had stressed the need to bring into the equation the informal consultations that often took place after a formal meeting was adjourned, as noted in the Chairman's oral report on meetings with those bodies consistently underutilizing their resources. 17. The Committee requested the Chairman to continue to consult on its behalf with the chairpersons of bodies that had consistently utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure of their allocated resources for the past three sessions, pursuant to the requests of the General Assembly set out in section B, paragraphs 6 and 7, of its resolution 54/248, with a view to making appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources. 18. The Committee was of the opinion that certain factors, such as the planning accuracy factor, which was a relevant planning tool for the Secretariat, should be taken into consideration when judging individual bodies. 19. At its 453rd meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Committee considered the statistical data and analysis contained in annex II and paragraphs 17 to 36 of the Secretary-General's report on pattern of conferences (A/58/194, Corr.1, Corr.2) and covering the period from May 2002 to April 2003. Overall, for the four duty stations, the percentage of meetings held by regional and other major groupings that were provided with interpretation for the reporting period had decreased to 92 per cent from 98 per cent over the same period in 2001/2002, a drop of six percentage points. However, the percentage was on a par with the rate in 2000/2001 and higher than the rate of 84 per cent in 1999/2000. 20. Regret was expressed over the slippage in the rate of provision of interpretation services to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, since such meetings, held to enable such groups to consult and arrive at consensus on agenda items, greatly facilitated the work of the Main Committees and other bodies. The report had mentioned several options for providing more predictable and adequate conference services to such meetings, and the costing study on those options was in the final stages of preparation. 21. The view was also expressed that the system appeared to be working rather well. With adaptability on the part of the Secretariat and the requesting groups the percentage could be improved, although it could be difficult, particularly for a large group like the Group of 77 and China, to adapt to last-minute changes. Ultimately, a delicate balance would have to be struck between the needs of the regional groups and the availability of services. 22. The Committee was unable to consider the proposals concerning the provision of conference services to regional and other major groupings on a more predictable basis in the absence of the report of the Secretary-General on their cost implications, which is pending. 3. Improved utilization of conference facilities (a) United Nations Office at Nairobi 23. At its 453rd meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the report on the improved utilization of conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi contained in paragraph 37 of the report of the Secretary-General on pattern of conferences (A/58/194 and Corr.1 and 2). 24. The Committee was informed that a report on the matter had been issued in document A/57/809, and that further reporting on the considerations of improving and modernizing the conference facilities at Nairobi would be done through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in accordance with established procedures. 25. Concern was expressed at the apparent inadequacy of resources for conference services at Nairobi and the factors that made it difficult for the duty station to attract and retain language professionals, particularly for posts funded from extrabudgetary resources. 26. The Committee took note that further reporting on the considerations of improving and modernizing the conference facilities at Nairobi would be done through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in accordance with established procedures. (b) Conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa 27. At its 453rd meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the report on the conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa contained in paragraphs 38 to 46 of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences (A/58/194 and Corr.1, Corr.2). 28. The Committee on Conferences expressed appreciation that in 2002 the Economic Commission for Africa had reorganized its conference centre along the lines of international best practice, establishing a Conference Coordination Unit that enabled it to better respond to the needs of its clients and an Integrated Conference Management System to further enhance the provision of services. As a result, occupancy at the centre had gone up by more than 80 per cent over the previous year, an increase that was being maintained in 2003. 29. The Committee noted that plans to integrate all operating phases into one system and to promote the centre further were envisaged for the near future. 4. Improving the performance of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management 30. At its 451st and 452nd meetings, on 8 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the report of the Secretary-General on the reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (A/58/213). In introducing the report, the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management noted that implementation of the Department's comprehensive and results-oriented reform plan was in full swing. The Department's budgetary position was sound and more rational meeting schedules had led to better smoother meetings programmes, utilization of resources and higher staff morale. Enforcement of the slotting system had resulted in initial improvement in the documents situation and in enhanced awareness on the part of author departments of the need for timely submission. The Journal was now a convenient tool for accessing information on meetings and meeting-related documents. The electronic meetings planning system (e-Meets) was operational and was soon to be expanded, while the electronic documentation processing system (e-Conveyor) had been tested and a prototype was expected to be operational by the end of 2003. Considerable attention was also being paid to enhancing synergy and extending it beyond the Department to include the other Secretariat entities and intergovernmental bodies. 31. Building on its success, the Department was embarking on a number of major new projects, including a comprehensive study on the integrated global management of conference-related resources covering the four duty stations to be undertaken in collaboration with the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) and with the full involvement of the duty stations. The study was aimed at developing guidelines for integrated global management that were consistent with the applicable legislative and administrative mandates, and would also recommend an operating model for the central monitoring and coordination mechanisms. 32. In response to General Assembly resolution 57/283 B, in which the Assembly had recognized the need to develop or update existing workload standards so as to reflect functions performed by language staff not currently included in those standards, the Department had also established a task force to undertake a comprehensive review of existing workload standards and performance measurements. A crucial issue in that respect was the relationship between the introduction of technological innovations and productivity gains and the related issue of return on investment. 33. In implementing the slotting system, it had become clear that the length of reports was no less important for the success of the system than submission dates. The Department would therefore continue to strictly enforce the limits on the length of reports originating in the Secretariat and would set up a task force to look at ways of dealing with reports that were not within the purview of the Secretary-General. 34. Reform was a dynamic process, however, which could be affected by unforeseeable organizational, financial, technical and human factors. Consequently, during the process of implementation, the plan was being fine-tuned or even modified on the basis of experience gained and lessons learned. Repositioning the Department 35. The view was expressed that the new results-driven approach to conference management should not obscure the fact that the function of the Department was to provide a range of services to the intergovernmental bodies. The need for the Department to react to the demands of those bodies must therefore be reconciled with its new proactive approach. It was explained that the Department fully recognized the need for balance. The ability to plan ahead, however, enabled it to deliver its services more effectively and within its budget. 36. Satisfaction was expressed at the curtailment of night and weekend meetings and at the initial improvement in the timeliness of submission of documents by author entities. Further improvement, however, was still needed. 37. While some members welcomed the Department's efforts to reduce documentation and enhance efficiency through the consolidation of reports, others were of the view that the Department was required to follow existing mandates in the area of conference management and that the consolidation of reports was not within its purview. It was explained that, while the Department sought, where possible, to combine reports of a similar nature, it did so without eliminating mandates and, where necessary, with the authorization of the body concerned. Pursuing full-system benefits 38. A number of questions were asked about the transition to an electronic documentation workflow (e-flow), including how adjustments to the sequence of processing in the documents-processing chain had affected the way in which editors worked. It was explained that e-flow involved the electronic transmission of documents as well as related reference material and terminology in all official languages through every stage of the documents-processing chain so as to reduce the time required to move documents down the processing line and, in some instances, to reduce workload downstream. The Department had issued operational guidelines that made computer skills a necessary requirement for all newly recruited staff involved in the documents chain and had developed a detailed training plan for permanent staff members. 39. Support was expressed for the integration of the technical-servicing secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees into the Department as a way to enhance their efficiency. The contrary view was also expressed, however, that delegations were satisfied with the current performance of the technical secretariats and failed to understand the rationale for their integration into the Department. Integrating global management 40. In response to questions about the extent to which the integrated management of conference-related resources had succeeded in making the fullest and most rational use of available resources across duty stations, it was pointed out that the calendar of conferences and meetings approved by the General Assembly remained the most authoritative tool for the management of meetings. Other factors to be taken into account were the headquarters rule and the other costs associated with holding meetings at duty stations away from Headquarters. The availability of conference services was not the only consideration, especially if peaks in demand at a given duty station could be met from within the existing conference-servicing capacity of that duty station. The comprehensive study which the Department had launched in cooperation with OIOS to devise a practical approach to integrated global management based on a broad consensus among the concerned duty stations of what was desirable and practicable was due to be completed in December 2003. The view was also expressed that, independently of the process of integrating global management, those principles and methods that had proven to be successful should be applied across duty stations. 41. In response to the question of whether the use of two incompatible information tracking systems, the Electronic Document Registration and Information Tracking System (e-DRITS) and the integrated Documents Control and Productivity Monitoring System (iDCPMS), was an obstacle to the integration of global management across duty stations, it was explained that the Department's ability to plan and to communicate had in no way been hindered. 42. For the discussion and recommendations on this topic, see chapter VI below. Alleviating the documentation situation 43. An assessment was requested of the initial results of the implementation of the slotting system. It was pointed out that, while adjustments were still being made to the system, which had been introduced only the previous year, the Secretariat had generally responded to the pressure to meet slotting deadlines. As an upstream planning mechanism, the system was demonstrating that long-term planning was better than short-term reacting. 44. It was noted with satisfaction that in the first five months of 2003, over 90 per cent of reports originating in the Secretariat had been submitted in accordance with the established page limits. Given the high per page cost of processing documentation, however, the need for a 100 per cent compliance rate was emphasized. 45. Deep concern was expressed over the fact that, in an era of instant communications and fast-paced international relations, when, in order to be relevant, information needed to be transmitted instantly to capitals, summary records continued to be produced so late as to be useless for any purpose other than as a historical record. Unlike verbatim records and press releases, summary records had become a marginal product of the Department that was little used by Member States and indeed slowed down the reform process. Press releases, however, were not an acceptable substitute for summary records since they were not subject to the rule governing the simultaneous issuance of official documents in all six official languages. Similarly, given the Organization's other more urgent priorities, providing the six Translation Services with additional resources for the translation of summary records was out of the question. The Assembly should therefore conduct a thorough cost-benefit analysis of the current approach to summary records, consider alternative approaches and review the list of bodies entitled to such records. The view was also expressed that the statement made in paragraph 42 of the report of the Secretary-General that the Assembly had not approved the Secretary-General's proposal for a study to be conducted on the potential of low-cost searchable digital recordings on the proceedings of meetings was not an accurate reflection of the Assembly's position on the matter. 46. It was pointed out that summary records were always prepared on time in the original language. The delay arose because of the chronic lack of capacity to translate them into the other five official languages. In view of the prohibitive cost of increasing that capacity to the required level, the Secretariat sought the Assembly's guidance on how the problem should be addressed since it could not unilaterally withdraw the entitlement to summary records that had been established by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council for their respective subsidiary bodies. 47. It was pointed out that the pilot project for concordance of draft resolutions prior to their adoption by the plenary would be expanded to the Fourth and Sixth Committees. The current working methods of the other main committees and the plenary made it difficult to envisage the concordance of their draft resolutions prior to their adoption by the General Assembly. Since there was little time between adoption in the main committee and action by the plenary, the remaining committees could adopt the corresponding draft resolutions after they had completed their consideration of the item from which it emanated. Ensuring high-quality performance in the course of reform 48. Emphasis was placed on the need to ensure that the drive for greater efficiency and economies did not result in a decline in the quality of the service that the Department provided to Member States. The view was expressed that the Group of 77 and China did not always receive a level of service commensurate with its size and importance in the Organization. Commitment to high quality must be an inherent aspect of the Department's reform. In that connection, information was sought on the productivity gains resulting from greater efficiencies and the introduction of information technology that had permitted economies to be realized. In response, it was pointed out that the Department was committed to its mandate, which was to provide high-quality service as efficiently as possible. None of the savings realized had been the result of a lowering of the quality of service. 49. On the question of the current workload standards for language staff, satisfaction was expressed at the establishment of a task force to conduct a comprehensive study covering all major language-related functions, including interpretation and translation. Any new standards should include quantitative measurements of some kind and should reflect the gains in productivity that should accrue from investments in information technology for language staff. Pending the introduction of new standards, however, the existing standards must be observed. 50. Note was taken with satisfaction of the series of language-specific consultations organized by the Department in May 2003 to facilitate discussions between its language services and interested delegations on the terminology used at the United Nations. It was pointed out that, with specific reference to Chinese, the terminology used in the Organization did not always reflect current usage. Those consultations could also be used to initiate a dialogue between delegations and interpreters on issues relating to the quality of interpretation. 51. Assurances were sought from the Department that documents would be equally accessible in all official languages under the e-Flow system. It was pointed out that the system was used for the internal flow of manuscripts in the original language of submission. At the end of the processing chain, documents were issued in all of the official languages. 52. There was general support and agreement expressed concerning the conclusions contained in paragraphs 51 to 53 of the report (A/58/213) concerning the direction of the reform and the follow-up steps to be taken. Concerns were expressed that the high quality of services should be maintained in the process of the reform and that Member States should be assisted in the transition to the electronic submission and retrieval of documents. The Committee decided to formulate its recommendations on those issues in the proposed draft resolution (see annex I). D. Requests for exceptions to section I, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 40/243 53. At its 451st meeting, on 8 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered chapter II, section C, and annex III of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences (A/58/194 and Corr.1 and 2), concerning requests from subsidiary bodies for exceptions to be made to section I, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 40/243, in which the Assembly had decided that no subsidiary organ of the General Assembly might meet at United Nations Headquarters during a regular session of the Assembly unless explicitly authorized by the Assembly. 54. The Committee was pleased to learn that the number of requests for exceptions had declined from seven in 2002 to four in 2003. It was noted that the four bodies in question had routinely sought the same exception for the same reasons, which were not likely to change, and the view was expressed that perhaps it would be sensible to grant them a permanent or at any rate a longer-term exception. On the other hand, it was explained that the requirement that subsidiary bodies must make the request for exception on an annual basis had provided the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management with an opportunity to discuss their real conference-servicing needs during a very high-volume period, leading in some cases to a reduction in demand. 55. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly explicitly authorize the following bodies to meet in New York during the main part of its fifty-eighth session, on the understanding that all such meetings would be allocated conference services on an as-available basis, from within existing resources, in such a way that the work of the General Assembly and its Main Committees would not be impeded: :: Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People :: Committee on Relations with the Host Country :: Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East :: Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund. 56. The Committee noted with satisfaction the reduction in the requests for exceptions. 1. At its 453rd meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the report on documentation and publication-related matters contained in paragraphs 53 to 62 of the report of the Secretary-General on pattern of conferences (A/58/194 and Corr.1 and 2) and heard explanations from representatives of the Secretariat. 2. It was explained that, while the rules on availability of official documents made it clear that they must be posted only simultaneously on United Nations web sites, from a practical standpoint, given the time required to translate and issue the documents, some departments had opted to provide advance drafts for informal consultations or to post them on their web sites. For that reason, the instructions contained in paragraph 3.17 of administrative instruction ST/AI/2001/5 stated that advance texts and unedited draft or incomplete versions of parliamentary documentation should not be disseminated on the Internet, except in consultation with the Chairperson of the body concerned and its Secretary, and with an appropriate disclaimer. All instances of posting on web sites contrary to the rule of multilingualism investigated by the Department of Public Information were found to be by specific request of the bodies concerned. The Official Document System (ODS), on the other hand, was the sole electronic repository for the definitive texts in all official languages, which were always posted on it simultaneously. 3. Many delegations stressed that the rule of simultaneous distribution was well established and must be fully applied. Some delegations thought that the instructions in administrative instruction ST/AI/2001/5 and the posting of advance drafts "as a courtesy" to the body concerned appeared to be in contradiction to the official position. The view was expressed that for simultaneous availability in all languages on United Nations web sites to be timely substantial resources would be required. It was also said that the consolidation of reports, as called for in the context of the reform of the Department, should make simultaneous availability more timely. 4. Clarification was sought on the rationale for the statement in paragraph 62 of document A/58/194 and Corr.1 and 2 and the technical constraints involved. A representative of the Secretariat explained that the former practice of copying parliamentary documents to web sites from ODS was being replaced by a system of direct links to ODS, where the documents always appeared in all languages. However, resource and access limitations made it impossible at present to link all parliamentary documents to the web site. 1. At its 453rd and 454th meetings, on 10 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the report on translation- and interpretation-related matters contained in paragraphs 69 and 70 of the report of the Secretary-General on pattern of conferences (A/58/194 and Corr.1 and 2) and heard explanations from representatives of the Secretariat. 2. Delegations expressed satisfaction at the reduction in vacancies in the Spanish language services from 28 to 16 and the filling of all six vacancies in the Chinese Translation Service at Headquarters and requested more complete data on vacancies in all language services. 3. The Committee was informed that competitive examinations in Arabic, English, French and Spanish were either completed or in progress, so that recruitment rosters could soon be increased. Concern was expressed about the number of retirements anticipated and about the working conditions in New York not being as attractive as in Europe. 4. Concerns were also expressed about occasional lapses in the quality of interpretation, and, in that regard, the usefulness of dialogue on terminology between interpreters and delegates, possibly through the format of language-specific informational meetings for delegations organized by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, was stressed. Department for General Assembly and Conference Management 1. At its 452nd meeting, on 8 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the programme narrative on General Assembly affairs and conference services of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 2)), programme 6 of the medium-term plan for the period 2004-2005, and heard an introduction by a representative of the Secretariat on the matter. 2. The Committee was informed that the proposed budget was based on the current reform and was intended to formalize the changes envisioned in the Secretary-General's report on improving the performance of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (A/57/289). The first year of reform had already yielded tangible budgetary results. While the Department in New York had exceeded its initial appropriations by $11 million and $27.6 million in the biennia 1998-1999 and 2000-2001, it had been able to stay within its budget allotment in 2002 and expected to discharge all its functions by the end of 2003 within its 2002-2003 budgetary appropriation. 3. The salient features of the proposed budget were zero resource growth, redeployment of resources and an emphasis on information technology. It was cost-neutral in the short term, with increases in information technology resources being offset by decreases in staffing costs achieved by a shift from a resource-intensive, demand-driven approach to a management-intensive, results-oriented strategy. The proposed budget also entailed reclassifications to reflect realigned priorities and to integrate the technical secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees into the Department. 4. The view was expressed that, without seeking to duplicate the work of the Fifth Committee, the Committee on Conferences had a mandate, based on General Assembly resolution 43/222, to look at the proposed budget from the standpoint of the pattern of conferences and to make recommendations to ensure the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources. 5. Many delegations welcomed the improvement in the Department's budgetary situation. A number of delegations expressed the view that, while they were in favour of fiscal discipline, they were concerned that the reduction in staffing costs might result in a loss in the quality or quantity of services to Member States, for example, in a reduction in the servicing of meetings of regional groups. The representative of the Secretariat explained that the Department had achieved savings, and expected to do the same in the next biennium, not by cutting back on high-quality services but by shifting from crisis-style management to advanced planning. 6. It was noted that the proposed budget lacked performance measures in a number of areas. User satisfaction surveys were useful but were not a substitute for objective indicators in assessing the success of the Department's reforms. 7. The Committee recommended that the General Assembly give careful consideration to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 for conference services, taking into account the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Committee concerning the relevant items on its agenda. 1. At its 451st, 452nd and 453rd meetings, on 8 and 10 September 2003, the Committee on Conferences considered the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences (A/58/194), paragraph 73, on information technology, and the report of the Secretary-General on the reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (A/58/213), paragraphs 24 to 34, on optimizing the use of technology. 2. At its 453rd meeting, on 10 September 2003, the Chiefs of Conference Services and their senior staff at Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna participated in a videoconference arranged by the Committee on Conferences, in which they orally reported on the progress achieved in introducing new technology and optimizing its use in the meetings chain and throughout the documents chain at their respective duty stations. 3. It was emphasized that information technology was the driving force behind the Department's reform efforts. Among the objectives sought were the development of a common information technology strategy for all duty stations, including the standardization of databases. In order for that strategy to be effective, however, continuous training was necessary for users at all levels of the system. The current practice of sharing best experiences among duty stations should also be encouraged. 4. Satisfaction was expressed at the progress achieved in such areas as the electronic management of documents and meetings, the electronic submission of documents, printing on demand, and the new electronic version of the Journal of the United Nations, which offered real-time worldwide electronic access to all language versions of hyperlinked documents, including the daily list of documents issued at Headquarters. Given the uneven reliance on the electronic version of documents among individual users, hard copies would continue to be available for as long as they were needed by delegations. 5. While welcoming the assistance that was being provided to the United Nations Office at Nairobi by the other duty stations, some members expressed concern at a situation in which one duty station was not able to develop its own capacity in the field of information technology and had to rely on the other duty stations. The Secretariat responded and indicated its appreciation for the information technology assistance it received from the other duty stations. 6. The difficulties caused by the volume of summary records for the translation services and the efforts of the United Nations Office at Geneva were noted. The problem of the late issuance of summary records of meetings could be addressed by exploring the possibility of equipping off-site translators with multimedia workstations at which to follow and produce summary records of meetings of United Nations bodies. 7. It was requested that the Secretariat continue to provide the necessary assistance, including training, to requesting Member States to enable them to access and submit documents and information electronically. Annex I Draft resolution The Committee on Conferences recommends to the General Assembly the inclusion of the following paragraphs in its resolution: Pattern of conferences The General Assembly, Reaffirming its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December 1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of 24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 56/287 of 27 June 2002 and 57/283 B of 15 April 2002, Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations, Also reaffirming the relevant provisions of its resolutions on multilingualism in the field of conference management, Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences and the relevant reports of the Secretary-General, I 1. Notes with appreciation the work of the Committee on Conferences; 2. Approves the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2004-2005, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences, taking into account the observations of the Committee, and subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004-2005 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session; 4. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the arrangements referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A of 18 December 1998, 54/248, 55/222 and 56/242 concerning Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Id al-Fitr and Id al-Adha, and requests all intergovernmental bodies to continue to observe those decisions when planning their meetings; II A. Utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities 1. Notes the improvements in the utilization of the conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa in response to section II.A, paragraph 21, of its resolution 57/283 B, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible options to increase further the utilization of the conference centre; 2. Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences to consult with those bodies that have consistently utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure of their allocated resources for the past three sessions with a view to making appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources; 3. Requests the Secretariat to continue to consult actively with the bureaux and secretariats of the bodies that consistently underutilize their conference-servicing resources with a view to making improvements in their utilization factors, bearing in mind that meetings are not to be held during off-hours and without interpretation; 4. Reaffirms that the provision of conference services for meetings and consultations of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to the maximum extent possible, facilitates the work of the Main Committees of the General Assembly and other United Nations bodies; 5. Reaffirms its decision in section II.A, paragraph 14, of its resolution 57/283 B to include all necessary resources in the budget for the biennium 20042005 to provide interpretation services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States upon request by those groups, on an ad hoc basis, in accordance with established practice, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, through the Committee on Conferences, a report on the implementation of that decision; B. Reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management 1. Welcomes the initial steps taken by the Secretary-General in the implementation of the reform measures put forward in his report in accordance with section II.B of its resolution 57/283 B, and encourages the continued implementation of the measures described in paragraph 52 of his report on the reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 2. Stresses that the reform of the Department should be aimed at improving the timely delivery of documentation and the quality of conference services provided to Member States with a view to meeting the needs of Member States as efficiently and effectively as possible and in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; 3. Notes that these measures will include a comprehensive study of the integrated global management of conference-related resources, in consultation with the Office of Internal Oversight Services and with the full participation of all duty stations in a collaborative and consultative process with a view to reaching conclusions that are both practical and comprehensive, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the Committee on Conferences informed on the matter; 4. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to improve the quality of reporting by consolidating reports on related subjects, writing more focused reports with clearly defined recommendations for action and observing stipulated page limits, and requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts in this regard in accordance with relevant mandates and in consultation with relevant intergovernmental bodies as appropriate, while ensuring that all mandated reports are issued for consideration, as requested, in a timely fashion and contain all the information requested; 5. Notes that reports not originating in the Secretariat comprise the bulk of the documents issued and requests the Secretary-General to examine ways and means to achieve compliance with the relevant guideline on page limits and to report to the Committee on Conferences on the matter; 6. Also notes the intention of the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive study of workload standards and performance measurement and to establish a Secretariat task force with broad participation; 7. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a thorough cost-benefit analysis of the current approach to summary records and to review the list of bodies entitled to them, in consultation with the relevant intergovernmental bodies, with a view to assessing the relevance of such records and providing viable, efficient, effective and financially sound alternatives; 8. Recognizes that user satisfaction is a key performance indicator in conference management and services, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to take a user-oriented approach towards performance management on a wider scope and to incorporate the results of such an approach, as well as the results of its own internal evaluation of the Department, in the operation of the Department; 9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide assistance to Member States, as required, in the transition to electronic submission and retrieval of documents, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; 10. Notes the pilot project on ways and means of completing the concordance of draft resolutions prior to their adoption by the General Assembly, and reiterates the need to maintain the concordance principle for all resolutions; III Documentation- and publication-related matters 1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules concerning simultaneous distribution of documents in all official languages are followed with respect to the posting of parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System (ODS) and on the United Nations web site, in keeping with section III, paragraph 5, of General Assembly resolution 55/222; 2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that documentation is available in accordance with the six-week rule for the distribution of documents simultaneously in the six official languages of the General Assembly; IV 1. Emphasizes that the primary goal of the introduction of new technology should be to enhance the quality of conference services and to ensure their timely provision in the most cost-effective manner, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the use of the new technology; 2. Welcomes the progress achieved thus far across duty stations in integrating information technology into management and documentation-processing systems; 3. Notes with concern the particular situation of the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and urges the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure that modern conference management and documentation practices, systems and technology are shared across all duty stations in an institutionalized manner; Requests the Secretary-General to submit a consolidated report on all actions mandated in the present resolution to the Committee on Conferences at its next session. Draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations and of the principal organs of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and treaty bodies established under the auspices of the United Nations for 2004-2005 The following abbreviations are used in the present annex: In the column headed "Organ" ECA Economic Commission for Africa ECE Economic Commission for Europe ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ESCWA Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICSC International Civil Service Commission IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development ILO International Labour Organization IMF International Monetary Fund IMO International Maritime Organization INSTRAW International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women ITU International Telecommunication Union UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UNHCR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNITAR United Nations Institute for Training and Research UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East UNU United Nations University UPU Universal Postal Union WFP World Food Programme WHO World Health Organization WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization WMO World Meteorological Organization In the column headed "Membership" G Governments E Experts ST Secretariat or secretariats In the column headed "Servicing" I Interpretation T Translation PV Verbatim records SR Summary records A Arabic C Chinese E English F French R Russian S Spanish A. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations, 2004 (as at September 2003) Dates (2004) Location Servicinga Periodicity Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Working Group on the Optional Protocol [General Assembly resolution 55/70]b 7-9 January New York 5 E T Two sessions per year Economic and Social Council, election of Bureau [Charter] 8 January 54 G (ACEFRS) SR One session per year UNCTAD, Working Party on the medium-term plan and the programme budget, forty-second session, first part [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] 12-16 January Geneva c One or two sessions per year Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, thirtieth session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 51/68]b 12-30 January 23 E Committee on the Rights of the Child, thirty-fifth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b 10 E Three sessions per year States Parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, twentieth meeting [General Assembly resolution 2106 (XX)]b 14 January 155 G One session every two years Military Staff Committee [Charter] 16 January, once every fortnight thereafter 5 G (CEFR) PV Every second Friday UNICEF, Executive Board, first regular session [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] 19-23 January 36 G Two to three sessions per year United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Board of Trustees [General Assembly resolution 46/122] (EFS) Conference on Disarmament, first part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] 19 January- 26 March 61 G One session in three parts per year UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, first regular session [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162] 26-30 January UNCTAD, Commission on Investment, Technology and Related Financial Issues [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] Commission on Human Rights, intergovernmental working group on effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/246] 26 January- 6 February 53 G Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (meeting on Rules of Procedure of the Conference of States Parties) [General Assembly resolution 55/25]b 26 January- 6 March Vienna 194 G Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, African region [Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/11] Addis Ababa (AEF) Joint Meeting of the Executive Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP [General Assembly resolution 52/12 B] January (1 day) 36 G/36 G/ Consultative Committee on the United Nations Development Fund for Women, forty-fourth session [General Assembly resolutions 31/133 and 39/125] January Asia and Pacific Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders [General Assembly resolution 51/171] Bangkok 52 G United Nations Staff Pension Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] January/February (1 meeting) 12 E Three sessions of one meeting each per year Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, pre-sessional working group [General Assembly resolutions 45/124, 47/94 and 51/68]b 3-6 February 4 E Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b Economic and Social Council, organizational session [Charter] Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions [General Assembly resolution 173 (II)] 3 February- 26 March 16 E Commission for Social Development, forty-second session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 10 (II), 1139 (XLI) and 1996/7] 4-13 February 46 G Investments Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] 9 February 11-12 E Four or five meetings per year UNCTAD, Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] 9-13 February Commission on Human Rights, Working Group on Situations [Economic and Social Council resolution 1990/41] (EFRS) Commission on Human Rights, working group of experts on people of African descent [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/246] International Narcotics Control Board, seventy-ninth session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b 13 E Two or three sessions per year Commission on Human Rights, open-ended working group on the right to development [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/261] 9-20 February Preparatory Meeting of the First Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction [article 11, paragraph 2, of the Convention]b,d 13 February and 28-29 June 134 G WFP, Executive Board, first regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]d 16-20 February Rome Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, forty-first session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 16-27 February Panel of governmental experts on missiles, first session [General Assembly resolution 57/71] 23-27 February UNCITRAL, Working Group on Arbitration [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 60 G Working Group on Reimbursement of Contingent-owned Equipment [General Assembly resolution 55/274] 23 February- 5 March 191 G Commission on Human Rights, open-ended working group to elaborate an optional protocol to the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/242] ECE, fifty-ninth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV)] 24-26 February 55 G (EFR) Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters [General Assembly resolution 37/99 K] February (3-4 days) UNCTAD, Commission on Enterprise, Business Facilitation and Development [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] February Committee of Permanent Representatives to UNEP [Governing Council decision 13/2] Nairobi 58 G Four sessions per year Africa Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders [General Assembly resolution 51/171] Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI)] February/March 25 G SRe Committee on the Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families [General Assembly resolution 45/158]b 1-4 March Commission on the Status of Women, forty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1999/257] 1-12 March 45 G Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, sixty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX)]b 1-19 March 18 E (CEFRS) Statistical Commission, thirty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/8] 2-5 March 24 G United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, Board of Trustees [General Assembly resolution 40/131] 4-12 March Human Rights Committee, Working Group on Communications [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)]b 8-12 March 9 E Group of government experts on the relationship between disarmament and development, second session [General Assembly resolution 57/75] 24 E UNCITRAL, Working Group on Electronic Commerce [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 15-19 March Advisory Group of the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People [General Assembly resolution 48/163] Human Rights Committee, eightieth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)]b 15 March-2 April (AEFRS) Commission on Human Rights, sixtieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 9 (II) and decision 2003/270]f 15 March-23 Aprilg Commission on Narcotic Drugs, forty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 9 (I) and 1991/39] 16-25 March Committee of the Whole of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs [Economic and Social Council resolution 1991/39] (4 days) Commission on Population and Development, thirty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 150 (VII), 87 (LVII) and 1995/55] 22-26 March 47 G UNCITRAL, Working Group on Insolvency Law [General Assembly resolution 33/92] UNEP, Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum, eighth special session [General Assembly resolutions 2997 (XXVII) and 42/185] 29-31 March Jeju Island, Republic of Korea Committee for Development Policy, sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/46] 29 March-2 April Committee of Experts on Public Administration [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/60] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Security Interests [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Legal Subcommittee, forty-third session [General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV)] 29 March-8 April SRi ICSC, fifty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 3357 (XXIX)] 29 March-16 Aprilg To be determined 15 E INSTRAW, Board of Trustees [General Assembly resolutions 33/187 and 34/157]d,h March (1 week) Santo Domingo 11 E UNITAR, Board of Trustees, forty-second session, first part [General Assembly resolutions 1934 (XVIII) and 47/227] March (2-3 days) 28 E One session per year General Assembly, Fifth Committee, resumed session [Charter] March Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, seventh session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001]b,d 90 G Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), forty-seventh sessiond 15 G Western Asia Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders [General Assembly resolution 51/171] Beirut 13 G Committee for the United Nations Population Award [General Assembly resolution 36/201] March/Aprilg (2 days) 10 G United Nations Staff Pension Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] March/Aprilg (1 meeting) Disarmament Commission [General Assembly resolution S-10/2] 5-23 Aprilg Commission on Sustainable Development acting as the preparatory committee for the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/55] 14-16 April Commission on Sustainable Development, twelfth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/289] 19-30 April Meeting of experts of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at its Fifth Review Conference]b,d United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names, twenty-second session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 715 A (XXVII) and 1314 (XLIV)] 20-29 April 80 E ESCAP, sixtieth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 37 (IV), 69 (V) and 723 B (XXVIII) and decision 2003/228] 22-28 April Shanghai Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf [annex II, article 2 (5), of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea] b 26-30 April 21 E United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, fifty-second session [General Assembly resolution 913 (X)] 21 G Committee on Information, twenty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 33/115 C] 26 April-7 May 99 G Preparatory Committee for the 2005 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, third session [General Assembly resolution 55/33 D]b,d 188 G Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, thirty-second session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39]b 26 April-14 May Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group, substantive session [General Assembly resolution 48/42] Aprilg (4 weeks) 114 G Commission on Human Rights, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, seventy-second session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/221] Aprilg (1 week) (AEFS) Economic and Social Council, special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization [General Assembly resolution 50/227] Aprilg (1 day) Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, organizational session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31] 19 G Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat [General Assembly resolution 56/206] Aprilg Four meetings per year Latin America and the Caribbean Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders [General Assembly resolution 51/171] Santiago 41 G United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, first regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/321] April/Mayg 26 ST (EF) Committee against Torture, pre-sessional working group [General Assembly resolution 56/44]b 3-7 May Commission on Human Rights, Working Group on Arbitrary Detention [Economic and Social decision 2003/247] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Transport Law [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 3-14 May United Nations Forum on Forests, fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/35 and decision 2003/297] International Law Commission, fifty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 174 (II)] 3 May-4 June and 5 July-6 August 34 E Economic and Social Council, resumed organizational session [Charter] 4-5 May 4 May-25 June New York and other UN duty stations 10 May Commission on Science and Technology for Development, seventh session [General Assembly resolution 46/235 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/75] 10-14 May 33 G Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/304] 10-21 May Committee against Torture, thirty-second session [General Assembly resolution 39/46 A]b United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Board of Trustees, twenty-third session [General Assembly resolution 36/151] 10-26 May Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations [Economic and Social Council resolutions 3 (II) and 1296 (XLIV) and decisions 1995/304 and 1997/297] 10-28 May Conference on Disarmament, second part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] 10 May-25 June Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, thirteenth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/1] 11-20 May 40 G Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, parallel meetings for informal consultations and working groups [Economic and Social Council decision 1997/232] (12 meetings) Panel of governmental experts on missiles, second session [General Assembly resolution 57/71] 17-21 May Commission on Human Rights, Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, Working Group on Minorities [Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/246] Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, pre-sessional working group [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39]b International Narcotics Control Board, eightieth session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b 17-28 May Committee on the Rights of the Child, thirty-sixth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b 17 May-4 June Group of government experts on the relationship between disarmament and development, third session [General Assembly resolution 57/75] 24-28 May WFP, Executive Board, annual session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]d WFP, Executive Board, second regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]d 31 May-4 June Regional seminar to review the situation in Non-Self-Governing Territories under the Second Decade on the Eradication of Colonialism [General Assembly resolution 55/147] May (3 days) Committee for Programme and Coordination, organizational session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] May (1 day) 34 G May UNCTAD, Working Party on the medium-term plan and the programme budget, forty-second session, second part [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] ECA, Committee of Experts of the Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, twenty-third meeting [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] ECA, Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, thirty-sixth session of the Commission [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] May/June Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, forty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 2-11 June PVi Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, Board of Trustees [Economic and Social Council decision 1993/283] 7-9 June UNICEF, Executive Board, annual session [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] 7-11 June Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea [General Assembly resolution 57/141] Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, eleventh session [General Assembly resolution 57/235] 7-11 Junec Sao Paulo 192 G One session every four years Committee on Contributions, sixty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 14 (I) A] 7-25 June Meeting of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea [General Assembly resolutions 37/66 and 49/28]b 14-18 June 138 G Commission on Human Rights, Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery [Economic and Social Council decision 16 (LVI)] UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, annual session [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162] 14-25 June UNFCCC, meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention [General Assembly decision 56/199]b, j Bonn 186 G United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, thirty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI)] 14 June-2 July Meeting of persons chairing human rights treaty bodies [General Assembly resolutions 46/111 and 49/178]b 21-25 June 8 E United Nations Board of Auditors [General Assembly resolution 74 (I)] 28-30 June 3 E 28 June-2 July Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Transnational Organized Crimes and its Protocols, first session [General Assembly resolution 55/25]b 28 June-9 July To be convened not later than one year following the entry into force of the Convention Committee for Programme and Coordination, forty-fourth session, first part [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] June (4 weeks) United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, Committee of Actuaries [General Assembly resolution 1561 (XV), article XXIX] June (1 week) (ER) Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, eighth session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001]b,d June Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), forty-eighth sessiond International Law Seminar [General Assembly resolution 49/51] June-July (3 weeks) 30 E Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI)] June/July (6-8 meetings per week, up to 30 meetings) [General Assembly resolution 37/99 K] (3-4 days) 20 E June/July (1 day) United Nations Administrative Tribunal [General Assembly resolution 351 A (IV)] 7 E PVk 5-9 July Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 5-14 July 27 G Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, thirty-first session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 51/68]b 6-23 July ICSC, fifty-ninth session [General Assembly resolution Economic and Social Council, substantive session [Charter] 6-30 July Human Rights Committee, eighty-first session 12-30 July Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1999/65] 14-16 July 29 G Panel of governmental experts on missiles, third session [General Assembly resolution 57/71] 19-23 July 26-30 July Commission on Human Rights, Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, fifty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 9 (II)] 26 July- 13 August 26 E Conference on Disarmament, third part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] 26 July- 10 September United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, fifty-second session [General Assembly resolutions 248 (III) and 46/200] July (2 weeks) Montreal (ICAO Headquarters) 33 E Group on Indigenous Populations [Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/34 and decision 2003/253] July (1 week) United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, Standing Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] July (1 day) UNCTAD, Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Competition Law and Policy [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] July Montreal Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, sixty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 2-20 August Commission on Human Rights, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, seventy-third session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/221] 9-13 August Group on Communications [Economic and Social Council resolution 1503 (XLVIII)] 16-27 August Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, intersessional forum on economic, social and cultural rights (Social Forum) [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/264] 23-24 August on the Law of the Sea]b 30 August- 3 September Committee for Programme and Coordination, forty-fourth session, second part [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] August (2 weeks) 6-10 September 7 September- 24 December Investments Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] 13 September UNICEF, Executive Board, second regular session [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] 13-17 Septemberd UNCTAD, Working Party on the Medium-term Plan and the Programme Budget, forty-third session [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] 13-17 September Committee on the Rights of the Child, thirty-seventh session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b 13 September- 1 October General Assembly, fifty-ninth session [Charter] 14 September- December PV/ SRl UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, second regular session [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162] 20-24 Septemberd UNCTAD, Trade and Development Board, fifty-first session [General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) and UNCTAD resolution 114 (V)] 27 September- 8 October 148 G Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), forty-ninth sessiond September (3 days) UNITAR, Board of Trustees, forty-second session, second part [General Assembly resolutions 1934 (XVIII) and 47/227] September (2-3 days) UNRWA, Advisory Commission [General Assembly resolution 302 (IV)]d September (1 day) Amman September/ October (1 day) September/ October UNCTAD, Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting [Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/67] September/ October International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States [General Assembly resolution 57/262] Third Quarter Mauritius 4-8 October Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, European region [Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/36] One session every three years 11-15 October UNCITRAL, Working Group on Procurement [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 18-22 October WFP, Executive Board, third regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]d Human Rights Committee, eighty-second session 18 October- 5 November International Narcotics Control Board, eighty-first session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b 27 October- 12 November UNHCR, Executive Committee, fifty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 1166 (XII)]d October (1 week) 64 G United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, second regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/321] United Nations Administrative Tribunal [General Assembly resolution 351 (IV)] October/ November (5 weeks) 1-5 November 8-10 November Commission on Human Rights, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, seventy-fourth session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/221] 8-17 November Committee against Torture, thirty-third session [General Assembly resolution 39/46 A]b 8-19 November Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, thirty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39]b 8-26 November Annual meeting of the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at its Fifth Review Conference]b,d 15-19 November 144 G 17-26 November 22 November 22 November- 3 December Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Special Meeting in Observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People [General Assembly resolutions 32/40 B and 33/28] 29 November 29 November- 3 December 29 November- 3 December First Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction [article 11, paragraph 2, of the Convention] b,d UNFCCC, Conference of the Parties to the Convention, session, and meetings of subsidiary bodies [General Assembly resolution 56/199]b,j 10 December Panel of External Auditors of the United Nations, the Specialized Agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency [General Assembly resolutions 347 (IV) and 1438 (XIV)] 30 November- 7 December United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities [General Assembly resolution 32/197] November (1 day) Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly for the Announcement of Voluntary Contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East [General Assembly resolution 1729 (XVI)] November (1 meeting) One meeting per year Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, ninth session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001] b,d November Sixth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [article 13, paragraph 1, of Amended Protocol]b,d 69 G Annual Meeting of States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Convention]b,d 89 G Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals [Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/65] 6-9 December United Nations Board of Auditors, special session [General Assembly resolution 74 (I)] 8 December Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] UNU, Council, fifty-first session [General Assembly resolution 3081 (XXVIII)]c December (1 week) Tokyo Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), fiftieth sessiond Disarmament Commission, organizational session [General Assembly resolution S-10/2] December (2 days) Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, thirty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 2099 (XX)] Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly for the Announcement of Voluntary Contributions to the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees [General Assembly resolution 55/75] December (1 meeting) 193 G UNCTAD, other commodity conferences and commodity meetings [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] As required (up to 30 meetings) As required UNCTAD, seminars and study groups [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] UNCTAD, consultations of the Secretary-General and of the President of the Trade and Development Board [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] to 20 meetings) UNCTAD, executive sessions of the Trade and Development Board [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] As required (3 days) UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, briefings and informal consultations [General Assembly resolutions 2020 (XX) and 48/162] UNICEF, Executive Board, briefings and informal consultations [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] Trusteeship Council (and drafting committees) [Charter] PVe Security Council [Charter] Security Council Committee of Experts [decision taken by the Security Council at its 1st meeting, 1946] Security Council, Committee on the Admission of New Members [decision taken by the Security Council at its 42nd meeting, 1946] Security Council, Committee on Council Meetings away from Headquarters [decision taken by the Security Council at its 1625th meeting] Security Council Commission established under Security Council resolution 446 (1979) 3 G Security Council, Ad Hoc Committee established under Security Council resolution 507 (1982) 4 G Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation between Iraq and Kuwait Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 748 (1992) concerning the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning Angola Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 918 (1994) concerning Rwanda Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1160 (1998) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and Associated Individuals and Entities Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1298 (2000) concerning the situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991)d United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine [General Assembly resolution 194 (III)] Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group [General Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX)] Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People [General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX)] Committee on Conferences [General Assembly resolution 43/222 B] Committee on Relations with the Host Country [General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI)] Economic and Social Council, informal consultations [General Assembly resolution 50/227] ECE, committees and working groups [Economic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV)] International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 [Security Council resolution 808 (1993) and General Assembly resolution 47/235]d The Hague International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 [Security Council resolution 955 (1994)]d Arusha UNCCD, Committee for the Review of the Convention, third session [General Assembly resolution 56/196]b, j To be determined (2 weeks) 185 G Group of governmental experts to conduct a study on developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security, first session [General Assembly resolution 56/19] To be determined (1 week) Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, Asia and the Pacific region [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1985/11 and 1988/15] 51 G Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, Latin America and the Caribbean region [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1987/34 and 1988/15] Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East [Economic and Social Council resolution 1776 (LIV)] (1 week) A capital in the region 23 G (AER) United Nations Forum on Forests: ad hoc expert group on consideration with a view to recommending the parameters of a mandate for developing a legal framework on all types of forests [Economic and Social Council decision 2003/299] To be determined (up to 5 days) Meeting between the representatives of the United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions [General Assembly resolutions 37/4 and 50/17] To be determined (3 days) 27 ST Second meeting of the States parties to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families [General Assembly resolution 57/218]b To be determined (1 day) To be convened no later than six months after the date of the entry into force of the Convention for the forty-first State Party Thirteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [General Assembly resolution 34/180]b 163 G Commission on Sustainable Development, organizational session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/63] Twenty-second Meeting of States Parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)]b 145 G High-level Open-ended Working Group on the Financial Situation of the United Nations [General Assembly resolution 49/143] Informal Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for Peace and/or its sub-groups [General Assembly resolution 47/120] Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Informatics [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/48] UNCTAD, expert meeting of the Commission on Investment, Technology and Related Financial Issues UNCTAD, expert meeting of the Commission on Enterprise, Business Facilitation and Development UNCTAD, expert meeting of the Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167]c Preparatory process meetings for the eleventh session of UNCTAD [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] ECLAC, thirtieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 106 (VI) and decision 1985/188] Puerto Rico a The languages in which interpretation will be provided are indicated. Languages in which translation and meeting records will be provided vary according to the rules of procedure applicable to the body concerned and, in the case of some working groups and similar bodies, according to the actual requirements when these are less than would be provided under the rules of procedure. b Treaty body. c Open to the participation of all interested States members of UNCTAD (UNCTAD resolution 80 (III), para. 9). d Conference services are funded from outside the regular budget of the United Nations. e For plenary meetings only. f In decision 2003/269 of 23 July 2003, the Economic and Social Council authorized eight fully serviced additional meetings, including summary records, in accordance with rules 29 and 31 of the rules of procedure of the functional commission of the Council, for the Commission's sixtieth session. The Council approved the Commission's decision to request the Chairperson of the sixtieth session of the Commission to make every effort to organize the work of the session within the time normally allotted so that the additional meetings authorized by the Council might be utilized only if they proved to be absolutely necessary . g Pursuant to paragraph 1 of section I of General Assembly resolution 57/283 B and as decided by the Assembly previously, United Nations intergovernmental bodies are requested to avoid holding meetings on Orthodox Good Friday, which falls on 9 April 2004. h In its resolution 57/175, the Assembly endorsed the recommendation made by the Working Group on the future operation of the Institute to examine the feasibility of establishing an advisory board composed of Member States to replace the Board of Trustees. i The General Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 53/45, noted with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 9 of Assembly resolution 52/56, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its forty-first session, had reviewed further its requirements for unedited verbatim transcripts and agreed to continue the use of those transcripts. j Inclusion of meetings in the United Nations calendar and financing of conference services are subject to a decision by the Assembly. k When holding oral hearings. l It has been the practice to provide verbatim records for plenary and First Committee meetings only. Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 [General Assembly resolution 57/27] Ad Hoc Committee on an international convention against the reproductive cloning of human beings [General Assembly resolution 56/93] 23 February- 5 March Ad Hoc Committee on the convention on the safety of United Nations and associated personnel [General Assembly resolution 57/28] Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization [General Assembly resolution 3349 (XXIX)] Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a convention on the rights of persons with disabilities [General Assembly resolution 57/229] Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East [General Assembly resolution 2656 (XXV)] 9 G Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the Security Council [General Assembly resolution 48/26] Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories [General Assembly resolution 2443 (XXIII)] PVb b When holding oral hearings. Dates (2005) 7 January Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, thirty-second session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 51/68]b 10-28 January Committee on the Rights of the Child, thirty-eighth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b 14 January, once every fortnight thereafter 17-21 January 24-28 January 31 January- 4 February International Narcotics Control Board, eighty-second session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b WFP, Executive Board, first regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]c UNCTAD, Working Party on the medium-term plan and the programme budget, forty-fourth session, first part [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] January (1 week) d Consultative Committee on the United Nations Development Fund for Women, forty-fifth session [General Assembly resolutions 31/133 and 39/125] January/February (2 weeks) January-March (8 weeks) 1-4 February 1 February- 24 March 7-11 February Commission for Social Development, forty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 10 (II), 1139 (XLI) and 1996/7] 9-18 February UNEP, Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum, twenty-third session [General Assembly resolutions 2997 (XXVII) and 42/185] 21-25 February Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, forty-second session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 21 February- 4 March Intergovernmental preparatory meeting for the thirteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61] 28 February- Commission on the Status of Women, forty-ninth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1999/257] 11 March Tenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child [General Assembly resolution 44/25]b February (1 day) UNCTAD, Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167]c UNCTAD, Commission on Enterprise, Business Facilitation and Development [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167]c (2 weeks) Statistical Commission, thirty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/8] 7-11 March Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, sixty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 7-25 March Commission on Narcotic Drugs, forty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 9 (I) and 1991/39] 8-17 March Commission on Sustainable Development, thirteenth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1993/207] 14 March-1 April Commission on Human Rights, sixty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolution 9 (II)] 14 March- 22 April UNITAR, Board of Trustees, forty-third session, first part [General Assembly resolutions 1934 (XVIII) and 47/227] Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, tenth session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001]b,c Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), forty-seventh sessionc ECE, sixtieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV)] March/Aprilf (4 weeks) 113 G Human Rights Committee, eighty-third session [General Assembly resolutions 33/187 and 34/157]c,g (2 days) Commission on Population and Development, thirty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 4-8 April Committee for Development Policy, seventh session Committee of Experts on Public Administration [Economic and Social Council resolution 2001/45 and decision 2003/59] 4-8 Aprilf Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Legal Subcommittee, forty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV)] 4-15 April SRh Meeting of experts of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at its Fifth Review Conference]b,c 11-22 April ICSC, sixtieth session [General Assembly resolution 11-28 April Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, thirty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39]b 25 April-13 Mayf International Law Commission, fifty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 174 (II)]f 25 April-3 June and 4 July- 12 August 27-28 April Eleventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders [General Assembly resolution 57/171] 18-25 Aprilb One session every five years ESCAP, sixty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 37 (IV), 69 (V) and 723 B (XXVIII)] Aprilf (7 days) Aprilf (1 day) Aprilf ESCWA, Preparatory Committee [Economic and Social Council resolution 1994/26] ESCWA, twenty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1818 (LV), 2089 (LXIII) and 1994/26] Committee on Information, twenty-seventh session April/Mayf 2-5 May International Narcotics Control Board, eighty-third session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b 2-13 May 2005 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, second session [General Assembly resolution 55/33 D]b,c 2-27 May 3 May-15 July 4-8 May 9-13 May Committee against Torture, thirty-fourth session 9-20 May United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Board of Trustees, twenty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 36/151] 9-25 May 9-27 May pre-sessional working group [Economic and Social 16-20 May United Nations Forum on Forests, fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/35 and decision 2001/218] 16-27 May decision 56/199]b,i 189 G Committee on the Rights of the Child, thirty-ninth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b 16 May-3 June Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, fourteenth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/1] 18-27 May Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families [General Assembly resolution 45/158]b 30 May-3 June WFP, Executive Board, annual session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]c High-level Committee on the Review of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, fourteenth session [General Assembly resolution 33/134] 31 May-3 June Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues [Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/22] May (2 weeks) Commission on Human Rights, Working Group on Arbitrary Detention [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/247] May (1 week) Commission on Science and Technology for Development, eighth session [General Assembly resolution 46/235 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/75] UNCTAD, Working Party on the medium-term plan and the programme budget, forty-fourth session, second part [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, fifty-first session [General Assembly resolution 913 (X)] Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, twentieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/1 and General Assembly resolution 56/206] (7 weeks) 6-8 June 6-10 June WFP, Executive Board, second regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]c Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, forty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 8-17 June PVh 13-24 June 20-24 June 27-29 June 27 June-1 July Committee on Contributions, sixty-fifth session June (3 weeks) Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, eleventh session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001]b,c Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), forty-eighth sessionc ECA, Committee of Experts of the Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, twenty-fourth meeting [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] ECA, Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, thirty-eighth session of the Commission [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] Committee for Programme and Coordination, forty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] June/July (1week) (1 day) PVj 4-8 July United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, thirty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI)] 4-22 July 4-29 July Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, thirty-third session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 51/68]b 5-22 July Second Biennial meeting of States to consider the implementation of the Programme of Action on Small Arms [General Assembly resolution 56/24 V] 11-15 July ICSC, sixty-first session [General Assembly resolution 11-22 July Human Rights Committee, eighty-fourth session 11-29 July 25-29 July Commission on Human Rights, Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, fifty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolution 9 (II)] 25 July- Group on Indigenous Populations [Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/34] Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] July (3 days) July/September (7 weeks) Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, sixty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 1-19 August 15-26 August August (2 days) UNCCD, Conference of the Parties to the Convention, sixth session, and meetings of subsidiary bodies [General Assembly resolution 56/196]b,i August/ September 6 September- 23 December 12-16 Septemberc Committee on the Rights of the Child, fortieth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 12-30 September General Assembly, sixtieth session [Charter] SRk 19-23 Septemberc Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), forty-ninth sessionc UNITAR, Board of Trustees, forty-third session, second part [General Assembly resolutions 1934 (XVIII) and 47/227] (2-3 days) UNRWA, Advisory Commission [General Assembly resolution 302 (IV)]c the Programme Budget, forty-fifth session [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] 3-7 October 10-14 October Human Rights Committee, eighty-fifth session 17 October- 4 November General Assembly, high-level dialogue on financing for development [General Assembly resolution 57/250] October (3 days) of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, fortieth session [General Assembly resolution 2099 (XX)] October (2 days) UNHCR, Executive Committee, fifty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 1166 (XII)] UNCTAD, Trade and Development Board, fifty-second session [General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) and UNCTAD resolution 114 (V)] 7-11 November and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]c Committee against Torture, thirty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 39/46 A]b 7-18 November UNFCCC, Conference of the Parties to the Convention, ninth session, and meetings of subsidiary bodies [General Assembly resolution 56/199]b,i thirty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39]b 7-25 November International Narcotics Control Board, eighty-fourth session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b 14-16 November Annual meeting of the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at its Fifth Review Conference]b,c 14-18 November Tenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment [General Assembly resolution 39/46 A]b 25 November 139 G 28 November- 2 December 6 December November (8 days) Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, twelfth session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001]b,c Seventh Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [article 13, paragraph 1, of Amended Protocol]b,c Annual Meeting of States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Convention]b,c 7 December UNU, Council, fifty-second session [General Assembly resolution 3081 (XXVIII)] (7 days) Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), fiftieth sessionc Commission on Narcotic Drugs, resumed forty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 9 (I) and 1991/39] UNICEF, Executive Board, extraordinary budgetary session [Executive Board decision 2000/7] Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991)c International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 [Security Council resolution 808 (1993) and General Assembly resolution 47/235]c International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 [Security Council resolution 955 (1994)]c Group of governmental experts to conduct a study on developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security, third session [General Assembly resolution 56/19] Group of governmental experts to conduct a study on developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security, second session [General Assembly resolution 56/19] Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1273 (XLIII) and 1765 (LIV)] 25 E General meeting on cooperation between the representatives of the secretariats of the United Nations system and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations [General Assembly resolutions 45/82 and 50/16] ECLAC, Committee of the Whole, twenty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 106 (VI)] To be determined (2 days) UNCITRAL, Working Group on Transport Law [General Assembly resolution 33/92] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Arbitration Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean [General Assembly resolution 56/16] 44 G Informal Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for Peace and/or its subgroups [General Assembly resolution 47/120] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Security Interests UNCITRAL, Working Group on Procurement UNCITRAL, Working Group on Electronic Commerce, forty-second session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] UNCTAD, expert meeting of the Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] General meeting of representatives of the United Nations system and of the Organization of American States [General Assembly resolution 55/15] c Conference services are funded from outside the regular budget of the United Nations. d Open to the participation of all interested States members of UNCTAD (UNCTAD resolution 80 (III), para. 9). f Pursuant to paragraph 1 of section I of General Assembly resolution 57/283 B and as decided by the Assembly previously, United Nations intergovernmental bodies are requested to avoid holding meetings on Orthodox Good Friday, which falls on 29 April 2005. g In its resolution 57/175, the Assembly endorsed the recommendation made by the Working Group on the future operation of the Institute to examine the feasibility of establishing an advisory board composed of Member States to replace the Board of Trustees. h The General Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 53/45, noted with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 9 of Assembly resolution 52/56, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its forty-first session, had reviewed further its requirements for unedited verbatim transcripts and agreed to continue the use of those transcripts. i Inclusion of meetings in the United Nations calendar and financing of conference services are subject to a decision by the Assembly. j When holding oral hearings. k It has been the practice to provide verbatim records for plenary and First Committee meetings only. IAEA, Board of Governors, Programme and Budget Committee 19 January WHO, Executive Board 19-24 January ICAO, Committee UPU, Postal Operations Council 5-13 February Berne Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings 9-27 February IFAD, Governing Council 18-19 February and May ICAO, Council IAEA, Board of Governors 8 March ILO, Governing Body and its committees 11-26 March Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Executive Council 18-21 March Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity Kuala Lumpur 19 April-7 May IFAD, Executive Board 21-22 April Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, First Review Conference of the Chemical Weapons Convention 28 April-9 May UNESCO, Executive Board April Paris April/May 4 May WHO, World Health Assembly, fifty-seventh session 17-22 May UNIDO, Industrial Development Board 25-27 May ILO, General Conference 1-18 June Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group A and informal/expert meetings WMO, Executive Council 8-18 June 14 June 18 June Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, twenty-second session 22-25 June FAO, Council ITU, Council IMO, Council London 30 August-10 September UNIDO, Programme and Budget Committee, twentieth session 8-9 September UPU Congress 15 September-5 October Bucharest IAEA, General Conference 20-24 September 23-26 September 27 September Annual meetings of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Vienna or New York WIPO, Assemblies of Member States September/October Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, Working Group A and informal/expert meeting Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, eighth session 20-24 October UPU, Council of Administration 4-19 November 8-11 November Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, twenty-third session IAEA, Board of Governors, Technical Assistance and Cooperation Committee 22-27 November IMO, Assembly November/December FAO, Conference 1-2 December 2-5 December International Seabed Authority, Assembly, tenth session Kingston Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Budget and Finance Committee 17 January 14 March 2 May UNIDO, Programme and Budget Committee, twenty-first session 2-6 May WHO, World Health Assembly, fifty-eighth session 7-23 June 13 June 20-25 June 21-23 June Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, twenty-fourth session August/September 19 September 26-30 September UNESCO, General Conference 3 October Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group A and informal/expert meeting ITU, World Summit on the Information Society, second phase 16-18 November Tunis 19-30 November 21 November 24 November UNIDO, General Conference, eleventh session 28 November-2 December Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, twenty-fifth session 1 December International Seabed Authority, Assembly, eleventh session WTO, Ministerial Conference World Tourism Organization, General Assembly 