%%%INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|INFORMATION MANAGEMENT|DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION|PROJECT EVALUATION|DUTY STATIONS|GOVERNANCE|INFORMATION SYSTEMS|COMPUTER SECURITY|FIELD OFFICES|

Fifty-eighth session * A/58/150. ** The release of the report was delayed due to disruptions caused by the August 2003 power blackout in New York City, which resulted in numerous operational emergencies and required that priority attention be given to restoring the information and communications technology operations at Headquarters. Item 123 of the provisional agenda* Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Information and communication technology strategy: implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/304 of 15 April 2003 Report of the Secretary-General** Summary The present report provides information on the issues raised by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/304 of 15 April 2003 concerning the scope of the information and communication technology strategy reported to the Assembly in the report of the Secretary-General dated 20 November 2002 (A/57/620) and update on the status of the projects identified in the strategy. Paragraphs Page Introduction Governance issues Information and communication technology requirements of duty stations Status of the projects identified in the strategy Rationale for investment Strengthening information and communications technology infrastructure Connectivity in the field Optimum placement on non-information and communications technology support functions Conclusion and recommendations Annexes I. Update as at 20 May 2003 of the information contained in tables 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 of document A/57/620 II. Connectivity in the field 1. In its resolution 57/304 of 15 April 2003 on the information and communications technology strategy, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide further information on the issues proposed in the context of the related report of the Secretary-General on the information and communications technology (ICT) strategy (A/57/620) submitted for consideration at its fifty-eighth session. II. Governance issues 2. In paragraph 4 of resolution 57/304, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to address the further strengthening of governance and central leadership arrangements. Action taken 3. The Project Review Committee of the Information and Communications Technology Board, currently being established, provides the head of the Information Technology Services Division of the Office of Central Support Services, as the Chairperson of the Committee, with a strong, central authority over ICT initiatives for the Organization as a whole. The Committee will review each ICT initiative, following a documented procedure, to ensure that: (a) a uniform methodology is being followed to articulate and justify the rationale behind the investment, including projected return on investment; (b) standards for the development of systems are consistently applied; (c) total cost of projects are accurately projected, including ongoing maintenance and support; (d) comprehensive documentation is made available through the entire life cycle of a project. 4. The head of the Division currently has the authority to establish ICT standards. The Committee will enforce those standards on ICT initiatives under review throughout the Secretariat. 5. The Information Technology Services Division has implemented an ICT assets database, which stores up-to-date information on all ICT systems that have been developed or are under development in the Secretariat worldwide. The appropriate use of this system will be assessed by the Committee as part of its review process for each initiative, ensuring that past or ongoing ICT investments are leveraged and that new initiatives are combined, when appropriate, forestalling duplication. 6. The methodology to be applied by the Committee will track the entire life cycle of all initiatives, from developing the business case and proving return on investment through the review of all its deliverables. All initiatives will include a final "lessons learned" section. The Committee functioning, following developing of the related standard procedures for the ICT projects, will provide for a consistent review of the projects portfolio within the Organization, including their estimated costs and time frames for their implementation. 7. All documentation related to the ICT initiatives will be stored in the ICT assets database for the record and future reference. 8. The Information and Communications Technology Board is closely involved in the creation of the Project Review Committee and will provide its leading role in reviewing the overall ICT structure of the Secretariat. III. Information and communication technology requirements of duty stations 9. In paragraph 5 of resolution 57/304, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to ensure that the ICT requirements of duty stations were integrated into the strategy and adequately provisioned. 10. Investments in infrastructure, especially telecommunications to enable robust connectivity to all duty stations and peacekeeping missions, have been integrated into the strategy and have been reflected in the proposals included in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 in all its relevant sections. Data traffic capacity to and from all duty stations will be significantly enhanced through the acquisition of additional bandwidth both over satellite circuits as well as over leased terrestrial lines, subject to availability of the related funding. IV. Status of the projects identified in the strategy 11. In paragraph 6 (a) of the resolution, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide an update on the status of projects identified in the strategy. This is provided in annex I to the present report. Of the 34 projects and initiatives included in the strategy, 11 have experienced delays in their implementation, owing largely to resource constraints in the biennium 2002-2003 and in some cases to modifications in their initial requirements. V. Rationale for investment 12. In paragraph 6 (b) of the resolution, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide information on the return on investment anticipated for major projects. 13. The methodology applied for the projection of returns on investment and to prioritize initiatives is based on the benefits that each initiative is anticipated to generate. In the absence of quantitative measures, the strategy utilizes four return indicators: service improvement: quicker access to information and/or higher quality services; process streamlining: eliminating duplication and having the potential for redeployment of resources; leveraging past investments and extending the life of current systems; and strong enabler in the decision-making process. Annex I lists initiatives under the three areas of delivery, prioritized by these criteria. Initiatives with a higher number of return indicators are given higher priority. 14. The standard project methodology under development by the Information and Communications Technology Board, to be implemented as part of the activation of the Project Review Committee, requires that each ICT project have a business case that is progressively refined from a high level to a very detailed level as the project proceeds through its life cycle. The Board is modelling this standard on best industry practices, and these practices include methods for analysis of the rationale for investment that will amplify those itemized in the preceding paragraph. 15. A fundamental component of each business case to be developed for an ICT project is the linkage of substantive goals and plans to the objectives and outcomes envisioned for the project. The Committee will ensure that business cases are consistently completed and recorded. VI. Strengthening information and communications technology infrastructure 16. In paragraph 6 (c) of the resolution, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide specific plans to strengthen the ICT infrastructure, including system security, reliability and maintainability. 17. The proposed programme budget includes provisions for a significant enhancement of the infrastructure throughout the system. It should be noted that improvements and basic maintenance of core infrastructure components originally planned for the current biennium were severely constrained due to the unavailability of funds. The proposals and the expected functionality, which are identified in the ICT strategy included, inter alia: (a) Migration to Windows 2000: the migration to this operating system and its adoption as a standard throughout the Secretariat worldwide will provide significantly higher desktop computer reliability and ensure continuing vendor support; (b) Migration to storage area networks: the installation of the storage area networks will allow a significant reduction in the use of individual servers and will add reliability to data centre operations. The storage area network architecture enables the sharing of high-performance common storage facilities by all software applications and servers leading to a more cost-effective utilization of available storage and generating significant savings for the Organization; (c) Redundancy of mission-critical hardware: the implementation of clusters of servers provides the capability to automatically switch to a different server in the event of a malfunction. This technology will be used to enable uninterrupted operations of mission-critical systems; (d) Multi-point digital videoconferencing: the installation of current generation videoconferencing equipment and its underlying telecommunication infrastructure will allow better transmission quality and permit the use of this medium to connect a higher number of sites simultaneously; (e) Advanced virus protection: the implementation of current generation antivirus technologies, coupled with the automated periodic distribution of virus-specific updates, will enable greater protection against viruses disseminated through the Internet and against unsolicited e-mail (SPAM); (f) Multi-layer Internet firewalls: the installation of multi-layer Internet firewalls will provide enhanced network security and the ability to ensure secure and reliable field connectivity. VII. Connectivity in the field 18. In paragraph 6 (d) of the resolution, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide information on the further development of connectivity with the duty stations, field missions, regional commissions, the International Court of Justice and the Tribunals. 19. The proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, as well as the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the proposed budgets of the Tribunals include provisions to substantially augment the capacity of connectivity with regional commissions, peacekeeping missions, and the Tribunals respectively. Annex II illustrates the proposed enhancements. Annex II.A shows the current capacity; annex II.B shows the proposed increased bandwidth for the biennium 2004-2005; and annex II.C shows the planned connectivity of all subregional offices of the Economic Commission for Africa. VIII. Optimum placement on non-information and communications technology support functions 20. In paragraph 7 of the resolution the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to address the optimum placement in the Organization of support activities, which are not ICT functions. 21. The issue of placement of technical support activities, which are not common ICT functions, in other areas of the Secretariat are currently under review. These functions include sound engineering and related conference or meeting support activities provided to intergovernmental and expert organs of the United Nations. It has been ascertained in the course of the review that these functions should be retained in the Office of Central Support Services, to ensure adequate quality and timeliness of the services, but they should be placed within other service areas of the Office. IX. Conclusion and recommendations 22. In the course of review of the information and communications technology strategy by the General Assembly during its fifty-seventh session, the Secretariat provided to the Assembly concrete examples of the impact on the ICT activities of the budget cuts in financial resources effected during the biennium 2002-2003. 23. In the context of that information, the Secretariat has stated that the most critical impact was the heightened level of risk under which several core services were operating. This was due to the reduced funding for contractual services and general operating expenses which forced the Secretariat to cancel or reduce service coverage for several infrastructure components needed in the provision of central services, inter alia: Internet services and support for central servers 24. The power blackout that affected the United States of America on 14 and 15 August and its impact on the United Nations activities provided a clear example of the risks involved in operating an ICT infrastructure with inadequate safeguards and support services. As a result of having to rely on a single Internet service provider, due to lack of funding to procure a back-up provider, Internet services were not available immediately after the electrical power was restored. As a consequence, connectivity with the field was interrupted, including the Integrated Management Information System operations, electronic mail, as well as the United Nations web site were not operating and the Official Document System was not available. 25. As the Organization has come to rely on several ICT infrastructure components and services for its everyday operations, it is critical that these be treated more as essential utilities rather than as optional investments. Without prejudice to the need for solid justification in the case of systems development initiatives, essential infrastructure maintenance should never be compromised. 26. The General Assembly may wish to take note of the present report in the context of its review and approval of the information and communications technology strategy proposed by the Secretary-General in his previous report (A/57/620). Annex I Most notable projects and initiatives Update as at 20 May 2003 of the information contained in tables I.1, I.2 and I.3 of document A/57/620 Table I.1 E-management PS (Process streamliner) SI (Service improvement) D (Support the decision-making process) L (Leverage past investments) Project Objective Expected benefits Progress -- milestones Type of return Galaxy-R1 Use the Internet, Intranet and software to support personnel recruitment Streamlined and shortened recruitment process through provision of automation to the candidate application, rostering and initial selection Release 1 of the system went into production on 1 May 2002 PS, SI, D IMISa consolidation of databases a Integrated Management Information System. Re-engineer the database architecture and consolidation mechanisms Streamlined processing of inter-office financial transactions, transfer of staff and others. Elimination of duplication of data-entry tasks. Enhanced reporting capability Functional studies started in the second quarter of 2003; they and technical studies are expected to be completed in the first and second quarters of 2004. Implementation plan and budget are to be developed PS, L, D IMIS in the field Implement IMIS in peacekeeping missions Connection of peacekeeping sites to the IMIS system. Circumvention of the need to re-enter personnel data at Headquarters by allowing the operation of IMIS directly from the field Twelve missions have been connected and are operating the system remotely. Two more are planned in the second quarter of 2003. A gap analysis study is under way to determine functionality gaps between IMIS and current field systems PS, L Galaxy-R2 Web site to assist staff members in separation (administration and benefits due by the Organization) and web tool that enables human resources practitioners, staff members and external applicants to set match criteria for United Nations advertised posts and online inventory of pre-approved United Nations consultants and individual contractors Assistance to staff members in a correct and timely administrative separation, as well as the calculation of the benefits due by the Organization; review of all vacancies on the Internet and provision of information to the "client" when a vacancy has been issued in the highlighted area; creation of an automated tool to pre-approve consultants working for the United Nations, using a similar process to e-staffing. Provision of close and efficient monitoring of consultants from a centralized platform First module of Release 2 -- e-Benefits -- is scheduled to be implemented in June 2003. Other modules are planned for implementation throughout 2003 and 2004 SI, PS IMIS on the Web Re-engineer the IMIS user interface to enable its operation on the Web and to streamline the most heavily used functions Migration to the Web and the re-engineering will greatly facilitate the deployment in the field of all its functionality. It will also bring its technology infrastructure to current industry standards, making it more suitable for implementation by other organizations A comparative analysis of alternative tools is currently under way. Preliminary selection of new tool on technical basis was complete in early 2003. A bid process is under way and expected to complete in the third quarter of 2003 ICT Assets (Inventory) System Make available on the United Nations Secretariat Intranet an online inventory of ICT assets, including: software applications, hardware, communications equipment, current projects and software license agreements The system will enable all offices connected to the Intranet to have access to current information on ICT assets located throughout the system worldwide. This could potentially generate significant savings as a result of sharing facilities already available elsewhere The system was implemented at United Nations Headquarters in August 2002. Data for over 90 per cent of projects has been entered. In May 2003, we are addressing some enhanced user functionality; reporting capabilities to be released in a new version of the ICT Assets system by the third quarter of 2003 L, D IMIS reporting on the Web Replace Paradox as the front-end reporting tool for IMIS Reports will be able to be delivered on the Web and provide greater flexibility to users of the system In progress. Expected completion: end-2003 L, SI Intranet/ Portal/Virtual Library throughout the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Provide easy access to tools that increase efficiency in the Office's work; promote and facilitate information-sharing among staff in 25 different offices around the world Increased efficiency; avoidance of duplication of work; staff better informed of the latest developments Document repository and web interface ready by August 2003; Prototype Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Intranet (based on United Nations Intranet) ready by September 2003; Integration of document repository with Intranet ready by November 2003. Intranet deployed at Headquarters (New York and Geneva) by end-2003; Deployment to selected field offices by early 2004; full deployment to all field offices by end-2004 PS, D e-HCC Electronic Headquarters Committee on Contracts The system provides automation to the processing of cases by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts. The system covers the automation of very paper-intensive processes and will enable reporting capabilities, which are currently not available The original concept of the application was widened to include input from Procurement and the Missions. Phase 1 is fully implemented and the Headquarters Committee on Contracts is using the application in production environment. Upcoming phases to be implemented by end-2003 PS Key Item Management Reporting System Reporting of key management performance indicators Using data which reside in IMIS, the system provides management level information on compliance (or divergence) with re-established goals Indicators and supporting reports developed for regular and extrabudgetary expenditure, vacancy management, gender balance, and implementation of the Office of Internal Oversight Services recommendations. System now available to all Headquarters departments and departments of offices away from Headquarters D Project Management Information System Provide the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) with an integrated system with project management and monitoring capabilities and provide United Nations implementing partners with Web-based application to submit electronically periodic progress and financial reports Replacement of current spreadsheet applications that are maintained with labour-intensive operating methods by relational database application and Web-based reporting capabilities. Streamlining of data capture, maintenance and analysis; enabling of standardization of management reports; and improved timeliness of submissions System design phase is completed. UNFIP is searching for appropriate funding source Integrated Monitoring and Documentation Information System (IMDIS) In partnership with the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts and the Office of Internal Oversight Services, provide an integrated, online environment for end-to-end execution of the programme management process Support to a United Nations management culture of accountability and administrative efficiency Initial design of v.3.0 completed December 2003; delivery of v.3.0 pilot August 2004; completion of pilot evaluation March 2005; completion of production system design July 2005 Electronic Performance Appraisal System (e-PAS) Automate the workflow involved in the preparation and disposition of PAS reports Streamlining of paper-intensive process and facilitation of the preparation of management reports using the underlying database As of 1 April, e-PAS has been rolled out to all United Nations offices, including missions Office of Legal Affairs information management project Provide for tracking of legal matters assigned; provide for document and archival records management; provide for online publication of public information legal materials More efficient case management; more efficient document management, filing, retrieval and legal research; increased understanding of international legal norms Finalizing plans for system. Subject to funding, procurement process for system design and development to begin in the latter half of 2003 IMIS 24x7 operations Allow concurrent online and batch mode processing Increased availability of the system to online users, including those in remote time zones L Table I.2 Knowledge sharing Internet search engine Provide multilingual search capabilities to all users of the United Nations Internet site High performance search capabilities for all web page-based content enabled. Long-standing need to have adequate search capabilities in all United Nations official languages addressed Google has been installed and is being tested by end-user departments. Implementation planned for the end of the second quarter of 2003 SI, L Open access to Official Documents System (ODS) Enable Internet access to ODS to non-governmental organizations and the general public At present, ODS is available free of charge but on a limited basis to permanent missions and capitals. Non-governmental organizations and other organizations are provided access on a fee-for-service basis. Enabling free access to the system would greatly facilitate the dissemination of official documentation avoiding the need to reproduce documents on the United Nations web site The system has been re-engineered to operate on an open-standards platform (Lotus Notes) and to deliver search capabilities in all six official languages. At present it requires additional hardware and software modifications for open access to be possible United Nations Secretariat skills directory Build an electronic directory following the organizational structure of the Secretariat Enabling the global search for specific competencies within the Organization and facilitating the creation of communities of practice Feasibility study has begun. Work would be scheduled to begin in 2004 if resources are appropriated United Nations Commodity Trade Database (COMTRADE) Migrate one of the largest United Nations databases from mainframe to client server environment with Internet access Subscribers will have direct access to the database and will be able to download data or research data using just a Web browser The development of the COMTRADE database dissemination module has been completed. Currently more than 650 million commodity trade transactions are available for viewing and downloading. The database received "very good" reviews from international partners, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, etc. and is used by them on a daily basis. Subscriber access of COMTRADE will start in June 2003 United Nations Tasking Reporting and Information System (UNTRIS) Enhance Department of Political Affairs capacity for information gathering, monitoring and analysis of conflict prevention activities This global mapping and reporting system will provide more precise and up-to-date information to managers and desk officers UNTRIS -- the Centre for Environmental Studies and Resource Management has completed its work on the first phase, which has been launched as a pilot in the Department with desk officers testing the news collection, map referral components and additional profiles and site integration functionality. It is anticipated that the project will be operational by mid-2003. The second phase has been deferred for lack of funds at this time and the possibility of cooperating with other departments with similar interests SI, D Multimedia Electronic Production System Introduction of current technology in the newsroom environment The system will enable a high degree of automation in new production. Efficiency, cost-control and safe storage are the main benefits The photo module, and the pilot phase of the radio module will begin implementation in June 2003. The entire photo module and the first phase of the radio module will be completed by the end of August 2003. The second phase of the radio module will begin implementation in January 2004 and it is expected to be complete by May 2004 Conversion of the Electoral Assistance Division filing system Enable the electronic and retrieval of documents in PDF format Faster access to more accurate information Development planned for 2003 SI Common (Department of Political Affairs/Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) geographic information system (GIS) of the Occupied Palestinian Territory Share up-to-date and precise maps and standardized location names Generate more precise information and use common nomenclature The Division of Palestinian Rights is continuing discussions with the Cartographic Unit. A test Middle East GIS was launched based on available satellite imagery and other data. Further long-term developments include the acquisition of better satellite imagery to be used as a backdrop for the GIS maps and exploring cooperation possibilities with other United Nations entities on similar projects Integration of all the elements of the United Nations Treaty Collection on the Internet into the internal Treaty Database/ Workflow system Provide the end-users with online access to the latest treaty-related information Allow for automatic updates on the Internet reflecting the corresponding updates in the internal system Ensure full text search capability for all bilateral and multilateral treaties in the database Broader online access to the treaties registered with the United Nations Secretariat, including their full texts More accurate and timely information on the Web Effective online search and retrieval system offering enhanced navigation options and easy to operate The system was re-engineered to integrate all Treaty Series publications into a single database. The following activities have been/are being undertaken: integration of desktop published treaties to existing web publishing database and its upgrade to a new software version. Target for completion: July-August 2003; Web publishing of the upgraded treaty database. Target: August 2003. Ongoing enhancements: Web publication of: Treaty Event books, Treaty Handbook, Handbook of Final Clauses, Recently deposited multilateral treaties, Summary of practice of the Secretary-General as depositary of multilateral treaties, Certified True Copies, Monthly Statement of Treaties and International Agreements, depositary notifications by the Secretary-General and other material; Full text search capability, full text indexing of the entire United Nations Treaty Collection, data validation to enhance the accuracy of online searches for older treaties and treaty actions, including the League of Nations agreements. Target for completion: 2004-2005 Subject to funding Conversion to CD-ROM of the United Nations Treaty Series publications Provide cost-effective facility for expeditious and convenient electronic full text search and retrieval of the United Nations Treaty Series and related publications at any location in the world Effective information delivery and distribution process Funding options being explored Extranet for the United Nations system Facilitate knowledge sharing among United Nations system organizations Availability of useful information to all relevant users in the United Nations system in a secure manner Network and systems architecture completed. The Directory of Senior Officials was implemented in September 2002. The Information Technology Services Division has implemented virtual private networking (VPN) secure connections with all but four organizations of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination. Besides the Directory of Senior Officials application, five others have been added as of April 2003. Other applications will be added in coming months UNBISnet Upgrade the Dag Hammarskjöld Library Integrated Library Management System Horizon software and replace the cataloguing system Through the use of UNICODE compliant software, multilingual script can be supported and be linked to the ODS While the Library's public access catalogue on the Web was upgraded early in 2003 (as this did not require a new operating system), the upgrade to the Library's Integrated Library Management System can be accomplished only when the Secretariat's migration to Windows 2000 is completed Table I.3 Services to governing bodies Return Resource Planning and Scheduler Develop and implement integrated system of meeting chain (planning, calendar of meetings, meeting servicing, maintaining organs/ sessions/meetings database and reporting systems -- scrolling list of meetings (TV and Web-based) and wall boards Through the use of workflow support software, enabling the Secretariat to optimize staff and contractors resources The design of eMeets project started in May 2002. First module of the system (TV scrolling list) was implemented in September 2003. System has run in production mode since 1 January 2003 (recording of all United Nations Headquarters meetings). Weekly and daily meeting reports are generated from eMeets and distributed to all concerned parties via e-mail. All room reservations for the meetings are conducted via eMeets. At this stage project team is improving eMeets reporting and developing Web-based modules to present information on the Internet. Also, there are plans to show meeting data from eMeets on large information electronic boards (to be procured) and information displays near major conference rooms (hardware to be acquired and installed) Electronic Meeting Board (coupled with above project) Display over a scrolling electronic screen information on meetings in real time. Information would include venue and references to associated documentation Assistance to delegations in planning their workload within the planned time frame The eMeets system is the source of all meeting-related information; however, the structure of information being displayed on the boards is not decided yet. eMeets itself is already in production Link United Nations Journal, ODS and list of documents Provide Web links between calendar of meetings and relevant documents Facilitation of the preparatory work of the delegations by seamlessly linking relevant information prior to meetings The project has been already implemented in the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (since 10 September 2002) and is in production for English and French versions on daily basis and in addition, in Arabic, Chinese, Russian and Spanish during sessions of the General Assembly. The Journal project has included new typographic design of the Journal (both printed and Web-based version), adding daily list of documents to the Journal contents and semi-automatic analysis of the Journal electronic document for extraction of quoted document symbols and creating web links to the actual documents residing in ODS. The Web Journal still needs an archive of the past issues of Journal, suggested by a number of requestors from the outside of the United Nations (mainly the non-governmental organization community). The Journal archive will be created based upon the availability of development manpower, possibly early in 2004. The document links in the Journal support only general distribution documents (residing in the ODS server) PS, SI Full implementation of the Interpreters Assignment Programme Automate the assignment of interpreters Streamline process of assignment optimizing the usage of interpretation resources The programme was successfully implemented for the United Nations Office at Vienna (2001) and the United Nations Office at Geneva (2002). There is a plan to implement it for the United Nations Office at Nairobi in 2003 Software Supported Drafting of Resolutions Provide automation and workflow system to the process of drafting resolutions Enabling of a more accurate and efficient process in the drafting of resolutions and related documentation during informal deliberations To be undertaken within 2004-2005 resources Extranets for regional groups Provide a secure Internet-based facility for regional groups to deliberate remotely Savings can be realized, both in terms of time devoted by the participants as well as the resources required to support meetings. Links to documents residing in the ODS can further streamline the deliberations and improve output Personal digital assistant (PDA) integration Enable the use of mobile/portable computing devices (i.e. Palm, IPAQ) to obtain United Nations relevant information Delegations will be able to access meeting-related information through mobile/portable devices, regardless of location Design undertaken and completed by the Government of Andorra. Development and deployment was completed by the Government The Government will fund a pilot project in 2003. No development work or server administration is done by the Information Technology Services Division Annex II A. United Nations Secretariat: existing global telecommunications network network proposed for the biennium 2004-2005 