%%%ENVIRONMENT|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|CAPACITY BUILDING|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|DEVELOPING ISLAND COUNTRIES|REPORT PREPARATION|FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS|CONSULTATIONS|INTERGOVERNMENTAL BODIES|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|COSTS|COMMON SERVICES|

Fifty-eighth session Agenda item 94 Environment and sustainable development * The report of the Committee on this item will be issued in nine parts, under the symbol A/58/484 and Add.1-8. Report of the Second Committee* Rapporteur: Mr. José Alberto Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) I. Introduction 1. The Second Committee held a substantive debate on agenda item 94 (see A/58/484, para. 2). Action on the item as a whole was taken at the 24th and 36th meetings, on 3 November and 9 December 2003. An account of the Committee's consideration of the item is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.2/58/SR.24 and 36). II. Consideration of draft resolutions A/C.2/58/L.12 and A/C.2/58/L.48 2. At the 24th meeting, on 3 November, the representative of Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-second session" (A/C.2/58/L.12), which read: "The General Assembly, "Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it established the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, "Recalling also its resolutions 53/242 of 28 July 1999, 56/193 of 21 December 2001 and 57/251 of 20 December 2002 on the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, "Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as the principal body within the United Nations system in the field of environment, which should take into account, within its mandate, the sustainable development needs of developing countries as well as countries with economies in transition, "Recalling the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, which emphasized the need for enhancing the provisions on support for capacity-building in developing countries and countries with economies in transition, as well as the provisions on technical and technological support, "1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-second session; "2. Emphasizes the need for the United Nations Environment Programme, within its mandate, to strengthen its contribution to sustainable development programmes, the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation at all levels, particularly in the area of capacity-building, bearing in mind the mandate of the Commission on Sustainable Development; "3. Reiterates the need to ensure that capacity-building and technical assistance to developing countries remain important components of the work of the United Nations Environment Programme, and in this regard emphasizes the need for expeditious implementation of relevant decisions of the Governing Council, Global Ministerial Environment Forum; "4. Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to contribute, within its mandate, to the preparations for the twelfth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development; "5. Further calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to contribute, within its mandate and as a member of the Inter-Agency Task Force, to the preparations for the international meeting to review the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, to be held in Mauritius from 30 August to 3 September 2004, including its preparatory process; "6. Encourages Member States, the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme and the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to submit their comments on the important but complex issue of establishing universal membership of the General Council, Global Ministerial Environment Forum, in order to contribute to the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to the General Assembly before its sixtieth session, in accordance with resolution 57/251; "7. Invites the Governing Council, Global Ministerial Environment Forum to regularly review the consistency of its agenda with the mandate of the United Nations Development Programme, as well as its manageability, aiming at, inter alia, enhancing transparency and the effective participation of member States in its sessions; "8. Requests that the reports on the work of the Environmental Management Group be made available to the General Assembly at its next session through the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme; "9. Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and in accordance with resolution 2997 (XXVII) underlines the need to consider adequate reflection of all administrative and management costs of the programme in the context of the United Nations regular budget; "10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that modern conference management and documentation services, systems and technology are made available to the United Nations Office at Nairobi, in order to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to the Programme and the other United Nations organs and organizations in Nairobi." 3. At the 36th meeting, on 9 December, the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee, Irena Zubčević (Croatia), introduced a draft resolution entitled "Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-second session" (A/C.2/58/L.48), which she submitted on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution A/C.2/58/L.12. 4. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.2/58/L.48 (see para. 6). 5. In the light of the adoption of draft resolution A/C.2/57/L.48, draft resolution A/C.2/58/L.12 was withdrawn by its sponsors. 6. The Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-second session The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it established the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, Recalling also its resolutions 53/242 of 28 July 1999, 56/193 of 21 December 2001 and 57/251 of 20 December 2002 on the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, Taking note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its seventh special session, Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as the principal body within the United Nations system in the field of environment, which should take into account, within its mandate, the sustainable development needs of developing countries as well as countries with economies in transition, Taking into account the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development ("Johannesburg Plan of Implementation"), Recalling the need to enhance the provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation concerning support for capacity-building in developing countries and countries with economies in transition, 1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-second session and the decisions contained therein; 2. Emphasizes the need for the United Nations Environment Programme, within its mandate, to further contribute to sustainable development programmes, the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation2 at all levels, bearing in mind the mandate of the Commission on Sustainable Development; 3. Reiterates the need to ensure that capacity-building and technical assistance to developing countries remain important components of the work of the United Nations Environment Programme, and in this regard emphasizes the need for full and effective implementation of relevant decisions of the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum; 4. Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to contribute, within its mandate, to the preparations for the twelfth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, while avoiding duplication and overlap in the work of the two bodies; 5. Also calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to contribute, within its mandate and as a member of the Inter-Agency Task Force, to the preparations for the international meeting to review the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, to be held in Mauritius from 30 August to 3 September 2004, including its preparatory process; 6. Encourages Member States, the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme and the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to submit their comments, in a timely manner, on the important but complex issue of establishing universal membership of the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum, including its legal, political, institutional, financial and system-wide implications, in order to contribute to the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to the General Assembly for consideration before its sixtieth session, in accordance with resolution 57/251; 7. Also encourages Member States to participate in the ongoing intergovernmental consultation process on the strengthening of the scientific base of the United Nations Environment Programme; 8. Notes, in regard to strengthening the overall financial situation of the United Nations Environment Programme, the various available options and the efforts being undertaken to enhance predictability in financing its programme of work and broadening its base of contributions; 9. Invites the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum to review its methods, agenda and programme of work, in view of the mandate of the United Nations Environment Programme, with the aim of enhancing manageability and the effective participation of States Members of the United Nations in its sessions, and taking into account recent work thereon by the Committee of Permanent Representatives of the United Nations Environment Programme; 10. Emphasizes the need to further enhance coordination and cooperation among the relevant United Nations organizations in the promotion of the environmental dimension of sustainable development, and in this respect welcomes the participation of the United Nations Environment Programme in the United Nations Development Group; 11. Requests that the reports on the work of the Environmental Management Group be made available to the General Assembly at its next session through the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme; 12. Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and in accordance with resolution 2997 (XXVII) underlines the need to consider adequate reflection of all administrative and management costs of the programme in the context of the United Nations regular budget; 13. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Office at Nairobi under review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to the Programme and the other United Nations organs and organizations in Nairobi. 