%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|PROJECT MANAGEMENT|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT|ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM|STAFFING|HUMAN RESOURCES|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|

Fifty-eighth session Agenda item 121 Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Administration and management of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights * The delayed submission of the present report was due to the extensive consultations required to finalize the document. Report of the Secretary-General* Summary The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/313, requested the Secretary-General to report to it at its fifty-eighth session on measures pertaining to the administration and management of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), taking into account the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the management review of OHCHR, as appropriate, and the report of the High Commissioner requested by the Secretary-General. In its first report on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended that the report of the Secretary-General submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 57/313 contain a comprehensive analysis of the administrative and resource requirements necessary to implement the proposals contained therein. The Advisory Committee recommended that the report pay particular attention to the overall management of the Office of the High Commissioner and include an analysis of the role of the New York Office and the related staffing requirements. The present report responds to those requests of the General Assembly and the Advisory Committee. It also represents a response to General Assembly resolution 57/300, in which the Secretary-General was encouraged to improve the effectiveness and management of the Office of the High Commissioner. As such, it builds on the commitment to strengthen management contained in action 5 of the proposals for strengthening the United Nations. The management structure of the Office of the High Commissioner will be made more robust by clarifying the respective responsibilities of the High Commissioner and the Deputy High Commissioner. In particular, the Deputy High Commissioner, in addition to generally backstopping the High Commissioner, will assume specific responsibilities for the direction of the policy planning, information management and other support units of the Office. It is recommended that the General Assembly proceed to take action on section 24, Human rights, of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Implementation of the reform measures considered in General Assembly resolution 57/300 Organizational structure of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Role of the New York Office and related staffing requirements Implementation of the recommendations contained in the management review of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights carried out by the Office of Internal Oversight Services Administrative and resource requirements Recommendation Annexes I. Summary of resources proposed for 2004-2005 relating to actions 2 to 5 described in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change" (A/57/387 and Corr.1) II. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the management review of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights carried out by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (A/57/488) III. Organizational structure and post distribution for the biennium 2004-2005 1. The General Assembly, in paragraph 2 of its resolution 57/313 of 18 June 2003, requested the Secretary-General to submit a report to it at its fifty-eighth session on measures pertaining to the administration and management of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), taking into account the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the management review of OHCHR (see A/57/488), as appropriate, and the report of the High Commissioner requested by the Secretary-General in action 5 of his report entitled "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change" (A/57/387 and Corr.1). 2. In paragraph 3 of the same resolution, the Assembly decided to revert at its fifty-eighth session to the issue of the administration and management of OHCHR, in the context of the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005, as well as to the issues relevant to the functioning of the Office addressed in resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002, in particular paragraphs 6, 8, 9 and 10, in the context of the procedures established for consideration of the progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the reform measures considered in the latter resolution. Information on the implementation of the provisions of those paragraphs is contained in section III of the report of the Secretary-General (A/58/351) on the status of implementation of actions described in A/57/387 and Corr.1. 3. In paragraph VI.1 of its first report on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005,1 the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended that the report of the Secretary-General submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 57/313 contain a comprehensive analysis of the administrative and resource requirements necessary to implement the proposals contained therein. The Advisory Committee recommended that the report pay particular attention to the overall management of the Office of the High Commissioner, and include an analysis of the role of the New York Office and the related staffing requirements. It was further recommended that action on proposals for posts under section 24, Human rights, be deferred, pending consideration of the report. 4. The present report responds to the above-mentioned requests and provides information on the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the management review of OHCHR. II. Implementation of the reform measures considered in General Assembly resolution 57/300 5. Pursuant to paragraphs 6, 8 and 9 of General Assembly resolution 57/300, OHCHR has implemented a number of measures in relation to actions 2, 3 and 4 set out in A/58/387 and Corr.1, as outlined below: Increased support for national human rights capacity-building (action 2) 6. Concerted efforts are under way to provide an integrated and consistent response to Member States that request support in strengthening their national human rights protection systems. The plan is aimed at encouraging the ratification of human rights treaties, helping integrate human rights into national development plans, assisting in the reform of national legislation and institutions and promoting better awareness of human rights. In this light, proposals have been included in the relevant subprogramme of section 24, Human rights, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 to strengthen human rights actions at the national level. Enhanced implementation of human rights treaties (action 3) 7. Consultations among Member States, treaty bodies and non-governmental organizations have taken place during recent years to develop closer cooperation and enhance the implementation of the principal human rights treaties. There is strong support for greater cooperation among treaty bodies and for the better harmonization of their reporting guidelines. All treaty bodies have been urged to adopt specific follow-up procedures and to take measures that would encourage the timely submission of reports and address the backlog issue. The proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 includes proposals for a P-5 post as head of the Petitions Unit, which undertakes the review of petitions received under the terms of various treaties, and a P-4 post to provide support to treaty bodies in respect of State reporting and processing of communications under complaints procedures. Improving the system of special procedures (action 4) 8. Steps have been taken in recent years to better support the special procedures and make them more effective. Details were presented to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-ninth session (see E/CN.4/2003/124). These steps include strengthening the support provided by OHCHR through additional human resources. The Special Procedures Branch was established in OHCHR as from 1 May 2003. In this connection, in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 recommendations are made for a D-1 post to head the Branch and a P-4 post to augment capacity in handling special procedures. 9. The status of the implementation of the above-stated actions is detailed in section III of A/58/351. Annex I below provides a summary of the resource requirements reflected in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 related to those actions. III. Administration and management of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 10. The administration and management of OHCHR is effected through the leadership of the High Commissioner, a Management Board, a Project Review Committee, an annual appeal for voluntary contributions, an annual report on the implementation of activities and use of funds, an Advisory Panel on Personnel Issues, efforts to promote an integrated personnel system, the support of the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) in the field, management audits by the Office of Internal Oversight Services and audits by external auditors. Each of these is summarized below: (a) Leadership of the High Commissioner. The High Commissioner is responsible, under the authority of the Secretary-General, for all the activities of the Office and for its administration, and carries out the functions specifically assigned to him or her by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993 and subsequent resolutions of policy-making bodies; (b) The Management Board. The Management Board was established in 1997. It is the mechanism through which OHCHR, at the senior level, under the leadership of the Deputy High Commissioner, provides a cross-sectoral managerial review of human and financial resources, and considers general management issues and operational issues that require an overall management decision. It advises the High Commissioner, and its decisions are subject to the High Commissioner's approval; (c) The Project Review Committee. The Project Review Committee was established in December 1998 and is the mechanism through which OHCHR, at the senior level, considers new projects and their revisions with the aim of assessing and providing guidance on: the relationship of the project to the mandates and priorities of OHCHR; the likely impact on issues the project is intended to address; the suitability and effectiveness of project management, including institutional and implementation arrangements; and the soundness of financial requirements, according to OHCHR priorities and actual resources; (d) The annual appeal and the annual report. Two thirds of the OHCHR budget is derived from voluntary contributions. The publication of the annual appeal and the annual report has helped generate greater cohesion, common purpose and more transparency in OHCHR extrabudgetary activities. Both documents also present descriptions of the regular-budget funding of OHCHR, so that donors and the general public obtain a clear picture of the overall and integrated activities of the organization: (i) The annual appeal describes OHCHR priorities for the coming year, with a special focus on priorities for extrabudgetary funding. It provides an overview of planned activities and financial requirements for the upcoming year. It seeks support from the international community for the mission of promoting and protecting human rights. It builds on the experience of implementing strategies for action as set out in previous appeals, while seeking to sharpen and strengthen those strategies; (ii) The annual report outlines the implementation of activities and the use of voluntary funds in a particular year. It provides a transparent and consolidated review of the achievements and impact of the Office's work, highlighting the commitment to establish a structured approach to reporting and improved financial and programme management at all levels. It is a tool used by programme managers for oversight and control of projects and activities, in both operational and financial terms; (e) The Advisory Panel on Personnel Issues. OHCHR established its Advisory Panel on Personnel Issues in March 1999. This internal management body evaluates all recommendations for the filling of extrabudgetary posts at OHCHR headquarters and in the field, for upgrading temporary staff and for lateral transfers, with a view to ensuring the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, as well as equitable geographical distribution; (f) OHCHR has finalized an agreement with the United Nations Office at Geneva to establish arrangements within which the latter provides various administrative support services to OHCHR, in particular in human resources management; (g) Efforts for an integrated personnel system. OHCHR has staff in Geneva and in the field funded from both the regular budget and extrabudgetary resources. Extensive staff-management consultations took place this year on the introduction of arrangements to integrate all voluntarily funded staff in Geneva under the 100 series of the staff rules. This policy of bringing staff under an integrated system will also be pursued in relation to long-serving staff in the field, it being understood that there will always be some staff in the field on project contracts. Effective 1 January 2003, all extrabudgetary Geneva-based staff formerly managed by UNOPS are now administered by the Human Resources Management Service of the United Nations Office at Geneva. This change was made in compliance with Office of Internal Oversight Services recommendations; (h) Geographical distribution of staff of OHCHR. Mindful of the recommendations of policy-making organs such as the General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights, the Office of the High Commissioner, in filling vacant posts, is paying particular attention to geographical distribution. All managers take this element into account when reviewing candidates and making recommendations for recruitment. All regular-budget posts of OHCHR are subject to geographical distribution, and OHCHR abides by the resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with regard to posts at the P-2 level and, where applicable, at the P-3 level, by recruiting staff from the national competitive examination. In addition, OHCHR, in its human resources action plan for 2003, has agreed to recruit one staff member from unrepresented or underrepresented countries and to avoid the recruitment of staff from overrepresented countries. OHCHR has instituted measures to apply the Organization's principles of geographical distribution with particular regard to unrepresented or underrepresented developing countries when filling extrabudgetary posts. These measures involve the screening of candidates at the initial recruitment stage, including of short-term staff, to ensure that, all other things being equal, priority is given to candidates from such countries; (i) The support of the United Nations Office for Project Services. OHCHR uses the services of its implementing partner, UNOPS, which provides administrative support for OHCHR field operations funded from extrabudgetary resources. These operations had an annual expenditure of approximately $10 million in 2002. On the basis of three years' experience of working together, the arrangements between OHCHR and UNOPS were revised to ensure improved financial monitoring, control and reporting, human resources management and coordination between the two parties. The revised arrangements with UNOPS were agreed on 20 May 2003; (j) Management and financial audits by the Office of Internal Oversight Services. Since 1997, the Office of the High Commissioner has been the subject of a number of reviews and audits, many at its own initiative, as it has sought to strengthen its administrative procedures and managerial practices. In 1998/1999, the Office of Internal Oversight Services audited the former field operations of OHCHR in Rwanda. Since then, the Office of Internal Oversight Services has carried out, at the request of OHCHR, audits of field operations in Burundi, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as an audit of OHCHR headquarters administration. In addition to the 2002 management review by the Office of Internal Oversight Services requested by the General Assembly, the Department of Management, at the request of OHCHR, carried out a review of the administrative capacity of OHCHR in 1999. A study of the OHCHR system for managing voluntary contributions was also carried out by Price Waterhouse in 1999, at the request of OHCHR, resulting in the implementation of a system to monitor and manage voluntary contributions. At its fifty-eighth session, the Commission on Human Rights requested the Joint Inspection Unit to carry out a review of OHCHR management and administration, with particular regard to recruitment policies and the composition of staff. The Joint Inspection Unit is due to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its next session, in March/April 2004; (k) Financial audits by external auditors. The external auditors review OHCHR operations, including most recently in May 2003, when an audit on the administrative and financial framework of OHCHR trust funds and the management of grants was carried out. In 1999 the external auditors reviewed the internal financial controls of OHCHR and visited its Cambodia office. Reporting procedures are in place for audits carried out both by the Office of Internal Oversight Services and by the external auditors, by which OHCHR reports on the implementation of their recommendations. IV. Organizational structure of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 11. The Secretary-General's bulletin of 15 September 1997 (ST/SGB/1997/10) established the following structure for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: the Staff Office of the High Commissioner, the Administrative Section, the New York Office, the Research and Right to Development Branch, the Support Services Branch and the Activities and Programmes Branch. 12. On the basis of the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Secretary-General's bulletin is being revised to reflect the following structure, as indicated in annex III: the Executive Office of the High Commissioner, Support Services, the New York Office, the Treaties and Commission Branch, the Special Procedures Branch, the Capacity Building and Field Operations Branch, the Research and Right to Development Branch and the External Relations Branch. It will be noted that the reorganization reflects the clarification of the respective roles of the High Commissioner and the Deputy High Commissioner. In particular, the Deputy High Commissioner will assume specific responsibilities for policy planning, information management and other support units of the office. V. Role of the New York Office and related staffing requirements 13. The New York Office forms part of the Staff Office of the High Commissioner. Its role is to represent the High Commissioner at Headquarters, at meetings of policy-making bodies and with permanent missions of Member States, in executive committees and their subsidiary bodies, at interdepartmental and inter-agency meetings and with civil society. The New York Office represents the High Commissioner in, and provides substantive support on human rights issues to, the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council and other policy-making bodies established in New York; provides policy advice and recommendations on substantive matters to the High Commissioner; provides support to the High Commissioner and other officials and to special rapporteurs and representatives when on mission in New York; assists the executive committees and other headquarters-based bodies in the integration of human rights in United Nations development, peace and security, humanitarian and economic and social activities; maintains liaison with, and supplies information and advice on human rights on behalf of the High Commissioner to, the Executive Office of the Secretary-General, Secretariat entities, United Nations agencies and delegations; and maintains liaison with the headquarters of key international institutions and major non-governmental human rights organizations in New York. It organizes meetings of States parties to human rights treaties and undertakes outreach activities, events and briefings for a wide range of audiences on human rights and related issues. 14. In order to fulfil those functions, the following staff are required: a Director at the D-2 level, to represent the High Commissioner in New York, direct the New York Office and its staff, processes and resources; a Deputy to the Director to undertake managerial, administrative, representative and substantive functions; three human rights officers to perform liaison, reporting and human rights mainstreaming functions relating to specific geographic and thematic questions; and four General Service staff to provide administrative, secretarial, documentary and communications functions. In 2002-2003, there are nine staff members in the New York Office funded by the regular budget, as follows: one D-2, one P-5, two P-4, one P-3, one General Service (Principal level) and three General Service (Other level). In 2004-2005, it is proposed to maintain the current level of staffing. VI. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the management review of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights carried out by the Office of Internal Oversight Services 15. Upon receipt from the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the report on the management review of the Office (A/57/488), OHCHR acted immediately to begin implementation of the recommendations therein. OHCHR was pleased that as at mid-2003, the Office of Internal Oversight Services considered 3 of the 17 recommendations implemented and closed, and others were in the process of implementation. 16. Annex II below provides a detailed update on the measures taken by OHCHR on each of the recommendations contained in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and relates these to the relevant resource requirements already reflected in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. VII. Administrative and resource requirements 17. In formulating the proposed programme budget for 2004-2005 for section 24, Human rights, full consideration has been given to the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services contained in its report on the management review of OHCHR. In addition to the information on the status of implementation of these recommendations, annex II indicates the related resource requirements, as applicable. VIII. Recommendation 18. It is recommended that the General Assembly take note of the present report and proceed to take action on section 24, Human rights, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. Notes 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/58/7). Summary of resources proposed for 2004-2005 relating to actions 2 to 5 described in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change" (A/57/387 and Corr.1) Action OHCHR Action Related proposed programme budget in 2004-2005 Reference A/58/6/(Sect.24) Thousands of United States dollars The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights will develop and implement a plan, in cooperation with the United Nations Development Group and the Executive Committee for Humanitarian Affairs, to strengthen human rights-related United Nations actions at the country level. Para 24.53 1 P-5 to head a geographic desk team to strengthen human rights technical assistance at the country level Para 24.39 1 P-4 Right to Development 2 P-3 converted from general temporary assistance Consultancies for specialists in the area of national human rights institutions, human rights legislation and the workings of human rights parliamentary committees Increase in travel to facilitate responses to requests by Member States for technical cooperation The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights will consult with treaty bodies on new streamlined reporting procedures and submit his recommendations to me by September 2003. Para 24.44 1 P-5 Head of Petitions Unit 1 P-4 to support treaty bodies The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights will undertake a review of the special procedures and report back to me by September 2003 with recommendations on how to enhance their effectiveness and improve the support provided. 1 D-1 Chief of Special procedures branch 1 P-4 to strengthen special procedures Increase in travel to facilitate the activities of special procedures The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights will develop a plan to strengthen management, taking into account the recommendations emerging from the management review conducted by the Office of Internal Oversight Services. Para 24.32 1 D-2 for the Executive Office 1 P-3 External Relations Para 24.61 Data processing equipment Data processing services Annex II Implementation of the recommendations contained in the management review of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights carried out by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (A/57/488) OIOS Recommendations Status of implementation Reference A/58/6(Sect.24) Thousands of United States dollars Recommendation 1 The Secretary-General should fully apprise the General Assembly of how the persistent shortfall in the regular budget funding impacts on the mandated activities of the Office (SP-02-001-01). OIOS considers this recommendation implemented. The deficiency in resource provision has hampered the conduct of the programme of work of the office. In particular, marked difficulties have been encountered in support of Treaty Bodies and in the conduct of Special Procedures. The Secretary-General has endeavored, in his proposals for three successive biennial budgets, to augment the staffing of OHCHR within the framework of overall financial policy and budgetary constraints. Currently, the number of posts in the Office exceeds the number of posts prior to the Secretariat-wide cuts in posts in 1998-1999. For 2004-2005, the Secretary-General has proposed in Section 24, Human rights, an increase of $3,655,100 (or 7.6%) from a revised appropriation of $47,576,300 to $51,231,400 before recosting, and an increase of 13 regular budget posts, from 166 to 179 (8 new posts and conversion of 5 positions to established posts). The Secretary-General articulated in his proposal the desired enhancements to the OHCHR regular budget in the context of the overall budgetary situation of the Secretariat. Para. 24.8 Recommendation 2 In accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, comprehensive statements of programme budget implications should be submitted to the Assembly in all instances where new OHCHR mandates and activities are presented for approval (SP-02-001-02). In accordance with rule 28 of the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of ECOSOC, 8 decisions and 86 resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights adopted at its fifty-ninth session in 2003 were reviewed, of which 47 entailed programme budget implications. In the 1986-1987 programme budget, a new procedure was established and has been followed since, following consultations with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, whereby provisions were made in the proposed programme budget for activities undertaken in response to decisions of the Commission on Human Rights as endorsed by ECOSOC. These activities fell within the concept of "perennial" activities and provisions were therefore proposed for them in the 1988-1989 programme budget in line with resolution 41/213 and were approved by the General Assembly. These activities relate to special rapporteurs and other fact-finding and investigative bodies established periodically pursuant to resolutions and decisions adopted by the Commission on Human Rights and endorsed by the Economic and Social Council. Country rapporteurs are appointed and/or extended on an annual basis. The thematic rapporteurs and working groups are established for three years. The number of such mandates recurs with regularity year after year. Recommendation 3 The High Commissioner should pursue further the consolidation of reporting to different organs on similar or closely related topics, with oral updates on recently issued reports, as necessary, and propose enabling actions for such arrangements to the General Assembly (SP-02-001-03). OHCHR has implemented a number of such consolidations, which includes the following: a) The note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on human rights education and public information activities in the field of human rights (A/Res/57/212) has been consolidated with the report of the Secretary-General on Human Rights Education (A/Res/57/206); b) Following past years' practice, the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (A/Res/48/141) has been consolidated with the report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (A/Res/48/120); c) The General Assembly, by its resolution 57/223 entitled "The right to development", requested the Secretary-General, in paragraph 33, inter alia, to present a comprehensive report on the implementation of that resolution to the Commission at its 59th session and to the General Assembly at its 58th session. In a Note by the Secretariat (E/CN.4/2003/125) submitted during the 59th session of the Commission on Human Rights, the Secretary-General drew the attention of delegations to document E/CN.4/2003/7 before the Commission on Human Rights, containing the annual report prepared by the High Commissioner for Human Rights in response to a request made by the Commission on Human Rights in resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998; d) Paragraph 41 of A/Res/57/195 requested the Secretary-General to prepare, through OHCHR, a report on the extent of implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its 58th session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its 59th session. Consequently, a report on the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination was submitted to the Commission on Human Rights at its 59th session (E/CN.4/2003/19). A 2-page document (A/58/80-E/2003/71) presented to the 58th session of the General Assembly and to ECOSOC at its substantive session in 2003 refers to the report of the Commission on Human Rights (E/CN.4/2003/19) on the same subject; e) The note by the Secretary-General transmitting the thirty-fifth report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories has been consolidated with the Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the periodic report of the Special Committee. The process of reform of the working methods of the Commission was initiated in April 2002. It led to the adoption in March 2003 of document E/CN.4/2003/118, which contains an entire section devoted to documentation matters, with a view to ensuring that relevant UN rules, regulations and practices concerning the processing of documents, including the six-week rule, are strictly respected. In parallel to this process, the Office emphasized the importance of rationalizing the documentation process and avoiding duplication. These issues will continue to be discussed by the Expanded Bureau of the Commission. Pursuant to Commission decision 2003/116, the Bureau is to submit its recommendations on the organization of work of the Commission to the 60th session of the Commission. Recommendation 4 The High Commissioner should consistently pursue consultations with the treaty bodies on the modalities for consolidating reporting under various treaty obligations into a single national report with a view to achieving steady progress towards this goal (SP-02-001-04). In October 2002, the High Commissioner wrote to the chairperson of each treaty body asking for views on the OIOS recommendation for consolidating reporting under the various treaty obligations into a single national report. Document E/CN.4/2003/126, presented to the 59th session of the Commission reports on a number of steps taken or facilitated by OHCHR to the issue of streamlining the reporting procedures of treaty bodies. These included the preparation by OHCHR of a background paper in February 2003, which formed the basis for discussions in a workshop organized by OHCHR and held from 5 to 7 May 2003. Participants included representatives of treaty bodies, States parties, entities of the UN system, NGOs and other such as the Inter-Parliamentary Union and national human rights institutions. An Inter-Committee meeting, comprised of up to three representatives of each treaty body, was held from 18-20 June 2003 to discuss the outcome of the workshop, and a report emanating from this meeting was submitted to the 15th meeting of human rights chairpersons held from 23 to 27 June 2003. The recommendations of the 15th meeting of chairpersons of human rights treaty bodies, which is before the General Assembly at its 58th session encourage targeted treaty-specific reports and expansion of the "core document." (In 1991, all treaty bodies adopted consolidated guidelines for a "core document" which contains general information on the State, in order to reduce the burden on States that are party to more than one human rights treaty which imposes reporting obligations). Harmonization of the various reporting guidelines issued by the treaty bodies has also been recommended, as has the development of more harmonized working methods by all the treaty bodies. The Secretariat is currently preparing draft guidelines for an expanded core document and exploring the possibilities for greater harmonization of the treaty reporting guidelines. These will be made available for comment by individual treaty bodies in early 2004 and consideration by the third inter-Committee meeting and the 16th meeting of chairpersons, both of which will take place in June 2004. Recommendation 5 The staffing of the Petitions Team should be brought in line with its workload to ensure the timely processing of communications and relevant jurisprudence (SP-02-001-05). The Secretary-General has proposed for the 2004-2005 biennium the establishment of a P-5 post as head of the Petitions Unit which undertakes the review of petitions received under the terms of various treaties, and a P-4 post to provide support to treaty bodies in respect of State reporting and processing of communications under complaints procedures. Three additional staff are being brought on board by November 2003 using voluntary funding. 1 new P-5 1 new P4 Recommendation 6 Management should review, prioritize and systematize all outstanding recommendations. Responsibilities and deadlines for action should be assigned and a mechanism for ensuring their implementation established (SP-02-001-06). OHCHR has reviewed outstanding recommendations and makes consistent and serious efforts to implement them. OHCHR is working diligently to implement the 17 recommendations in the OIOS management review and other recommendations on the office and regularly updates OIOS on progress achieved. Recommendation 7 The High Commissioner should draw up a comprehensive and detailed strategy for the Office, from which the medium- and longer-term tangible objectives of the OHCHR organizational units and operational activities would be derived. The strategy should be realistic, taking into account the resources available (SP-02-001-07). In his annual report to the Commission on Human Rights (E/CN4/2003/14), the High Commissioner has also indicated key parts of his core priorities. The 2004 Annual Appeal has been carefully reviewed to bring planned expenditure in line with expected resources. Recommendation 8 The entity responsible for policy planning and methodology should be established as a self-contained unit having OHCHR-wide responsibility and reporting to the Deputy High Commissioner. It should be strengthened with due regard to the required diversity of professional expertise. Realistic work plans for the short, medium and longer term should be adopted, with clear assignment of responsibilities, deadlines and accountability for the delivery of planned outputs (SP-02-001-08). This recommendation will be implemented. Please see response to Recommendation 13. The resources for policy planning and methodology, which up to the present have been provided within the Research and Right to Development Branch, will be established as a self-contained unit having OHCHR-wide responsibility and reporting to the Deputy High Commissioner. Staffing of the posts in this unit will be reviewed to ensure the required diversity of professional expertise. Recommendation 9 (a) There should be an established practice of preparing annual work plans for each organizational unit that would include all outputs, deadlines, staff responsibilities and resources required. Plans should be coordinated to establish substantive horizontal linkages, approved by the High Commissioner and updated as necessary. (b) Staff support to programme management and planning should be strengthened and upgraded to ensure that the framework for programme management and work planning is fully developed and incorporates extrabudgetary activities and that required guidance, training and support are provided to managers at all levels (SP-02-001-09). A common work plan form has been prepared and provided to all Branch/Section/Unit leaders to facilitate a coordinated approach to the preparation of annual work plans. Annual work plans for 2003 take into account the outputs, deadlines, staff responsibilities and resources required. OHRM has increased the allocation to OHCHR under the upgrading of substantive skills and Branches are undertaking team-building exercises with a view to strengthening teams and middle management. Recommendation 10 Central staff support to the ongoing monitoring of the implementation of the work programme should be strengthened and made responsible for the preparation of quarterly progress reports for senior management along with short-term projections regarding priorities to be focused on in regard to achieving the set objectives of the Office. This responsibility centre should also monitor the implementation of recommendations of intergovernmental and oversight bodies, follow up on executive decisions and foster the development of self-evaluation activities (SP-02-001-10). This recommendation is being implemented. All Branches have now constituted teams to focus on programme performance reporting as well as to carry forward results-based budgeting. The Management Committee of the Policy Review and Management Board regularly monitors implementation of oversight recommendations and the Office has begun self-evaluation activities. The Executive Office of the High Commissioner ensures follow-up on executive decisions. Recommendation 11 The High Commissioner should align the nomenclature of OHCHR organizational entities with common norms, initiate the reclassification of all managerial posts in line with their actual responsibilities, and subsequently apprise the Commission on Human Rights and the General Assembly of the relevant financial implications (paras. 27-29) (SP-02-001-11). The nomenclature and structure of the Office are being guided by the OIOS recommendations and gradually brought in line with the nomenclature and structure of the rest of the Secretariat. A full implementation at this time would require the establishment of at least two Divisions in the substantive areas to handle the functions entrusted to the Research and Right to Development Branch, Treaties and Commission Branch, Capacity and Field Operations Branch and the Special Procedures Branch. However, it is intended to monitor the operation of the four branches starting in 2004-2005 to determine whether there would be managerial advantages in proceeding at a later date to consolidate these four branches into two Divisions. Recommendation 12 The organizational structure of OHCHR should be streamlined into more manageable, compact and substantively coherent entities benefiting from the synergies between the activities they carry out. In deciding on the organizational streamlining, the High Commissioner may wish to take into consideration the proposals outlined in paragraphs 30-36 (SP-02-001-12). The Registry has been moved in the biennium 2002-2003 from Subprogramme 1, Research and Right to Development, to programme support in the Administration Section. Policy planning, information management and technology and administrative services will be under the direct supervision of the Deputy High Commissioner as described under recommendation 13 below. The post of a chief of staff is proposed to be established. The incumbent would be responsible for, inter alia, assisting the High Commissioner in maintaining relations with Governments, other United Nations agencies and entities, international organizations, regional and national institutions, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and academia; maintaining liaison on policy matters with the Executive Office of the Secretary-General and other relevant offices at Headquarters, as well as with the spokespersons of the Secretary-General at New York and Geneva and the media; carrying out fund-raising functions and special projects as assigned by the High Commissioner. A new External Relations Branch has been created comprising Fundraising, External Relations and Communications, removing these functions from the Executive Office. The High Commissioner launched a distinct Special Procedures Branch devoted to these procedures and streamlining the current Activities and Programmes Branch. Consistent with action 2 of the reform proposals, capacity to act at the national level would be strengthened within OHCHR infrastructure. To strengthen the interdisciplinary legal and socio-economic research and policy analysis capability of OHCHR, a P-4 post is proposed. 1 D-2 1 P-3 post External Relations Branch 1 P-5 to head a geographic desk team to strengthen human rights at the country level 1 P-4 in the area of right to development Recommendation 13 The High Commissioner should define the responsibilities delegated to the Deputy and maintain the integrity of such delegation and accountability for discharging those responsibilities. Clear procedures and reporting lines should be established in the front office (paras. 40-41) (SP-02-001-13). The High Commissioner has set out and defined the role of the Deputy High Commissioner as described below. The Deputy High Commissioner: acts as Officer-in-Charge during the absence of and is accountable to the High Commissioner; assists the High Commissioner in the overall direction and supervision of the activities of the human rights programme; carries out special projects as assigned by the High Commissioner; represents the High Commissioner at meetings and by making statements on his or her behalf; monitors oversight activities; advises the High Commissioner regarding field operations; coordinates the development of regional strategies is directly responsible for policy planning, information management and technology and administrative services as follows: Policy Planning: identifies and advises the High Commissioner on complex and sensitive policy issues; assists the High Commissioner in the formulation, communication, implementation and evaluation of policies, practices and activities for the promotion and protection of human rights; oversees all policy matters and operational activities aimed at developing national human rights capacity and institutions; assists the High Commissioner in developing strategies for both urgent actions and long-term framework for human rights mainstreaming strategy and policies. Information Management and Technology: Manages the information services of the human rights programme (including the documentation centre and library and enquiry services) and information technology operations, including, inter alia,, the human rights databases. Administrative Services: Oversees the provision of administrative support services. Recommendation 14 An information management and communication section reporting directly to the Deputy High Commissioner should be established. It should comprise the library, web site, database and information technology operations throughout OHCHR. It should be mandated to establish and oversee the relevant policies and procedures and to vet all information technology projects proposed by other entities. A biennial plan for information management and technology development should be prepared and implemented (paras. 42-47) (SP-02-001-14). The Deputy High Commissioner will oversee information management and technology operations throughout OHCHR. Please see Recommendation 13 above. Paras 24.29 and 24.61 Library books and supplies Recommendation 15 Systematic action should be taken to reclassify all posts in the new organizational structure according to their levels and types of service and to decide whether they belong to the 100 or the 200 series. Evaluation criteria should be put in place to define qualifications, expertise and performance for the purpose of considering serving staff against the new staffing table. OHCHR should seek assistance from the Office of Human Resources Management of the United Nations Secretariat in carrying out this regularization exercise (SP-02-001-15). Implementation will be undertaken in the biennium 2004-2005. Job descriptions of the relevant posts are to be prepared with the assistance of OHRM. Recommendation 16 The High Commissioner should devote more attention to human resources management issues, including the geographical distribution of the staff, PAS discipline and effectiveness, and managerial accountability for discharging supervisory duties. The situation should be periodically reviewed at senior staff meetings and appropriate remedial measures taken (SP-02-001-16). This recommendation is being implemented. The High Commissioner is seeking to ensure geographical distribution of the staff in line with the Organization's goals and has fully implemented the performance appraisal system in OHCHR. Senior managers have been apprised of the issue of geographical distribution and have made a commitment to address the issue. Members of the Advisory Panel on Personnel Issues have also been advised of the need to address the issue of geographical balance. Para. 24.53 2 posts at P-3 level are proposed for conversion from temporary assistance under subprogramme 3 for the Activities and Programmes Branch. Recommendation 17 A comprehensive plan of action to implement all outstanding recommendations of internal and external reviews and evaluations as well as oversight bodies should be drawn up in the context of implementing the recommendations of the current report. The implementing action should be monitored quarterly by the senior management (SP-02-001-17). See comments under recommendation 6. Annex III Organizational structure and post distribution for the biennium 2004-2005 Abbreviations: RB, regular budget; XB, extrabudgetary; GS, General Service; PL, Principal level; OL, Other level. a New post. b Conversion. 