%%%AIRSPACE|NICOSIA (CYPRUS)|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|

General Assembly Fifty-eighth session Agenda item 30 Question of Cyprus Security Council Fifty-eighth year Letter dated 26 December 2003 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 22 December 2003, addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Reşat Çağlar, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex were circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 30, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Altay Cengizer Minister Counsellor Chargé d'affaires a.i. Upon instructions from my Government, and further to the letter dated 23 October 2003, I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 8 December 2003, addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative at the United Nations and circulated as a document of the General Assembly and of the Security Council (A/58/621-S/2003/1163), which yet again contains allegations of violations of the "airspace of the Republic" and "of the flight information region (FIR) of Nicosia", and to bring to your kind attention the following: In response to such false and pretentious allegations, I wish, once again, to reiterate that flights within the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus take place with the full knowledge and consent of the appropriate authorities of the State, over which the Greek Cypriot administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or right of say whatsoever. Furthermore, it should be underlined that allegations of so-called violations of the flight information region or violations of air traffic regulations are invalid, as the civil aviation authority of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is the only competent authority to provide air traffic and aeronautical information services. As stated in our previous letters, such allegations are based on the false and illegitimate claim that the sovereignty of the Greek Cypriot administration extends over the whole island, including the territory of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This claim by the Greek Cypriot side is divorced from the existing realities in Cyprus, namely, the existence of two independent States, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction within its respective territory on the island. Attempts by the Greek Cypriot representatives, through often-repeated false claims, to confer legitimacy upon an illegal administration will be futile for as long as the Turkish Cypriot people refuse to bow to its writs. What would indeed be conducive to a better climate on the island would be for the Greek Cypriot side to stop arrogating for itself the rights and responsibilities it does not legally have, and to cease all hostilities towards the Turkish Cypriot people. It is obvious that the aim of those baseless allegations is to divert attention from the real issues prevailing on the island, in particular, the continuation of the all-embracing embargoes imposed on the Turkish Cypriot people and the totally negative position adopted by the Greek Cypriot administration vis-à-vis the confidence-building measures of the Turkish Cypriot side. Those counter-productive policies of the Greek Cypriot side, coupled with the recent revelations by the Greek Cypriot leadership regarding the devious tactics adopted by them in the negotiating process, naturally do not instil confidence in the Turkish Cypriot people that the Greek Cypriot side is sincere and ready for a new partnership with the Turkish Cypriot side on the island based, inter alia, on the sovereign equality of the two peoples in Cyprus. (Signed) Reşat Çağlar Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 