%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|LATIN AMERICA|CARIBBEAN REGION|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|TACTICAL NUCLEAR WEAPONS|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY|REGIONAL SECURITY|REGIONAL DISARMAMENT|DEVELOPMENT|INFORMATION SOCIETY|TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE|DIGITAL DIVIDE|

President: The Hon. Julian R. Hunte (Saint Lucia) The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m. Reports of the First Committee The President: The General Assembly will consider the reports of the First Committee on agenda items 62 to 80. I request the Rapporteur of the First Committee, Mr. Miguel Carbo of Ecuador, to introduce the reports of the First Committee in one intervention. Mr. Carbo (Ecuador), Rapporteur of the First Committee (spoke in Spanish): I am greatly honoured to introduce to the General Assembly for consideration and adoption the reports of the Committee on Disarmament and International Security -- the First Committee -- on items 62 to 80. Under the chairmanship of Ambassador Jarmo Sareva of Finland, the First Committee worked constructively and effectively over the course of 23 meetings, covering 19 agenda items relating matters of disarmament and international security and adopting a total of 47 draft resolutions and seven draft decisions. Twenty-nine draft resolutions and draft decisions were adopted without a vote. We could characterize the session of the First Committee as procedurally complex but substantially constructive and action-oriented. During the session, Member States dealt with issues relating to the full range of disarmament issues, as well as others relating to international security. Most of the delegations that took part in the deliberations paid tribute to achievements of the past few years, while expressing legitimate concerns and their readiness to cooperate in order to deal with matters that need to be looked into in the near future. As in the past, complex nuclear issues, involving nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, continued to be at the heart of the debate on international security. Among those, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, as well as other weapons of mass destruction, conventional weapons, anti-personnel mines and small arms and light weapons were the most important matters discussed. The First Committee also devoted a meeting to an informal exchange of views on its working methods. This exchange was enriched by an interactive discussion on substantive and procedural aspects on the Committee's working methods. It was concluded that, in order to improve the working methods, the First Committee should continue to exchange ideas on the matter in the future. I wish to invite delegations to take note of the following corrections. In document A/58/451, operative paragraph 6 (b) of the draft resolution should read "sixtieth session", instead of "fifty-eighth session". In paragraph 6, on page 4 of the English text of document A/58/462, Poland should be mentioned among the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.1/Rev.1. In document A/58/469, the last sentence of paragraph 5, beginning with the word "Subsequently", should be deleted. With your permission, Mr. President, I would like to pay tribute to all participating delegations for their spirit of cooperation in our common search for a better, more stable and safer world. I also wish to express my sincere thanks to the Chairman of the First Committee, Mr. Jarmo Sareva, who, thanks to his diplomatic skill and extensive knowledge in disarmament and international security matters, was able to skilfully guide the deliberations and his competent leadership enriched the Committee. I also wish to thank the Vice-Chairmen of the Committee -- Mr. Anouar Ben Youssef of Tunisia, Mr. Suriya Chindawongse of Thailand and Mr. Ionut Suseanu of Romania -- for the constructive role they played in the Bureau's work. I also wish to express my appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Services, Mr. Chen Jian and the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, for their important contribution, as well as for their leadership, and the Secretariat staff who assisted members of the Committee. I also wish to thank the Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Mohamed Sattar, whose broad experience and high level of professionalism made a significant contribution to the success of the work of the Commission. I also extend my thanks to Mr. Timor Al Asana, Mr. Sergei Cherniavsky and Mr. Tam Chung and other members of the Secretariat for their valuable assistance to the Committee. My functions as Rapporteur of the First Committee have enabled me to recognize the work of a great number of staff members who have not been mentioned here, but whose dedication and professionalism deserve our admiration and gratitude. In conclusion, I wish to submit for consideration to the General Assembly the reports of the First Committee, contained in documents A/58/451 through A/58/469. The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the First Committee. If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the First Committee that are before the Assembly today. It was so decided. The President: Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations regarding the recommendations of the First Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that, "When the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from the vote in the Committee." May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats. Before we begin to take action on the recommendations contained in the reports of the First Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was done in the First Committee, unless notified otherwise in advance. This means that where recorded or separate votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the First Committee. Agenda item 62 Reduction of military budgets Report of the First Committee (A/58/451) The President: The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of its report, as orally corrected. The draft resolution is entitled "Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures". The First Committee adopted the draft resolution as orally corrected, without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/28). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 62? Agenda item 63 Verification in all its aspects, including the role of the United Nations in the field of verification Report of the First Committee (A/58/452) The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft decision recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The First Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/515). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 63? Agenda item 64 Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace Report of the First Committee (А/58/453) The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. A recorded vote has been requested. A recorded vote was taken. In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia Against: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey The draft resolution was adopted by 130 votes to 3, with 42 abstentions (resolution 58/29). [Subsequently, the delegation of Portugal informed the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.] The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 64? Agenda item 65 African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty Report of the First Committee (А/58/454) The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The draft resolution is entitled "African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba)". The First Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/30). The President: May I take it that the Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration of agenda item 65? Agenda item 66 Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) Report of the First Committee (А/58/455) Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I am speaking on behalf of the States of Latin American and the Caribbean that originally sponsored draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.6, which has now been incorporated into document A/58/455. When the draft resolution was adopted without a vote in the First Committee on 27 October, it referred to the fact that the eighteenth regular session of the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL) would take place at Havana, Cuba, on 5 and 6 November 2003. That event yielded some important results, including the adoption of 19 resolutions of particular relevance for the States members of OPANAL. It was officially recognized that, with the Republic of Cuba's ratification, the zone of application established in accordance with the Treaty of Tlatelolco was now fully in force, thereby consolidating the first nuclear-weapon-free zone to be established in a densely populated region. Furthermore, the Havana Declaration, adopted by acclamation at that meeting, bears testimony to the common Latin American and Caribbean interest in making positive steps towards nuclear disarmament with a view to ensuring the effectiveness of OPANAL. That important text reaffirmed that the consolidation of the nuclear-weapon-free zone enshrined in the Treaty of Tlatelolco represents an important contribution by our region to international peace, security and stability. It is a clear demonstration of the steadfast commitment of Latin America and the Caribbean to the cause of complete and verifiable nuclear disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter. In their turn, the States members of OPANAL highlighted the importance of multilateralism in disarmament and related international security matters, while at the same time recognizing the important role of the United Nations in the sphere of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. We reiterate our commitment to adopting measures to strengthen this role. The original sponsors of the draft resolution believe that it would be appropriate for the draft resolution to include a reference to the results of the General Conference of OPANAL. We therefore propose that paragraph 1 be amended appropriately to read as follows: "Welcomes the fact that the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) is now in force for the sovereign States of the region, and that this fact was officially acknowledged by the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean at its eighteenth session, which was held at Havana on 5 and 6 November 2003, and takes note of the results of that session of the General Conference, including the adoption of the Declaration of Havana." That proposal has been sent to all permanent missions to the United Nations. It was also reconfirmed this morning with a number of delegations that are particularly interested in the matter. We arrived at the compromise language so that we would be able to retain the consensus on the draft resolution. Consequently, on behalf of the sponsors, we are requesting that the draft, as orally amended, be submitted to the General Assembly for consideration. We hope that once again it will be adopted without a vote. The President: The representative of Cuba has submitted an oral amendment to operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution. In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first take a decision on the oral amendment to operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the oral amendment to operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution? The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of its report, as orally amended. The First Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as orally amended? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/31). The President: There is one request to speak in explanation of vote after the vote. Mr. Journes (France) (spoke in French): The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America have associated themselves with this statement. We support the nuclear-weapon-free zone established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco. We consider that the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean concerns only the States which are party to the Tlatelolco Treaty, and that we are not bound by the elements of the statement elaborated in Havana following the eighteenth session of this General Conference. The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 66? Agenda item 67 Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security Report of the First Committee (A/58/456) The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft decision recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of the report. The First Committee adopted a draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/516). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 67? Agenda item 68 Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security Report of the First Committee (A/58/457) The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The First Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/32). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 68? Agenda item 69 Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament Report of the First Committee (A/58/458) The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of the report. Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, South Africa, Tonga, Ukraine, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu The draft resolution was adopted by 106 votes to 49, with 19 abstentions (resolution 58/33). [Subsequently, the delegation of Niger informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.] The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 69? Agenda item 70 Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East Report of the First Committee (A/58/459) The First Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/34). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 70? Agenda item 71 Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons Report of the First Committee (A/58/460) Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe None Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America The draft resolution was adopted by 119 votes to none, with 58 abstentions (resolution 58/35). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 71? Agenda item 72 Prevention of an arms race in outer space Report of the First Committee (A/58/461) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of America The draft resolution was adopted by 174 votes to none, with 4 abstentions (resolution 58/36). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 72? Agenda item 73 General and complete disarmament Report of the First Committee (A/58/462) The President: The Assembly has before it 24 draft resolutions recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 82 of its report, and five draft decisions recommended by the Committee in paragraph 83 of the same report. I should like to inform members that action on draft resolution I is postponed to a later date to allow time for the review of its programme budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft resolution I as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget implications is available. The Assembly will now take a decision on the 23 draft resolutions and the five draft decisions, one by one. After all the decisions have been taken, representatives will again have the opportunity to explain their vote. The draft resolutions are to be found in paragraph 82 of section III of the report of the First Committee. We turn first to draft resolution II, entitled "Missiles". Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of America Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan Draft resolution II was adopted by 113 votes to 3, with 57 abstentions (resolution 58/37). [Subsequently, the delegations of Ireland and Sweden informed the Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.] The President: Draft resolution III is entitled "Regional disarmament". The First Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 58/38). The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled "Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels". Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe India Bhutan Draft resolution IV was adopted by 172 votes to 1, with 1 abstention (resolution 58/39). The President: Draft resolution V is entitled "Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes". The First Committee adopted draft resolution V without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 58/40). The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled "Improving the effectiveness of the methods of work of the First Committee". The First Committee adopted draft resolution VI without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 58/41). The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled "National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology". The First Committee adopted draft resolution VII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 58/42). The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled "Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context". Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Mongolia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, South Africa, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 73 votes to 48, with 46 abstentions (resolution 58/43). The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled "Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation". Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Albania, Bulgaria, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Poland, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine Draft resolution IX was adopted by 118 votes to 12, with 46 abstentions (resolution 58/44). The President: Draft resolution X is entitled, "Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control". Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe United States of America France, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Draft resolution X was adopted by 173 votes to 1, with 4 abstentions (resolution 58/45). The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled "Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons". A separate vote has been requested on operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution XI. As there is no objection to that request, I shall first put to the vote operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution XI, on which a separate vote has been requested. Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe France, Israel, Russian Federation, United States of America Georgia, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution XI was retained by 165 votes to 4, with 3 abstentions. [Subsequently, the delegation of Tajikistan informed the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.] Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands), Vice-President, took the Chair. The Acting President: I now put to the vote draft resolution XI as a whole. Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Serbia and Montenegro, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uzbekistan Draft resolution XI as a whole, as amended, was adopted by 124 votes to 29, with 22 abstentions (resolution 58/46). [Subsequently, the delegation of Tajikistan informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.] The Acting President: Draft resolution XII is entitled "Reducing nuclear danger". Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil, China, Georgia, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Tajikistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan Draft resolution XII was adopted by 114 votes to 47, with 17 abstentions (resolution 58/47). The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled "Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction". The First Committee adopted draft resolution XIII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution 58/48). The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled "Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas". Separate votes have been requested on the last three words, "and South Asia", of operative paragraph 5 and on operative paragraph 5 as a whole of draft resolution XIV. Are there any objections to these requests? There are none. I shall first put to the vote the last three words of operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution XIV, on which a separate vote has been requested. Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe France, India, Pakistan Albania, Bhutan, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), Myanmar, Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America The last three words of operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution XIV were retained by 159 votes to 3, with 9 abstentions. [Subsequently, the delegation of France informed the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.] The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 5 as a whole of draft resolution XIV, on which a separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe France, India Bhutan, Georgia, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution XIV as a whole was adopted by 163 votes to 2, with 9 abstentions. The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote draft resolution XIV as a whole, as orally amended. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Bhutan, Georgia, India, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Russian Federation, Spain Draft resolution XIV as a whole was adopted by 168 votes to 3, with 8 abstentions (resolution 58/49). The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote draft resolution XV, entitled "Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons". Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe France, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Albania, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Uzbekistan Draft resolution XV was adopted by 128 votes to 4, with 43 abstentions (resolution 58/50). [Subsequently, the delegation of Tajikistan informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.] The Acting President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled "Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: a new agenda". A separate vote has been requested on the twentieth preambular paragraph of draft resolution XVI. Is there any objection to that request? There is none. I shall therefore put to the vote the twentieth preambular paragraph of draft resolution XVI, on which a separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Australia, Israel, Japan, Micronesia (Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Albania, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Uzbekistan The twentieth preambular paragraph of draft resolution XVI was retained by 128 votes to 6, with 41 abstentions. The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote draft resolution XVI as a whole. Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe France, India, Israel, Pakistan, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Albania, Australia, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey Draft resolution XVI was adopted by 133 votes to 6, with 38 abstentions (resolution 58/51). The Acting President: Draft resolution XVII is entitled "Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction". The First Committee adopted draft resolution XVII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution XVII was adopted (resolution 58/52). The Acting President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled "Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction". Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Azerbaijan, China, Cuba, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Morocco, Myanmar, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam Draft resolution XVIII was adopted by 153 votes to none, with 23 abstentions (resolution 58/53). [Subsequently, the delegation of Tajikistan informed the Secretariat that it intended to vote in favour.] The Acting President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled "Transparency in armaments". Separate votes have been requested on operative paragraph 2; on operative paragraph 3, the last words of operative paragraph 4 and operative paragraph 8 in a single vote; and on operative paragraph 4 as a whole. Are there any objections to these requests? I see none. I shall first put to the vote operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution XIX, on which a separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe Algeria, Bahrain, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen Operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution XIX was retained by 153 votes to none, with 23 abstentions. [Subsequently, the delegation of Djibouti informed the Secretariat that it intended to abstain.] The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 3, the last words of operative paragraph 4 -- "as well as the 2003 report of the Secretary-General" -- and operative paragraph 8 of draft resolution XIX, on which a single separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Cuba, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen Operative paragraph 3, the last words of operative paragraph 4 -- "as well as the 2003 report of the Secretary-General" -- and operative paragraph 8 of draft resolution XIX were retained by 152 votes to none, with 22 abstentions. The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 4 as a whole of draft resolution XIX, on which a separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen Operative paragraph 4 as a whole of draft resolution XIX was retained by 152 votes to none, with 22 abstentions. The Acting President: I now put to the vote draft resolution XIX as a whole. Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe Algeria, Bahrain, China, Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen Draft resolution XIX as a whole was adopted by 150 votes to none, with 27 abstentions (resolution 58/54). [Subsequently, the delegation of Belarus informed the Secretariat that it intended to vote in favour.] The Acting President: Draft resolution XX is entitled "Promotion at the regional level in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe of the United Nations programme of action on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects". The First Committee adopted draft resolution XX without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution XX was adopted (resolution 58/55). The Acting President: Draft resolution XXI is entitled "Nuclear disarmament". Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, India, Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritius, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Sweden, Tajikistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan Draft resolution XXI was adopted by 112 votes to 45, with 20 abstentions (resolution 58/56). The Acting President: Draft resolution XXII is entitled "The Conference on Disarmament decision (CD/1547) of 11 August 1998 to establish, under item 1 of its agenda entitled `Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament,' an ad hoc committee to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator (CD/1299) and the mandate contained therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices". The First Committee adopted draft resolution XXII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution XXII was adopted (resolution 58/57). The Acting President: Draft resolution XXIII is entitled "Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them". The First Committee adopted draft resolution XXIII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution XXIII was adopted (resolution 58/58). The Acting President: Draft resolution XXIV is entitled "A path to the total elimination of nuclear weapons". Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe India, United States of America Bhutan, Brazil, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Ireland, Israel, Mexico, Myanmar, New Zealand, Pakistan, South Africa, Sweden Draft resolution XXIV was adopted by 164 votes to 2, with 14 abstentions (resolution 58/59). The Acting President: We now turn to draft decision I entitled "United Nations conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers in the context of nuclear disarmament". Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe France, Israel, Monaco, Poland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey Draft decision I was adopted by 133 votes to 6, with 38 abstentions (decision 58/517). [Subsequently, the delegation of Germany informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against; the delegation of Ukraine had intended to abstain.] The Acting President: Draft decision II is entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia". The First Committee adopted draft decision II without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/518). The Acting President: Draft decision III is entitled "Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures". The First Committee adopted draft decision III without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft decision III was adopted (decision 58/519). The Acting President: We now turn to draft decision IV entitled "Relationship between disarmament and development". Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Israel, Rwanda Draft decision IV was adopted by 177 votes to 1, with 2 abstentions (decision 58/520). The Acting President: Draft decision V is entitled "Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament". The First Committee adopted draft decision V without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft decision V was adopted (decision 58/521). The Acting President: I now give the floor for explanations of vote after the vote. Mr. Omura (Japan): I would like to explain Japan's abstention in the voting on draft resolution VIII as recommended in the report A/58/462 entitled "Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context". Japan fully understands the importance of confidence-building measures, especially in situations and areas of tension and supports these measures. In this context, we view this draft resolution as containing certain positive elements which we believe are useful and agreeable. However, we believe that when these confidence-building measures are applied to specific regional conflicts, all relevant regional concerns should also be taken into account so that the measures will make a genuine contribution to confidence-building in the region. In addition, this draft resolution contained some problematic elements such as the concept of military balance between States in the region of concern in operative paragraph 5. More careful examination is required on these issues and therefore we abstained from this resolution. Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): As it did in the First Committee, Cuba voted in favour of the draft resolution entitled "Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context", based on our firm conviction that confidence-building measures adopted at various levels can contribute to strengthening peace, security and stability in all parts of the world. Cuba interprets the resolution just adopted as a text of a general nature that does not prejudge the position of any State with respect to specific processes or situations involving confidence-building measures at the regional and subregional levels. Confidence-building measures, because of their very nature, cannot be imposed and must therefore be established and agreed upon on a voluntary basis, at a pace deemed appropriate by the States participating in the process. Regional confidence-building measures must be adopted at the initiative of, and with the agreement, of interested States in the region. Confidence-building requires the consensus of the States participating in the process. The ultimate objective of these measures is to strengthen international peace and security, to improve relations among States, to promote the social, economic and cultural well-being of peoples and to contribute to the prevention of war. Their purpose is to reduce and even eliminate the danger of misunderstandings and supposed errors in military activities, to help to prevent military conflicts and covert activities aimed at instigating armed conflict and to reduce the risk of surprise attacks and the accidental outbreak of hostilities. Practical confidence-building measures ultimately depend on specific security conditions and other interrelated aspects of the situation in the country, region or subregion. Confidence-building measures must be implemented in a way that guarantees every State's right to security. Cuba will maintain under consideration and ongoing assessment its position on this important issue. Mrs. Maierá (Brazil): Brazil voted in favour of the draft resolution on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context. We support the general thrust of the resolution because we consider that confidence-building measures are a powerful instrument to generate trust among countries in all regions. Their implementation has a positive impact on the consolidation of a more cooperative environment essential to the full development of national and regional potential. This is confirmed by Brazil's bilateral, regional and multilateral experience in this field. In our hemisphere, Brazil is a country that has consistently undertaken the largest number of confidence-building measures in the appropriate mechanisms within the Organization of American States. However, confidence-building measures should not be imposed or monitored in any way by any actor other than the country that voluntarily engaged in the exercise. Therefore, it is our understanding that the consultations foreseen in operative paragraph 7 are to be undertaken with the prior consent of the parties involved. My delegation supported the draft resolution in spite of the fact that we were not comfortable with some of the language included in the text, although we recognize the effort made by the Pakistani delegation to accommodate some of the concerns raised by several delegations, including ours. We still consider that the text might have been refined in order to attain the consensus that the initiative deserved. We hope we can work further with the Pakistani delegation to reach consensus on this important initiative. Mr. Neo (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour of the draft resolution on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context, as we believe that confidence-building measures serve as a useful instrument in the promotion of regional peace and security. It is unfortunate that some of the debate surrounding the draft resolution referred to a specific regional context. The resolution does not in itself refer to a specific situation or regional context. Our vote on the draft resolution is based purely on the merits of the text and should not be construed to signify a taking of sides in any bilateral dispute. Ms. Šorytė (Lithuania): Lithuania abstained in the vote on draft resolution XV on reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, which was just adopted by the General Assembly. This abstention must not, however, be regarded as entirely reflecting our view on the issue of non-strategic nuclear weapons. Lithuania attaches high importance to the issue addressed in the draft resolution. The Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) contains the commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to reduce non-strategic nuclear weapons on the basis of unilateral initiatives as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process. We look forward to the 2005 NPT Review Conference, which provides a framework to address in an effective manner the reduction of non-strategic weapons. Lithuania supports calls for further confidence-building and transparency measures aimed at reducing the operational status of non-strategic nuclear weapon systems and at enhancing special security and physical protection measures for the transport and storage of non-strategic nuclear weapons, as provided for in operative paragraphs 3,5,6 and 7 of the draft resolution. The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 73. Agenda item 74 Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly Report of the First Committee (A/58/463) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it six draft resolutions recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 23 of its report. Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to orally amend draft resolution I, entitled "United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean", contained in document A/58/463. As the delegation of Cuba has already said, the eighteenth session of the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean took place in Havana on 5 and 6 November 2003. In order to update the draft resolution, my delegation wishes to orally amend the eighth preambular paragraph with the following changes. In line 3, the words "will be" should be replaced by the words "was" so that it reads "and that this fact was officially acknowledged". In line 6, the words "to be" should be replaced by the words "which was" so that it reads "which was held at Havana". We kindly ask for the support of all delegations in adopting these two oral amendments. The Acting President: I shall now put the six draft resolutions to the vote by the Assembly, one by one. After all the decisions have been taken, representatives will again have the opportunity to explain their vote. The representative of Costa Rica has submitted an oral amendment to the eighth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I. In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly will first take a decision on the oral amendment to the eighth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I. May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the oral amendment to the eighth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I? The oral amendment was adopted. The Acting President: We turn now to draft resolution I, as orally amended, entitled "United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean". The First Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution I, as orally amended, was adopted (resolution 58/60). The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled "United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa". The First Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the likewise? Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/61). The Acting President: Draft resolution III is entitled "United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific". Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 58/62). The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is entitled "United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament". The First Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 58/63). The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled "Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons". Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan Draft resolution V was adopted by 118 votes to 46, with 13 abstentions (resolution 58/64). The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is entitled "Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa". Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 58/65). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 74? Agenda item 75 Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session Report of the First Committee (A/58/464) The Acting President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled "Report of the Conference on Disarmament". Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/66). The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission". The First Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/67). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 75? The President returned to the Chair. Agenda item 76 The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East Report of the First Committee (A/58/465) A separate vote has been requested on the sixth preambular paragraph of the draft resolution. If there is no objection to that request, I shall first put to the vote the sixth preambular paragraph of the draft resolution, on which a separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe India, Israel Bhutan, Ethiopia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Trinidad and Tobago, United States of America, Vanuatu The sixth preambular paragraph was retained by 162 votes to 2, with 10 abstentions. The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution as a whole. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Australia, Cameroon, Canada, Ethiopia, India, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Vanuatu The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by 162 votes to 4, with 10 abstentions (resolution 58/68). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 76? Agenda item 77 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects Report of the First Committee (A/58/466) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/69). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 77? Agenda item 78 Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region Report of the First Committee (A/58/467) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/70). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 78? Agenda item 79 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Report of the First Committee (A/58/468) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Colombia, India, Mauritius, Syrian Arab Republic The draft resolution was adopted by 173 votes to 1, with 4 abstentions (resolution 58/71). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 79? Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction Report of the First Committee (A/58/469) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 58/72). The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 80? The President: Before we move to the next item on the agenda, I should like to announce that this will be the last General Assembly for Mr. Mohammad Sattar, Chief of the Disarmament and Decolonization Affairs Branch of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, and Secretary of the First Committee. Mr. Sattar has been with the United Nations for 28 years, and for the majority of that time has been associated with work on disarmament and the First Committee. His contribution to this field and to the First Committee has been truly significant, and I would like the Assembly to give him a round of applause in appreciation. Having worked with him personally in the Decolonization Committee, I know that all Members will join me in wishing him all the best in the years to come. Agenda item 49 Information and communication technologies for development Report of the Secretary-General (A/58/568) Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the States of the Rio Group -- Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela and my own country, Peru. With the convening in Geneva this week of the World Summit on the Information Society, this is a good opportunity for the General Assembly, as the most representative forum, to voice its will to encourage and coordinate initiatives making it possible to overcome the challenges linked to the revolution in information and communication technologies in the context of development. The Rio Group would like to express once again its hope that the digital divide will be reduced, as that divide constitutes a new form of exclusion at the national and international levels. We are committed, therefore, to launching initiatives to advance equality of opportunity in access to and the use of information technology and communications. That commitment is based on the conviction that the use and exploitation of such new technologies are indispensable in all strategies to eliminate poverty and to ensure sustainable economic growth. The heads of State of the Rio Group, at their latest Summit held in May 2003 in Cusco, Peru, affirmed the strategic importance of that component in their action plans for the elimination of poverty. To that end, in order to give priority status to the development of such technologies, the heads of State decided to take "measures aimed at the promotion of educational and scientific-technological strategies that assert elements of competitiveness, secure access for those with meagre resources, and enable us to progressively join the information society". That society, in which knowledge and information constitute the main sources of progress, must be built with a view to promoting the welfare of the individual and the elimination of the current socio-economic differences in our societies, while avoiding new forms of exclusion. The Latin America and the Caribbean region has had the opportunity to make an important contribution to the preparatory process of the World Summit on the Information Society. In January 2003 we met in Bávaro, thanks to the kind offer of the Dominican Republic, a member of our Group. In that meeting we adopted a declaration based on the ruling principles and main themes that, in the view of the Rio Group, need to be examined at the Summit and in its follow-up. In that way, the countries of our region offer their widest support to the promotion of dialogue on policies concerning global tendencies in the information society and to the promotion of regional activities. Following the Bávaro declaration, the Rio Group has intensified its cooperation and exchange of information at the regional level and in the framework of preparations for the Summit. In addition, the agreed declaration is a valuable tool for our Governments in the elaboration of new policies and the adoption of measures aimed at developing an information society. Nevertheless, those efforts must be accompanied by a common vision and international initiatives that will allow for capacity-building among developing countries, so that they can take advantage of information and communication technologies and at the same time promote conditions for a propitious international environment that will lead to universal access to such technologies. The Rio Group supports the efforts of the Preparatory Committee for the Summit aimed at establishing a group of universally accepted basic principles as a framework upon which to build the information society. Such principles include its contribution to economic and sustainable development, infrastructure development, capacity-building, acknowledgement of linguistic and multicultural diversity and international cooperation. In addition, the Group feels that consideration needs to be given to tailoring treatment to differing capacities, owing to the unequal distribution of resources among countries. It stresses the need to establish concrete commitments to reduce and eventually eliminate the digital divide. Finally, the Rio Group would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/58/568), presented in his capacity as Chairman of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, on the progress attained in the elaboration of a broad and coherent strategy on information and communication technologies for the United Nations system. That work is complex and requires the active participation of all parties involved, so that the strategy can respond to the specific needs and features of each entity and at the same time secure better coordination and synergies among the activities of the different programmes and agencies of the United Nations system. As stated in the report, we hope in 2004 to receive a comprehensive proposal and a corresponding plan of action that includes all of the entities of the United Nations system. The Rio Group attaches great importance to the project, and we are convinced that it will contribute to the increased efficiency and efficacy of the United Nations and will be able to transform it into a knowledge-based system of organizations. Mr. Ge Songxue (China) (spoke in Chinese): The Chinese delegation has closely studied the report of the Secretary-General on information and communication technologies for development (A/58/568). We wish to express our appreciation for the initiative of the Secretary-General to use information and communication technologies (ICT) as a strategic tool to enhance the efficiency, effectiveness and impact of the programmes and technical cooperation activities of the United Nations system. Elements included in the information and communication technologies strategy, such as e-management, knowledge-sharing, better services, infrastructure, security, capacity-building and governance are all very important. We hope that the strategy can be successfully implemented. Statements made by all speakers on this item reflect a consensus that information and communication technologies are of great importance for development. It is encouraging to note that countries have made progress in varying degrees in using ICT for development. China is a large developing country and we have first-hand knowledge of the significance of such technologies for development. Over two decades ago, the Chinese Government decided to make economic development its priority, using the construction of its communication system as a starting point. The Chinese Government clearly realized that steady economic growth could only be assured by making full use of the opportunities available in the age of information by accelerating the development of information, communication and network technologies and by energetically using those technologies in the economic, social, science and technology, national defence, educational, cultural and legal fields. After years of hard work, China has established a countrywide high-capacity high-speed basic transmission network, composed mainly of fibre optic cable supplemented by satellite and digital microwave communication. Eight vertical lines running north to south and eight horizontal lines running east to west form a national fibre optic cable grid connecting all provincial capitals and over 90 per cent of towns and counties. By the end of 2002, China already had 20.83 million computers linked to the Internet and 59.1 million Internet users, ranking second in the world in Internet use. However, compared with its total population, the Internet users only account for 4.6 per cent of the population, indicating that the impressive number of users does not correspond to extensive Internet use by the general population. There is a huge amount of room for further development. Marked progress has been made in developing and using communication technology in China. The communication network has been expanded from small to large capacity, from analog to digital technology and from single-service to diversified services, thus meeting the basic needs of social and economic development in the information age. With China's entry into the World Trade Organization, the telecommunication sector has been opened to the outside world. The development of ICT in China has made an outstanding contribution to enhancing our national economic strength, reinforcing national defence and raising living standards. Information and communication technologies and the information industry have touched all economic and social sectors in China. They are playing an important role in providing better information services to society and improving the quality of life. Information and communication technologies have also provided an advanced operational means and the requisite network technology for China's macroeconomic control, economic performance and security. Those technologies are major contributors to the transformation of traditional technologies in enterprises, improving labour productivity and accelerating industrialization through informatization, leading to good economic returns and social benefits. In turn, the information industry itself has benefited from the growth of business. In 2002, the value added by the information industry reached 5.7 per cent of China's gross domestic product. To use information and communication technologies to promote development and eliminate the digital divide requires the concerted effort of the international community. The World Summit on the Information Society, to be held in Geneva in December this year and in Tunisia in 2005, is a good opportunity for us to discuss how, through financial aid, technology transfer and capacity-building, developing countries can be better helped to use information and communication technologies for development in order to realize the Millennium Development Goals. China is ready to work actively with the international community in this endeavour. Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The Tunisian delegation attaches particular importance to the debate that brings us together today, on information and communication technologies in the service of development, particularly since this meeting is being held on the eve of the beginning of work in Geneva on the first stage of the World Summit on the Information Society. The second stage of the Summit, which will be held in Tunisia from 16 to 18 November 2005, is a historic event that will give information and communication technologies a central role in the advancement of just and lasting development and a balanced information society accessible to all. Everyone today is aware of the pivotal role of information and communication technologies (ICT) in promoting development, stimulating growth and alleviating poverty. However, this revolution has not touched the vast majority of the world's people. The digital divide threatens to exacerbate the digital gap between the industrialized and the developing countries. This situation concerns all of us and requires practical measures to enable all countries to benefit from the enormous opportunities provided by the development of technology and the digital information revolution. It is our hope that the two phases of the World Summit on the Information Society will enable us to identify ways and means to exploit the possibilities provided by new technologies in order to help countries achieve the Millennium Development Goals and benefit from the potential of globalization and the establishment of a new type of relations among nations based, on solidarity and the sharing of knowledge in a way that opens new perspectives and which will alleviate the social gaps between the countries of the North and South. We believe that great technological progress is meaningful only if it is placed at the service of all; insufficient access of developing countries to ICT threatens to exacerbate their marginalization and delay their integration into the global economy. The United Nations, which has placed the economic, social and science and technology fields at the centre of its concerns, is the ideal forum for seeking a solution to the gap separating developed and developing countries in all areas, including the digital divide, and for enabling developing countries to be integrated into the global economy. We welcome the outstanding progress made by the United Nations in the use of ICT and the efforts made to forge important partnerships, including with the private sector, in order to reduce the digital divide and take advantage of the possibilities offered by technology to advance development. In resolution 57/295, the General Assembly emphasized the importance of using ICT as a strategic tool to strengthen the usefulness, effectiveness and impact of the development programmes and technical cooperation activities of the United Nations system. In that regard, we would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/58/568), submitted for the Assembly's consideration, concerning the results of cooperation in information and telecommunication technologies within the United Nations system under operative paragraph four of the aforementioned resolution. In particular, we welcome the fact that it is increasingly recognized that ICT, if wisely and methodically used, makes it possible not only to improve management and administration but also to strengthen the implementation of programmes and to enhance the scope of action of various bodies, as well as the implementation of their objectives, thereby providing greater coherence, efficiency and profitability. The Tunisian delegation welcomes the initiatives under way within the United Nations system to elaborate tools and instruments to optimize the use of the possibilities offered by ICT and their integration into development and technical cooperation activities undertaken by the various United Nations bodies. Tunisia has placed itself in the vanguard of the fight against the digital divide by investing massively in information technology and the Internet. Tunisia's performance in the area of ICT -- the implementation of ICT in universities and educational institutions, the creation of high-tech business zones to encourage research and technological innovation, the expansion of various types of communications networks and the increase in connectivity rates, in addition to the growing number of Internet users and the opening of horizons to all strata of the population so that they can keep up with scientific and technological progress -- those achievements have earned Tunisia the honour and privilege of being selected to host the World Summit on the Information Society. Today, Tunisia is working on the task of carrying out the preparations for hosting the Summit during its second stage, from 16 to 18 November 2005 in Tunis. We are counting on the General Assembly to adopt during its present session the recommendations and decisions required to provide its effective support and directives for the second stage of the Summit once the first stage, from 10 to 12 of December of this year, is concluded in Geneva. Mr. Akram (Pakistan): During the last two decades, the global economy has gone through fundamental changes. The process of globalization, driven by trade and technological innovations has radically changed the paradigms in almost every domain of human activities. Tremendous advancement in science and technology, especially in the field of information and communication technologies (ICT), has expanded the network of transnational linkages, and the digital and information revolution has provided historical opportunity for developing countries to take a quantum leap forward and integrate into the global economy. Paradoxically, this process of global, economic and technological development has also resulted in an uneven distribution of benefits, thereby accentuating global economic polarization. As a result of the dramatic advancement of modern technology, the digital divide has further widened, as has the income and development gap between the developed and developing countries. The benefits of technological expansion have not reached the poor. The technological revolution has magnified the socio-economic disparities and divides. Nevertheless, there is broad consensus that technology, especially ICT, is the way of the future. With universal access, it can serve as the engine of economic growth and development. The challenge is how to ensure that the technological revolution, particularly ICT, benefits every inhabitant of the world. One cannot deny the fact that to manage globalization and make technology work for the poor, the international community needs to adopt a holistic, progressive and participatory approach, an approach that ensures the utilization of technology towards the development needs of the developing countries and that leads to poverty eradication. An important prerequisite for attaining this objective will be the creation of an enabling international environment supportive of development. The transfer of technology to developing countries should be an important element of this approach. Investment in basic literacy infrastructure and human resource development are essential to make ICT work for the development of the poor communities. The United Nations is well placed to lead the world in placing science and technology in the service of development. By building partnerships with all relevant actors, the United Nations can lead the way in promoting the development objectives of developing countries. In this regard, we feel that the establishment of the United Nations Information and Communications Technology Task Force was a timely step in the right direction. There is need to give full support to this United Nations initiative. On our part, Pakistan fully supports its programmes and activities and hopes that the Task Force will continue to support the United Nations membership in its efforts to make ICT work for its development. The holding of the first phase of the World Summit on the Information Society in Geneva this week is yet another important step. The Prime Minister of Pakistan, His Excellency Mr. Zafarullah Khan Jamali, will lead the Pakistan delegation to the Geneva Summit. We look forward to a successful outcome of this phase, as well as of its second phase, to be held in Tunisia in 2005. Pakistan has actively participated in its preparatory process and will continue to lend its full support to both phases of the Summit. We also believe that strengthening the United Nations Commission on Science and Technology, by improving its efficiency and effectiveness, is an imperative. We need to empower the Economic and Social Council and its affiliated bodies dealing with science and technology to strengthen the capacities of the developing countries, in order to enable them to reap the fruits of the ICT revolution. For our part, the Government of Pakistan has adopted a holistic, progressive, participatory and all-encompassing approach to the promotion of information and communication technology in our country. A National Commission for Science and Technology, headed by the President of Pakistan, has been established. A proposal to establish an advisory body to examine ways and means to develop those areas of science and technology that are directly related to economic development and national security are also under consideration. An all-out effort to strengthen the science base in the country is being made. For that, synergy between the Ministries of Education and Science and Technology is being created. To achieve that target, the Government of Pakistan is concentrating on upgrading infrastructure in research and development organizations and institutes, as well as on technology development, creating linkages between industry and academia and the development of an extensive pool of human resources in key areas of science and technology. A vibrant national information technology policy has been launched. Our information technology policy is aimed at the realization of the role of the Government as a facilitator and an enabler; secondly, at the development of an extensive skilled information technology workforce; thirdly, at providing business incentives for both local and foreign investors; at designing legislative and regulatory frameworks that are conducive to the promotion of the information technology industry as the engine of development; and, finally, at the establishment of an efficient and cost-effective infrastructure that provides affordable and widespread connectivity, as well as equitable access to networks. Pakistan is also actively seeking foreign investment in the sectors of telecommunications and software development. A liberal investment environment, which includes 100 per cent foreign ownership of companies, repatriation of profits and favourable legislation is being offered. This, coupled with intelligent, motivated and young information technology human resources provide conducive conditions for foreign investment. The Government is also encouraging joint ventures in the information technology industry in Pakistan. Pakistan, like many other developing countries, has endeavoured to strategically place itself so that it could benefit from the immense potential of information and telecommunication technology. These policies and efforts can yield the desired results only with a commensurate international effort to place ICT in the service of development. Mr. Mustapha (Malaysia): We have been witnessing, in the past 10 years especially, how information and communication technologies (ICT) are transforming our world. Hundreds of years ago, communication physically travelled by word of mouth from one person to another. It took days and months for us to send information to others in different parts of the world. Today we are able to communicate in real time, virtually facing each other and involved in real discussion, while we sit in front of monitors at different locations across the globe. ICT has immense potential and, if properly harnessed, could provide opportunities to developing countries, especially the least developed countries, to leapfrog in their development process. However, due largely to the marginalization of developing countries over the years, stemming from the globalization process, ICT has not been able to assume its catalytic role as a development enabler. On the other hand, it could contribute to widening the divide between the developed and the developing countries. According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), there are more than 500 million Internet users worldwide, but 80 per cent of them are in the developed world. Further, in the developing world, only one in every 50 persons has Internet access, compared with two out of every five in the developed world. Clearly, adequate and urgent steps would have to be taken to reverse this digital divide. Otherwise, developing countries would be further marginalized. In this regard, the convening of the World Summit on the Information Society in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003 and in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005, is timely. It would provide the world an opportunity to develop a better understanding of the information revolution and its impact on the international community. The Summit is an important forum for the international community to affirm its commitment to address the digital divide in a meaningful way. In this regard, Malaysia believes that the outcome of the Summit must be action-oriented and contain concrete goals, as well as implementable measures, which would particularly benefit the developing countries and help facilitate their development. At the same time, the Summit must also give due attention to the issue of info-security. While noting that the Internet is largely self-governing, Malaysia believes that failure to establish rules framing Internet governance will result in the abuse and misuse of the Internet, which may have a far-reaching impact on the socio-economic sector. Nevertheless, we recognize that a balance must be found between judicious regulation and the need for the Internet to retain its freedom and creativity. Information is a source of immense potential and an important factor for change. With the advent of technology and communication breakthroughs, as well as the relentless forces of liberalization and deregulation beating on our door, our world is fast changing. All countries now face new challenges in transitioning from a resource-based to a knowledge-based economy. We need to leapfrog into the knowledge age and propel our society and our economy into a more competitive position vis-à-vis the rest of the world. The Government of Malaysia, since the early 1990s, has embarked on creating an information society in the country. A Multimedia Super Corridor was launched in 1995 as a first step to leapfrog Malaysian society into the digital age. Since then, the transformation into a knowledge society is progressing well under the monitoring of the National Information Technology Council. One of the main challenges we face in Malaysia is the question of Internet access or penetration to all segments of society. Malaysia's penetration rate for fixed line is only 21 per cent, compared to the world class standard of 50 per cent. In the same vein, the rate of mobile line use is 23 per cent, also as compared to 50 per cent. There are also 9.4 computer users for every 100 Malaysians, whereas the world class rate is 40. In that connection, the Government has taken efforts to bridge the information and digital gap among the local communities. Under the current development allocation for ICT-related programmes for 2001 to 2005, the bulk of the RM 6.2 billion budget has been earmarked for infrastructure development. Recently also, in recognition of the central role of youth in nation-building, the National Information Technology Centre sponsored the InfoSoc (Information-Society) Malaysia 2003 International Conference and Exhibition, which was held in Kuala Lumpur from 21 to 24 June this year, with the theme "Catalysing youth for value creation: leveraging on ICT". The United Nations is well positioned to take a lead role in shaping the global ICT vision for development. Clearly, the greatest challenge is to bridge the digital divide and foster digital opportunity for all mankind. ICT provides tools that can help make the world a better place by alleviating poverty, improving the delivery of education and healthcare services and making Government more accessible to the people. This is the vision of the Millennium Development Goals, adopted by our leaders in 2000. The World Summit on the Information Society is the next international gathering that will shape international cooperation at the multilateral level. It offers us an opportunity to shape the future course of the information society in a positive way by ensuring that it benefits all citizens. The developed countries must therefore assist the developing countries in their efforts to develop technologies, as embodied in the Millennium Declaration agreed to by our leaders. The work of the ICT Task Force and the Group of 8 Digital Opportunities Task Force will be critical in this regard. Malaysia stands ready to contribute, within its capabilities, towards promoting international cooperation in the area of information and communication technologies, especially among the developing countries. Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): First we wish to thank the Secretary-General for the introduction of his report, contained in document A/58/568. We are living in the era of technological revolution, where information and communication technologies (ICT) make it possible for countries to have real-time access to all events taking place in the world and to obtain information on the most recent technological advances. However, this reality is in contrast with the asymmetry and the imbalance caused by the process of neo-liberal globalization, where the rich become richer and the poor become poorer. The difference in income between the richest and the poorest countries, which was 37 times greater in 1960, is today 74 times greater. On the one hand, there is rapid growth in trade, finance, information and technology, while, on the other, an increase in poverty, marginalization, poor health and illiteracy. The technological divide between developing and developed countries is increasing by leaps and bounds. The information and communication technologies revolution has brought about the boom of the world economy. However, not all actors are participating on an equal footing. Developed countries, as well as major transnational corporations, exert an overwhelming influence and consequently reap the benefits, while, in developed countries, e-trade, cell phones and instant message relay are everywhere; just to give one example, more than half of the world's population living in developing countries do not even have access to the telephone network. How can we speak in the developing countries about new information and communication technologies, given the economic and social situation they are subjected to as a result of prevailing unequal international economic relations? The world's developing countries have limited financial resources, which they must devote to combating poverty, malnutrition, poor health and illiteracy. They lack the human resources and the infrastructure necessary to access the opportunities provided by the technological revolution. The future of mankind depends to a great extent on ensuring a rational approach to development in which there is a greater distribution of wealth and where the gap between the rich and the poor countries is breached and sustainability is guaranteed. For that to happen, a new, just, democratic and fair world order is required, in which developing countries participate on an equal footing in the decision-making process on global problems. We also need to establish effective cooperation among all international actors, in order to increase the effect of information and communication technologies on development, allowing for technology transfer to developing countries on a preferential basis, particularly technologies related to expertise, as well as for training and technical assistance so that our countries can develop their human resources. We must also put an end to the use of unilateral measures that contravene international law and affect access to information and communication technologies and to international networks of information and communication exchange. The Cuban delegation believes that certification systems and the possible sanctioning of a State with regard to access to telecommunication technologies or to other technologies, which are closely linked because of possible threats to international peace and security, must be multilateral in nature and must be based on modalities agreed by the international community. Cuba is carrying out a strategy to introduce information technology to all spheres of society, despite the cruel and brutal economic, financial and commercial blockade imposed by the Government of the United States and despite serious constraints in resources. Our first priority is to provide training for individuals, in particular, for our young people. The creation of young people's computer clubs throughout the country has made available the necessary equipment and instructors to teach computers to children and adolescents for free. Similarly, during the past school year, 117,868 girls and boys at the pre-school level in primary schools had access to computers for thirty minutes a week. Based on this course, the 23,527 young children registered at the pre-school level in daycare centres are also benefiting. Today we have 46,290 computers installed in pre-school, primary and middle schools, including all rural schools. In order to ensure their use, 2,368 schools that did not have electricity because of their distance from the national electric grid were equipped with solar panels. Among those schools, 93 have only one student each. Similarly, Cuban education makes use of 78 software programs, 37 of them at the secondary level and the rest at the primary level. This has meant that students can, through interactive programmes and with the use of multimedia, obtain much more knowledge for their overall training. Similarly, technological computer schools have been set up to prepare thousands of young people in the basics of computers and electronics. This is a necessary step in increasing the level of information technology in all spheres of society. My delegation welcomes the holding of the World Summit on the Information Society, the first stage of which will be held this week in Geneva, and its second stage will be held in Tunis in 2005. We hope that at that forum specific actions and initiatives will be established allowing developing countries to take part in world technological progress and move toward development. Mr. Aboutahir (Morocco) (spoke in French): On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I would like to ask you, Mr. President, to leave open item 49 of the General Assembly's agenda, entitled "Information and communication technology for development". The importance of the first stage of the Geneva Summit on the Information Society requires that we show patience here so as to be able to take into account the results of this first stage of the World Summit and also to enable us to take into consideration the launching of the preparatory process for the second stage, planned for Tunis in 2005. It is in that context that the Second Committee suspended action on draft resolution A/C.2/58/L.42 on the World Summit on the Information Society in order to be able to bring it directly to the plenary of the General Assembly in due time. Draft resolution A/C.2/58/L.42, to be reintroduced soon, should reflect the results of the first stage in Geneva and launch the preparatory process for the second stage of the World Summit in Tunis. These are the reasons why the Group of 77 and China hopes to have the understanding of the General Assembly in leaving agenda item 49 still open. The President: I thank the representative of Morocco who is in effect the last speaker in this debate on this item. It is therefore my understanding that a draft resolution under this item will be submitted at a later date. The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 49. The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 