%%%FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|FINANCIAL FLOWS|DEVELOPMENT FINANCE INSTITUTIONS|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|COMMODITIES|ECONOMIC GROWTH|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|FOOD SECURITY|PARTNERSHIP|HUMAN SETTLEMENTS|POVERTY MITIGATION|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION|

UNITED NATIONS General Assembly FIFTY-FIRST SESSION Official Records A/C.2/51/SR.37 English Page SECOND COMMITTEE 37th meeting held on Monday, 2 December 1996 at 10 a.m. New York SUMMARY RECORD OF THE 37th MEETING Chairman: Mr. HAMBURGER (Netherlands) CONTENTS AGENDA ITEM 12: REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL (continued) AGENDA ITEM 94: MACROECONOMIC POLICY QUESTIONS (continued) (b) FINANCING OF DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING NET TRANSFER OF RESOURCES BETWEEN DEVELOPING AND DEVELOPED COUNTRIES (continued) (c) TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT (continued) (d) COMMODITIES (continued) AGENDA ITEM 95: SECTORAL POLICY QUESTIONS (continued) (a) INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION (continued) (b) FOOD AND SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (continued) AGENDA ITEM 96: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION (continued) (b) AGENDA FOR DEVELOPMENT (continued) (ii) RENEWAL OF THE DIALOGUE ON STRENGTHENING INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION FOR DEVELOPMENT THROUGH PARTNERSHIP (continued) (c) INTEGRATION OF THE ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION INTO THE WORLD ECONOMY (continued) (d) POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT (continued) (e) HUMAN SETTLEMENTS (continued) (f) ERADICATION OF POVERTY (continued) CONTENTS (continued) AGENDA ITEM 97: ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (continued) (a) IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (continued) (b) SPECIAL SESSION FOR THE PURPOSE OF AN OVERALL REVIEW AND APPRAISAL OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF AGENDA 21 (continued) (c) IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY (continued) (f) INTERNATIONAL DECADE FOR NATURAL DISASTER REDUCTION (continued) AGENDA ITEM 98: OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT (continued) The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m. AGENDA ITEM 94: MACROECONOMIC POLICY QUESTIONS (continued) (A/C.2/51/L.16/Rev.1, L.14 and L.49, L.28 and L.50, L.26 and L.53) 1. Mr. GUTIERREZ (Costa Rica), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said that, following the meeting of Ambassadors held on 27 November 1996, the Group had deemed it necessary to change its previous position regarding the use of the expression "within the existing resources" or other similar expressions in the resolutions of the Second Committee. The Group believed that by wondering whether or not to use such expressions, the Committee would in fact be encroaching upon the prerogatives of the Fifth Committee, which was primarily responsible for the consideration of the financial aspects of all programmes and the budgetary implications of any of the Main Committees' resolutions. In that regard, the Group drew the Committee's attention to the letter from the Chairman of the Fifth Committee addressed to the Chairman of the Second Committee (A/C.2/51/9), which in fact recalled that the Fifth Committee was the appropriate Main Committee of the Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters. The Chairman of the Fifth Committee requested therefore that the Second Committee should leave aside any financial aspects when considering drafts, so that the Fifth Committee could take the appropriate action. Given the Fifth Committee's priority in that matter, the Group of 77 and China wished to eliminate the use of the expression in question. If necessary, there should be a vote on the relevant paragraphs of the resolutions introduced. (b) FINANCING OF DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING NET TRANSFER OF RESOURCES BETWEEN DEVELOPING AND DEVELOPED COUNTRIES (continued) Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.26 and L.53: Net flows and transfer of resources between developing and developed countries 2. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.53, which had been submitted on the basis of informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.26. As the draft had met with general approval, he hoped that the Committee would adopt it by consensus. 3. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.53 was adopted. 4. Ms. LEBL (United States of America) expressed her delegation's reservations concerning the tenth preambular paragraph of the proposed resolution. She reaffirmed that the United States understood that the expression "sustained economic growth" as it appeared in the resolutions referred to growth within the framework of sustainable development, as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and maintained by the heads of State and Government of more than 130 countries during the World Summit for Social Development. The entire paragraph in question read: "We are deeply convinced that economic development, social development and environmental protection are interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development, which is the framework for our efforts to achieve a higher quality of life for all people. Equitable social development that recognizes empowering the poor to utilize environmental resources sustainably is a necessary foundation for sustainable development. We also recognize that broad-based and sustained economic growth in the context of sustainable development is necessary to sustain social development and social justice." Her delegation was not in a position to accept the objectives in paragraph 3 of the draft concerning official development assistance. She requested that her statement should be fully reflected in the summary record of the meeting. 5. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.26 was withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.28 and L.50: Global financial integration and strengthening collaboration between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions 6. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.50, which had been submitted on the basis of informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.28. He noted that, in the first line of the fourth preambular paragraph, "section VIII" should be replaced by "section VII". In spite of all the difficulties posed by the question, the draft resolution had been produced by consensus, and he invited the members of the Committee to also adopt it by consensus. 7. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.50, as orally revised, was adopted. 8. Mr. FLORENCIO (Brazil) said that he had coordinated the negotiations on the draft resolution on behalf of the Group of 77. He emphasized how important it was for the United Nations to continue the debate on the global financial integration phenomenon, the problems and the opportunities that it presented, including the debate on the instability of short-term capital flows. The draft resolution drew on two previous resolutions, General Assembly resolution 50/91 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/43. However, it further emphasized the conceptual framework of the global financial integration issue and described the effects of that phenomenon on different countries and regions. The draft also sought to give impetus to collaboration between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions, which could only have favourable effects for all parties concerned. 9. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.28 was withdrawn. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.16/Rev.1: International trade and development 10. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, said that the draft resolution was novel in that it was not just a text introduced by the Vice-Chairman and adopted by consensus, but a draft sponsored by a number of countries. However, its uniqueness stemmed from more than just the number of sponsors. An effort had also been made to implement the provisions of General Assembly resolution 50/227. Accordingly, the preamble had been condensed in an effort to streamline the text, and the draft was divided into three sections: the first section was devoted to the ninth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the second section to the multilateral trade system, and the third section to other questions related to trade and development. He recommended its adoption by consensus. 11. Ms. KELLEY (Secretary of the Committee), in reference to paragraph 14 of draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.16/Rev.1, said that the Secretary-General would soon present his proposed programme budget for 1998-1999, dealing, inter alia, with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and that his proposals would be considered by the competent bodies in accordance with established procedures. 12. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.16/Rev.1 was adopted. 13. Mr. FLORENCIO (Brazil) said that it was the first time a draft resolution on international trade and development prepared by the Group of 77 had been co-sponsored by developed countries. That unprecedented circumstance was testimony to their political will to cooperate in North-South relations and set an example for the development-related work of the United Nations. 14. He reiterated the Vice-Chairman's observation that the draft resolution was much shorter and much more action-oriented than those previously adopted. By confirming the consensus reached in Midrand, South Africa, and providing broad support for the draft, the General Assembly was restating its confidence in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development by recognizing that the Conference had adopted far-reaching reforms and should from now on devote itself to its vast programme of work. 15. Regarding the World Trade Organization, the draft resolution reaffirmed the major role that the Organization played as a framework for a rule-based multilateral trading system, and requested that its Ministerial Conference in Singapore should make an effort to achieve balanced results taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries. 16. Mr. MOGOTSI (South Africa) said that, as host of the ninth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, South Africa welcomed the fact that the draft resolution on international trade and development had met with consensus and broad-based co-sponsorship, including the United States, the Russian Federation, Norway, Japan and Mexico. The extreme diversity of sponsors of the draft reflected the relevance and dynamic nature of the "Partnership for Growth and Development" established in Midrand, and his delegation expressed its appreciation to those who were helping to ensure that the Partnership went beyond mere rhetoric. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.14 and L.49: Commodities 17. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria) said that, in reference to the last paragraph of the draft resolution, concerning the scheduling of consideration of the item, it had been decided during informal consultations that the General Assembly would henceforth consider it every two years and would take it up again at the fifty-third session. He invited the Committee to adopt the draft by consensus. 18. Mr. OUATTARA (Côte d'Ivoire) said that, as coordinator, he would like to introduce some clarifications omitted from the final wording of the draft resolution. After "a driving force of investments and" the word "contributor" was to be inserted in the second preambular paragraph. In paragraph 4, the word "emphasizes" was to be replaced by "expresses". In the second line of paragraph 6 (c), the word "aim" was to be replaced by "have as their objective", which was the wording adopted at the ninth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. In the fifth line of paragraph 12, after "Net Food-Importing Developing Countries", the word "and" was to be inserted. In the sixth line, the words "the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" were to be replaced by "it" to avoid repetition. 19. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.49, as orally revised, was adopted. 20. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.14 was withdrawn. Draft decision on various reports, notes and comments of the Secretary-General (A/51/388, A/51/331, A/51/255, A/51/152, A/51/152/Add.1) 21. The CHAIRMAN introduced a draft decision concerning agenda item 94 which read: "The General Assembly takes note of the following documents: Report of the Secretary-General on global financial integration: challenges and opportunities (A/51/388); Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening international organizations in the area of multilateral trade (A/51/331); Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development concerning specific measures in favour of island developing countries (A/51/255); Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled `United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: Review of institutional and programme issues' (A/51/152) and the comments of the Secretary-General on the above-mentioned report of the Joint Inspection Unit (A/51/152/Add.1)". 22. The draft decision was adopted. 23. The CHAIRMAN said that the Committee had concluded its consideration of agenda item 94. (a) INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION (continued) (A/C.2/51/L.12 and L.46, A/C.2/51/L.38 and L.47) Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.12 and L.46: Industrial development cooperation 24. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.46 on the basis of informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.12. As a consensus had been reached during informal consultations, he recommended that the draft resolution should be adopted by consensus. 25. Ms. LEBL (United States of America) stated that her delegation disassociated itself from the draft resolution. In particular, it had reservations concerning the sixth preambular paragraph. She reaffirmed that the United States understood that the expression "sustained economic growth" as it appeared in the resolutions referred to growth in the framework of sustainable development, as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and maintained by the heads of State and Government of more than 130 countries during the World Summit for Social Development. The entire paragraph in question read: She requested that her statement should be fully reflected in the summary record of the meeting. 26. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.46 was adopted. 27. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.12 was withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.38 and L.47: Food and sustainable agricultural development 28. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.47, produced after consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.38. He recalled that the text had been introduced after the World Food Summit, held in Rome from 13 to 17 November 1996, and was a follow-up to the Plan of Action adopted on that occasion. 29. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.47 was adopted. 30. Mr. WEIBGEN (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) pointed out that the draft resolution had several provisions concerning the follow-up to the Summit, and concerning reports to the Economic and Social Council and to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session. The Summit participants had adopted a Plan of Action containing several commitments, and what was now needed was follow-up action to the Summit. 31. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.38 was withdrawn. Draft decision on the report of the Secretary-General on the use of freshwater resources for food and agricultural production, as well as the implications of the results of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations for food production, including agro-industrial products and on global food security in developing countries (A/51/431) 32. The CHAIRMAN introduced a draft decision under agenda item 95 that read: "The General Assembly takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the use of freshwater resources for food and agricultural production, as well as the implications of the results of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations for food production, including agro-industrial products and on global food security in developing countries (A/51/431)". 33. The draft decision was adopted. AGENDA ITEM 96: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION (continued) (A/C.2/51/L.23, L.45, L.21, L.52, L.19, L.43, L.15/Rev.1*, L.18 and L.51) Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.23 and L.45: Communication for development programmes in the United Nations system 34. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.45 which was being proposed after consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.23, and stated that the words "entitled Communication for development in the United Nations system," should be added at the end of the first preambular paragraph. He recommended that the draft resolution should be adopted by consensus. 35. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.45, as orally revised, was adopted. 36. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.23 was withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.21 and L.52: Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation for development through partnership 37. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.52, produced after consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.21. He indicated that, in paragraph 3, the blanks should be filled in with "50/490 of 16 September 1996", and recommended that the draft resolution should be adopted by consensus. 38. Mr. HAPSORO (Indonesia) said that, in the seventh line of paragraph 3, the words ", and the theme to be" should be replaced by the words "on the theme of". 39. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.52, as orally revised, was adopted. 40. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.21 was withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.19 and L.43: Implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development 41. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.43, produced after consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.19, and recommended that it should be adopted by consensus. 42. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.43 was adopted. 43. Ms. LEBL (United States of America) expressed reservations concerning the third preambular paragraph of the draft resolution. She reaffirmed that the United States understood that the expression "sustained economic growth" as it appeared in the resolutions referred to growth in the framework of sustainable development, as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and maintained by the heads of State and Government of more than 130 countries during the World Summit for Social Development. The entire paragraph in question read: 44. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.19 was withdrawn. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.15/Rev.1*: Implementation of decisions adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) 45. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.15/Rev.1*, and said that the exact title of the draft resolution was "Implementation of the outcome of the second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)". 46. Mr. BURHAN (Turkey) said that his delegation would like to sponsor the draft. 47. The CHAIRMAN emphasized that the draft had no programme budget implications. 48. Ms. LEBL (United States of America) said that the words "from within existing resources" in paragraph 19 should therefore be deleted. 49. Mr. SEATON (South Africa), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, reaffirmed that the Group opposed linking statements on programme budget implications and the use of the words "from within existing resources". 50. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.15/Rev.1*, as orally revised, was adopted. 51. Mr. AARDAL (Norway) said that his delegation had reservations concerning paragraphs 19 and 33 and pointed out that it was important to guarantee transparency in the evaluation. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.18 and L.51: First United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty 52. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.51, submitted on the basis of consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.18. Although the title referred to the First United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, the text was about the overall problem of poverty. In the text, the General Assembly welcomed the initiative to convene a micro-credit summit in Washington, D.C., from 2 to 4 February 1997. He recommended that the draft resolution should be adopted by consensus. 53. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.51 was adopted. 54. Ms. LEBL (United States of America) said that her delegation did not support the target set in paragraph 15. 55. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.18 was withdrawn. AGENDA ITEM 97: ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (continued) (A/C.2/51/L.10, L.39, L.48, L.9, L.41, L.11, L.5, L.31, L.4 and L.42) Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.10 and L.39: Elaboration of an International Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa 56. The CHAIRMAN drew attention to document A/C.2/51/L.48, which contained the programme budget implications of the draft. 57. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.39, submitted after consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.10. He recommended that the draft resolution should be adopted by consensus. 58. Ms. LEBL (United States of America) said that her delegation was in favour of the draft resolution but, in view of the potential implications of paragraph 12, she would like to make some clarifications. Several important questions concerning the transition period leading up to the establishment of a permanent secretariat remained pending. The interim secretariat should provide as soon as possible an estimate of its needs during the transition period so that a knowledgeable decision could be made regarding the resources to be allotted for that period. The United States would like the question of resources to be considered during the first session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention. The resources allocated to the negotiation process, which had been paid into the special Trust Fund and the Special Voluntary Fund, should be drawn upon first, and the regular budget should be used only when all extrabudgetary resources had been exhausted. 59. Mr. CHOUINARD (Canada) said that his delegation would like to sponsor the draft. 60. Mr. O'CONNELL (Ireland), speaking on behalf of the European Union, said that his delegation supported the resolution, it being understood that nothing in it should prejudge the decisions to be taken by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention or by the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, or the decisions to be taken concerning the programme budget for the 1998-1999 biennium. 61. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.39 was adopted. 62. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.10 was withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.9 and L.41: Special session for the purpose of an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of Agenda 21, and A/C.2/51/L.11: Application of the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development in international cooperation on the environment 63. Ms. KELLEY (Secretary of the Committee) pointed out that the programme budget implications of draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.41 were contained in document A/C.5/50/43 of 13 December 1995. 64. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.41 and recommended that it should be adopted by consensus. The sponsors of A/C.2/51/L.11 were prepared to withdraw their draft. 65. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.41 was adopted. 66. Mr. DELANEY (Papua New Guinea), speaking as coordinator of the Group of 77 and China, expressed satisfaction with the progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 50/113. Only 11 weeks remained before the preparatory meeting of the special session and some essential questions had yet to be settled, including the participation of the major groups and non-governmental organizations. Although the Second Committee could not consider this type of question in detail, the text of the resolution provided for a broader range of consultations with the President of the General Assembly. The Group of 77 and China did not by any means want the process to lead to the elaboration of an abbreviated version of Agenda 21. The consideration should be the occasion for all to confirm the commitments made and to make practical suggestions. Participants in the special session should consider the progress made and make available the necessary resources to assist developing countries. In the spirit of compromise, the Group of 77 and China had deleted any reference to the principle of common but differentiated responsibility, but were convinced that it was an essential principle. 67. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.9 and L.11 were withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.5 and L.31: Convention on Biological Diversity 68. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-Chairman, introducing draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.31, submitted after informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.5, said that he would like to make an amendment to paragraph 5, replacing the word "secretariat" with the words "Executive Secretary" in order to use the same wording as in paragraph 6 of document UNEP/CBD/COP/3/L.10, adopted at the Conference of the Parties to the Convention. He recommended that the draft resolution should be adopted by consensus. 69. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.31, as orally revised, was adopted. 70. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.5 was withdrawn. Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.4 and L.42: International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction 71. The CHAIRMAN said that the programme budget implications of draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.4, contained in document A/C.2/51/L.36, did not apply to draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.42. 72. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.42, submitted after informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.4. He hoped that it would be adopted by consensus. 73. Mr. PRENDERGAST (Jamaica), Coordinator for the Group of 77 and China, said that he would like to make the following changes to paragraph 14 of the English text. In the fourth and fifth lines, the words "to" and "proposals" should be added, so that the sentence would read: "and to set forth in his substantive report to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, proposals regarding the format ...". 74. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.42, as orally revised, was adopted. 75. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.4 was withdrawn. AGENDA ITEM 98: OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT (continued) (A/C.2/51/L.8 and L.44) Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.8 and L.44: Operational activities for development 76. Ms. KELLEY (Secretary of the Committee) said that under paragraph 27, the General Assembly would decide to convene a special session in 2001 in order to review the achievement of the goals of the World Summit for Children. As the meeting schedule had yet to be established, it was not possible to give an estimate of conference-servicing costs, but the dates, duration and services required for the special session and preparatory meetings would be determined in consultation with UNICEF, at which time assessment of the programme budget implications would be made. 77. Ms. REBONG (Philippines), Coordinator for the Group of 77 and China, said that the order of paragraphs 5 and 6 should be inverted. 78. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introducing draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.44, submitted after informal consultations on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.8, said that the text emerging from the consultations stressed the need for assistance for children in especially difficult circumstances, including those victims of conflicts or those suffering from exploitation. Agreement on the paragraph concerning the convening of a special session in 2001 had been particularly difficult, but he hoped that the draft would be adopted by consensus. 79. Mr. BURHAN (Turkey) and Mr. LOZANO (Mexico) said that their delegations would like to sponsor the draft resolution. 80. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.44, as orally revised, was adopted. 81. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.8 was withdrawn. Draft decision on a note by the Secretary-General (A/51/391) 82. The CHAIRMAN introduced a draft decision on agenda item 98 which read: "The General Assembly takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on the activities of the United Nations Development Fund for Women, 1995." (A/51/391). 83. The draft decision was adopted. AGENDA ITEM 12: REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL (continued) (A/C.2/51/L.29, L.30/Rev.2 and L.37) Draft resolutions A/C.2/51/L.29 and L.30/Rev.2: Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources 84. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.30/Rev.2, and said that, as it had not been possible to reach a consensus during informal consultations, it would be necessary to have a vote. 85. Mr. IBRAHIM (Malaysia) said that Algeria, Cuba, Jordan and Saudi Arabia would like to sponsor the draft resolution. 86. Mr. MANOR (Israel), speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said that the draft resolution was superfluous because the issue of rights over natural resources had been covered in the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement signed on 28 September 1995, and should be settled within the framework of the direct negotiations on permanent status already under way. The principle of direct negotiations also applied to Syria and Lebanon, and he invited them to resume negotiations with his country. The real objective of the draft resolution was to predetermine the outcome of the negotiations, which contradicted the spirit and letter of the Interim Agreement and of the Madrid Conference. His delegation would vote against the draft and invited other delegations that supported the peace process to do the same. 87. Mr. HAMDAN (Lebanon) pointed out that occupation was the most serious obstacle to economic development. He was well aware that the Second Committee was not authorized to deal with political problems, but the problems were of an economic nature. The international community should remain faithful to the spirit of the Charter and stress the disastrous consequences of the occupation. The implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978) would allow for the establishment of a climate of peace in the region and put an end to the violent acts taking place there. Lebanon was asking other countries not to help settle its internal problems, but to add no new ones. He therefore requested the immediate withdrawal of the occupying Israeli forces. 88. At the request of the representative of the United States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.30/Rev.2. In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Against: Israel, United States of America. Abstaining: Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Côte d'Ivoire, El Salvador, Fiji, Georgia, Kenya, Liberia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Ukraine, Uruguay. 89. The draft resolution was adopted by 123 votes to 2, with 17 abstentions. 90. Mr. TANAKA (Japan) said that his Government participated actively in the peace process, having already provided approximately $200 million. Japan had therefore voted in favour of the draft resolution, but that did not prejudge its position on the outcome of the ongoing negotiations or the status of the occupied territories. His delegation believed, however, that the Second Committee was not the appropriate forum for the draft resolution, as it contained very political elements. 91. Mr. MURPHY (Ireland), speaking on behalf of the European Union, stated that it recognized the applicability of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. It also believed that the issues taken up in the draft should be dealt with in negotiations on the permanent status, and that the adoption of the draft should not be seen as prejudging their outcome. The European Union was concerned by the addition of a supplementary item to the already heavy agenda of the Second Committee. 92. Mr. WINNICK (United States of America) expressed his delegation's firm opposition to the draft resolution, which involved the General Assembly in the direct negotiations under way and amounted to a prejudgement of their outcome. The explicit reference to Jerusalem was unacceptable. The United States had voted against the resolution because it risked compromising the efforts of the parties involved in the direct negotiations. 93. Mr. FERNÁNDEZ PALACIO (Argentina) said that his delegation's abstention did not contradict Argentina's long-standing support for the Security Council resolution mentioned in the draft, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territories by force and the applicability of the Geneva Convention. 94. Ms. CARAYANIDES (Australia) said that her delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution as the goal of the text was to guarantee that the natural resources in the occupied territories were not used inappropriately. The goal was not to undermine the outcome of the negotiations. She was concerned by the addition of supplementary items to the already heavy agenda. 95. Ms. McVEY (Canada) said that the proliferation of resolutions was not good for the United Nations and its various committees. The draft resolution just adopted was an example of proliferation. However, as Canada was in favour of several elements of the draft, it had voted in favour. She had noted the reference to the ongoing process of negotiations, and believed that they offered the best way to settle the problems covered in the draft, as well as the question of the status of Jerusalem. She also believed that the adoption of the draft should not be considered as prejudging the outcome of the peace process. 96. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation's vote in favour of the draft resolution should not be regarded as a recognition of Israel. 97. Mr. SEYOUM (Eritrea) said that his delegation had intended to vote in favour as in previous years, but its vote had not registered on the board. He requested that that fact should be reflected in the summary record of the meeting. 97 bis. Mr. MONTOYA (Colombia) said that, if his delegation had been present during the voting, it would have voted in favour of the draft. 98. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.29 was withdrawn. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.37: United Nations Declaration against Corruption and Bribery in International Commercial Transactions 99. Mr. RAMOUL (Algeria), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.37, and said that the Economic and Social Council had recommended that the draft should be adopted by consensus. It has been approved by consensus during informal consultations. 100. Mr. AMMARIN (Jordan) said that his delegation would like to co-sponsor the draft. 101. Ms. CARAYANIDES (Australia) said that Australia fought against corruption and would like to join the consensus. Her Government had not yet taken a final decision on the criminalization of certain practices and the tax deductibility of bribes. 102. Mr. YUAN Shaofu (China) said that corruption was a high-priority problem which he hoped would be the subject of further consultations. The wording of paragraph 3 of the Declaration could lead to different interpretations depending on the judicial system, and his delegation therefore had reservations in that regard. 103. The CHAIRMAN announced that Bolivia and Ecuador had joined the sponsors of the draft. 104. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.37 was adopted. 105. Mr. WINNICK (United States of America), Mr. LOZANO (Mexico), Mr. SEATON (South Africa) and Mr. VIVAS (Venezuela) welcomed the adoption of the resolution on the fight against corruption, which marked a stage in international cooperation in the struggle against bribery and sent a crucial and unequivocal message to ordinary criminals. 105 bis. Mr. LOZANO (Mexico) stated that an attempt should be made to eradicate tax havens and the influence of certain transnational corporations which sometimes served as accomplices. Draft decision on various reports and notes by the Secretary-General 106. The CHAIRMAN introduced a draft decision on agenda item 12 that read: "The General Assembly takes note of chapters I to IV and V to VII and the annexes of the report of the Economic and Social Council (A/51/3, parts I to III), the report by the Secretary-General on preventive action and intensification of the struggle against malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa (A/51/379) and the note by the Secretary-General concerning the United Nations Population Award (A/51/534)." 107. The draft decision was adopted. 108. The CHAIRMAN said that the Committee had thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 12. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.17: Integration of the economies in transition into the world economy 109. Mr. DJABBARY (Islamic Republic of Iran), Vice-Chairman, introduced draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.17, submitted after informal consultations. Its adoption by consensus had been recommended during the consultations. At the end of the last preambular paragraph, the following words should be added: "in accordance with the multilateral trading agreements". In the fifth line of paragraph 2, the words "within existing resources" should be deleted. 110. The CHAIRMAN informed the Committee that the adoption of the draft resolution would have no budgetary implications. 111. Mr. NEBENZIA (Russian Federation) informed the Committee that Argentina and Israel had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution. 112. Draft resolution A/C.2/51/L.17 was adopted. 113. Mr. SABOIA (Brazil) expressed his country's firm support of the efforts made by the countries with economies in transition towards integration into the world economy. 114. Mr. NEBENZIA (Russian Federation) warmly thanked all of the countries that had supported the draft resolution. The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 