%%%CORRUPTION|TREATIES|DOCUMENTS|

Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption Seventh session Vienna, 29 September-1 October 2003 Report of the Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption on its seventh session, held in Vienna from 29 September to 1 October 2003 Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Organization of the session A. Opening of the session B. Attendance C. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work D. Documentation Consideration of the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption Finalization and approval of the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption Draft resolution on the adoption of the Convention for consideration and action by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session Adoption of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on its seventh session Annexes List of participants List of documents before the Ad Hoc Committee at its seventh session 1. In its resolution 55/61 of 4 December 2000, the General Assembly recognized that an effective international legal instrument against corruption, independent of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (resolution 55/25, annex I) was desirable and decided to establish an ad hoc committee for the negotiation of such an instrument. 2. The Intergovernmental Open-Ended Expert Group to Prepare Draft Terms of Reference for the Negotiation of a Future Legal Instrument against Corruption, convened pursuant to General Assembly resolution 55/61, met in Vienna from 30 July to 3 August 2001 and recommended to the Assembly, through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Economic and Social Council, the adoption of a draft resolution on the terms of reference for the negotiation of an international legal instrument against corruption. The draft resolution was subsequently adopted by the Assembly as resolution 56/260 of 31 January 2002. 3. In its resolution 56/260, the General Assembly decided that the Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption should negotiate a broad and effective convention, which, subject to the final determination of its title, should be referred to as the "United Nations Convention against Corruption". 4. In the same resolution, the General Assembly requested the Ad Hoc Committee, in developing the draft convention, to adopt a comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach and to consider, inter alia, the following indicative elements: definitions; scope; protection of sovereignty; preventive measures; criminalization; sanctions and remedies; confiscation and seizure; jurisdiction; liability of legal persons; protection of witnesses and victims; promoting and strengthening international cooperation; preventing and combating the transfer of funds of illicit origin derived from acts of corruption, including the laundering of funds, and returning such funds; technical assistance; collection, exchange and analysis of information; and mechanisms for monitoring implementation. II. Organization of the session 5. The Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption held its seventh session in Vienna from 29 September to 1 October 2003, during which it held six plenary meetings with simultaneous interpretation in the six official languages of the United Nations. 6. At the 136th meeting, on 29 September, the Officer-in-Charge of the Division for Treaty Affairs of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime opened the session by recalling the recent sad event of the passing away of Héctor Charry Samper (Colombia), Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee. The Officer-in-Charge asked the Ad Hoc Committee to observe a moment of silence in memory of Mr. Charry Samper. 7. The Officer-in-Charge recalled that Mr. Charry Samper had applied his vast experience and profound knowledge, together with his passion for justice and the rule of law, with generosity and commitment in his work as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee. He had cared deeply about the future convention. He had left no position or concern unheeded. He had shared the tasks and had stood at the side of all members of the bureau, supporting and guiding whenever necessary. 8. The Officer-in-Charge informed the Ad Hoc Committee that its bureau had met on 25 September to consider the procedural matter that had arisen as a result of the untimely death of its Chairman. In honour of his memory, the bureau had decided to recommend to the Ad Hoc Committee the following: (a) That the composition of the bureau of the Ad Hoc Committee remain unchanged; (b) That the representative of Jordan be asked to serve as Acting Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee at its seventh session. 9. The bureau had shared its recommendations with the chairmen of the regional groups on 25 September. 10. At the beginning of its seventh session, the Ad Hoc Committee approved the recommendations of the bureau. 11. At the 136th meeting, on 29 September 2003, all those who made statements paid tribute to the late Hector Charry Samper (Colombia), Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, for his leadership and wisdom in guiding the negotiations on the draft convention, and expressed their condolences to his family. 12. The Acting Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee underlined the fact that the Ad Hoc Committee was close to fulfilling the mandate given by the General Assembly in its resolution 56/260. He noted that the future convention would be of high quality and would be worded in a way that would make it possible for States to ratify it as quickly as possible; and it would reinforce existing national and international laws against corruption and set practical standards to strengthen the global fight against corruption. He called upon delegations to continue to be flexible and cooperative during the negotiations on the final text of the draft convention. 13. The representative of Chile, speaking on behalf of the Member States of the United Nations that are members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, highlighted the contributions that Mr. Charry Samper had made to the work of the Group, as well as to the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. 14. The representative of Brazil, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, stated that the members of the Group wished to acknowledge the spirit of consensus exhibited by all delegates, even in the face of difficult choices. Emphasizing that the issue of "return of assets" was of the utmost importance to the Group, he expressed the hope that the outstanding issues concerning definition of phrases such as "illicitly acquired assets", "recovery of assets" and "affected State Party" would be settled in accordance with the agreements reached on chapter V of the draft convention during the sixth session of the Ad Hoc Committee. With regard to the definition of the term "corruption", he stated that the future convention should provide for the possibility of application to all acts of corruption included in chapter III, as well as to such acts as States parties might criminalize or had already criminalized. He also stressed the importance of article 4, which was in accordance with the fundamental principles of international law, in order to protect countries against arbitrary acts. Regarding article 42, paragraph 3, he emphasized the need for the future convention itself to regulate the administration and return of proceeds of corruption by the competent authorities, especially in the light of the agreements reached in chapter V during the sixth session. He called for a solution based on consensus regarding article 53, paragraph 9, which was of extreme importance to developing nations seeking the widest measure of international cooperation, in particular the recovery of proceeds of corruption, even in the absence of dual criminality. In that regard, he drew the attention of the Ad Hoc Committee to the efforts made in the informal consultations on the matter as a good basis for finding a compromise. As the Ad Hoc Committee at its sixth session had agreed to delete the concept of sharing assets from article 61, he requested the consistency group to examine any inconsistency between the present article 61 and article 75, paragraph 2 (c). He also urged all States, including federal States, to ensure that the future convention would be applicable to all their constituent states and territories. Finally, he encouraged States to show their political commitment by being represented at high political levels during the High-level Political Conference for the Purpose of Signing the United Nations Convention against Corruption, to be held in Merida, Mexico, from 9 to 11 December 2003. 15. The representative of Italy, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union, as well as the acceding countries (Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia) and the associate countries (Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey), stated that the European Union continued to participate actively in the Ad Hoc Committee. He noted that, in view of the important results achieved in areas of great relevance to the effectiveness and balance of the future convention at the sixth session, he was confident that the Ad Hoc Committee would reach consensus on the remaining issues within the allotted time. He reiterated the commitment of the European Union to contributing to the negotiations to that end. 16. The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of Arab States, expressed confidence that the Ad Hoc Committee would achieve consensus and finalize the draft convention under the leadership of the Acting Chairman. He emphasized that article 3 of the draft convention should be broad enough to cover all offences. He also stressed that article 42, which was of paramount importance, should be clear so that its provision could be applied by all States parties to the future convention. In addition, he underlined the importance of article 53, paragraph 9. He expressed confidence that the Ad Hoc Committee could complete its work and produce a text that all States would wish to comply with, so as to contribute to the global fight against corruption. 17. On behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States, the representative of Tunisia pledged the support of the Group to the proposal of Nigeria regarding article 53, paragraph 9, on mutual legal assistance and dual criminality. 18. The Minister of Justice of the Philippines stated that his Government subscribed fully to the maxim that public office was a public trust and was guided by the principle that all public officials must at all times be accountable to the people; serve them with the utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency; act with patriotism and justice; and lead modest lives. He gave a detailed account of the institutions that his Government had established and the legislation adopted to prevent and combat corruption, to recover the vast resources that might have been illegally amassed by corrupt officials and to promote a high standard of ethics in public service. He noted that his Government had also stepped up its drive against corrupt officials by conducting lifestyle checks on all officials who had allegedly acquired property manifestly out of proportion to their lawful income. He noted that his Government recognized the importance of the new convention in fostering international cooperation and facilitating asset recovery. 19. The Acting Chairman expressed his gratitude to the Minister of Justice of the Philippines and stated that his presence at the seventh session of the Ad Hoc Committee was a confirmation of the unwavering commitment to the successful conclusion of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee and to the new convention that his Government had demonstrated consistently throughout the negotiation process. 20. The representative of Ecuador reported on the efforts taken by his Government to combat corruption by establishing effective anti-corruption bodies and pursuing a pragmatic approach to deal with corrupt practices. 21. The representative of China stated that preliminary agreement had been reached on the draft convention, thus laying down internationally agreed principles in the field of international law. He stressed that his delegation had played a positive role in the negotiation of the various provisions of the draft convention. He stated that his delegation would continue to consult other delegations in a flexible and constructive manner so as to achieve a successful conclusion of the negotiations. 22. The representatives of Algeria and Guatemala paid tribute to the former Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee for his outstanding leadership and expressed their deep sorrow at his passing. 23. The representative of Colombia expressed his gratitude to all delegations for their kind words with respect to the sudden passing of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee. He noted that their messages of solidarity and sympathy would be conveyed to Mr. Charry Samper's family. 24. The seventh session of the Ad Hoc Committee was attended by representatives of 114 States. Also attending the seventh session were observers for specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. A list of participants is contained in annex I to the present report. 25. At its 136th meeting, on 29 September 2003, the Ad Hoc Committee adopted the following agenda for its seventh session: 1. Opening of the seventh session of the Ad Hoc Committee. 2. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work. 3. Consideration of the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption: outstanding matters (article 2, subparagraphs (g bis), (p) and (v); note for the travaux préparatoires on the concept of corruption; article 3; article 4, paragraph 2; note for the travaux préparatoires on protection of personal data; article 42, paragraph 3; article 53, paragraph 9; article 78 (including note for the travaux préparatoires regarding federal States); article 79 bis; articles 80-85; and preamble). 4. Finalization and approval of the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption. 5. Draft resolution on the adoption of the Convention for consideration and action by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. 6. Adoption of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on its seventh session. 26. At its seventh session, the Ad Hoc Committee had before it, in addition to the documents prepared by the Secretariat, documents containing proposals and contributions submitted by the Governments of Brazil, Japan, the Netherlands and Nigeria. A list of documents is contained in annex II to the present report. III. Consideration of the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption 27. At its fifth and sixth sessions, the Ad Hoc Committee had provisionally approved the following: article 1; article 2, subparagraphs (a), (c), (d) and (f)-(k) and the deletion of subparagraphs (b), (e) and (l); article 4, paragraph 1; the deletion of article 4 bis; article 5; article 5 bis; articles 6-9; article 9 bis; the deletion of article 10; article 11; articles 13 and 14; article 19 (subject to the resolution of an issue relating to the definition of "public official" contained in article 2, subparagraph (a)); article 19 bis; articles 21-25; the deletion of article 26; the deletion of article 28; article 32; the insertion of a new article 32 bis; article 33; article 38; article 38 bis; article 38 ter; article 39; article 40 (subject to a decision on whether to retain the phrase "offences covered by this Convention" or replace it with the phrase "offences established in accordance with this Convention"); article 40 bis; article 42 (except para. 3 and subject to a decision on whether to retain the phrase "offences covered by this Convention" or replace it with the phrase "offences established in accordance with this Convention"); article 42 bis; article 43 (subject to a decision on whether to retain the phrase "offences covered by this Convention" or replace it with the phrase "offences established in accordance with this Convention"); article 43 bis (subject to a decision on whether to retain the phrase "offences covered by this Convention" or replace it with the phrase "offences established in accordance with this Convention"); articles 44-46; articles 48 and 49; article 50 (subject to a decision on whether to use the phrase "offences covered by this Convention" or retain the phrase "offences established in articles [...] of this Convention" in para. 2 and except for paras. 3 and 4); article 50 bis; article 51, paragraphs 2-4; article 52; article 53 (except for para. 9); articles 54-56; article 59; articles 64 and 65; article 67; article 67 bis; article 60; the insertion of a new article 60 bis; the deletion of article 68, paragraphs 1 and 4; article 61; the deletion of article 62; article 66; articles 73-76; the deletion of article 76 bis; article 77; and the deletion of article 79. 28. During its seventh session, the Ad Hoc Committee considered the remaining provisions of article 2, subparagraphs (g bis), (p) and (v); the note for the travaux préparatoires on the concept of corruption; article 3; article 4, paragraph 2; the note for the travaux préparatoires on the protection of personal data; article 42, paragraph 3; article 53, paragraph 9; article 78 (including the note for the travaux préparatoires regarding federal States); article 79 bis; articles 80-85; and the preamble. It based its deliberations on the consolidated text contained in document A/AC.261/3/Rev.5 and on proposals and contributions made by Governments. IV. Finalization and approval of the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption 29. During its seventh session, the Ad Hoc Committee considered and finalized the draft convention. It based its deliberations on the consolidated text contained in document A/AC.261/3/Rev.5 and on proposals and contributions submitted by Governments. The Ad Hoc Committee also had before it revisions of and amendments to the draft convention prepared during informal consultations at the request of the Chairman (A/AC.261/L.254). 30. It was noted that the consistency group had held a total of 29 meetings during the fifth, sixth and seventh sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee and had reviewed all the provisionally approved articles of the draft convention. Its recommendations (see document A/AC.261/24 and Corr.1) had been incorporated into the final text of the draft convention and submitted to the Ad Hoc Committee for consideration. 31. At its 141st meeting, on 1 October, the Ad Hoc Committee approved the draft United Nations Convention against Corruption and decided to submit it to the General Assembly for consideration and action at its fifty-eighth session, in accordance with Assembly resolution 56/260. V. Draft resolution on the adoption of the Convention for consideration and action by the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session 32. At its 141st meeting, on 1 October, the Ad Hoc Committee considered a draft resolution submitted by the Chairman, entitled "United Nations Convention against Corruption" (A/AC.261/L.233). The Ad Hoc Committee also had before it proposals and contributions submitted by Governments (A/AC.261/L.252, A/AC.261/L.253 and A/AC.261/L.255). 33. At the same meeting, the Ad Hoc Committee approved the draft resolution, as orally amended, on the understanding that the text of the draft resolution would be finalized and submitted to the General Assembly for consideration and action at its fifty-eighth session. VI. Adoption of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on its seventh session 34. At its 141st meeting, on 1 October, the Ad Hoc Committee adopted the report on its seventh session (A/AC.261/L.256). 35. At the closing meeting, the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime congratulated the Acting Chairman, the members of the bureau of the Ad Hoc Committee and all the delegations for having concluded the negotiations on the draft convention. The new convention would be both balanced and comprehensive and it would establish benchmarks; thus, it would offer good prospects for the fight against corruption. Furthermore, it would command broad support, as all the members of the regional groups had participated actively in the negotiation process. The Executive Director thanked all those who had contributed to the success of the Ad Hoc Committee. He concluded by reading the following message from the Secretary-General: "I am pleased to extend my best wishes and congratulations to the Ad Hoc Committee on the successful conclusion of the negotiation process leading to the United Nations Convention against Corruption. It is particularly heartening that you were able to complete this process in less than two years. I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Ambassador Héctor Charry Samper for his leadership, dedication and expertise in chairing the Committee. He will be greatly missed. This Convention can make a real difference to the quality of life of millions of people around the world. I urge Member States to continue demonstrating their commitment with their signature at the Merida Conference in December." 36. The representative of Mexico informed the Ad Hoc Committee of the preparations for the High-level Political Conference for the Purpose of Signing the United Nations Convention against Corruption, to be held in Merida, Mexico, from 9 to 11 December 2003, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 57/169 of 18 December 2002. He noted that, in accordance with that resolution, consultations on the draft provisional agenda of the Conference would be organized by the Secretariat in Vienna in October. 37. The representative of Tunisia, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States, expressed his satisfaction at the fact that the Ad Hoc Committee had succeeded in concluding the negotiations in a timely manner. He noted that the adoption of the convention would demonstrate the strong will of the international community to fight corruption, which was a barrier to sustainable development and the rule of law. He expressed the hope that many States would sign the new convention at the High-level Political Signing Conference and that the convention would enter into force as soon as possible. He expressed his gratitude to the Acting Chairman, the members of the bureau and the secretariat for all their efforts and paid tribute to the late Mr. Charry Samper for his contributions to the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. 38. The representative of Paraguay, speaking on behalf of the Member States of the United Nations that are members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, expressed satisfaction with the successful conclusion of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee, as few areas in the world had experienced the negative impact of corruption more than Latin America. He thanked all delegations, the members of the bureau and the secretariat for their deep commitment to the work of the Ad Hoc Committee and joined in paying tribute to the late Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee. 39. The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of Arab States, expressed satisfaction with the results of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. He thanked all the delegations, the members of the bureau and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for contributing to the negotiation of the draft convention. He stated that the adoption of the new convention would mark a turning point in the fight against corruption. He noted that, as the new convention would be in the best interest of all the members of the international community, he was confident that the members of the Group of Arab States would sign and ratify it. He also stressed the important role of the United Nations in the fight against corruption. Finally, he expressed his condolences to the family of Mr. Charry Samper, 40. The representative of Italy, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union, expressed his great satisfaction with the results achieved by the Ad Hoc Committee. He was confident that the new convention would become extremely useful in combating corruption. He noted that, for a long time, the European Union had been committed to fighting corruption and had been active in establishing legal instruments at the regional level for curbing corruption. It was the common understanding of the members of the European Union that corruption should also be tackled at the international level. He underlined the fact that the new convention would cover all aspects of efforts to deal with the problem, including prevention, criminalization, international cooperation and asset recovery. In concluding his remarks, he expressed his gratitude to the late Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, its Acting Chairman and members of the bureau for their dedication and skilful guidance, as well as to all delegations for their contributions to the draft convention. He also thanked the secretariat for its support. He noted that the members of the European Union would make every effort to ensure that the new convention would enter into force as soon as possible. 41. The representative of Brazil, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, expressed his appreciation for the efforts by the Acting Chairman to ensure that the draft convention was approved by the Ad Hoc Committee at its seventh session. He underlined that that achievement had been made possible by the spirit of understanding that had prevailed throughout the negotiations. He noted that, although corruption was a global phenomenon, developing countries were most affected by it. He expressed the hope that the entry into force of the new convention would have a concrete effect on efforts to prevent and combat corruption. 42. The representative of Japan, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of Asian States, expressed his gratitude to the Acting Chairman for his leadership during the seventh session of the Ad Hoc Committee. He also thanked all delegations and the secretariat for their contributions to the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. The new convention would provide a solid foundation for efforts to put an end to corruption. He called upon all Governments to ensure that their domestic legislation was brought in line with the provisions of the new convention. Noting that the fight against corruption was a top priority in Asia, he emphasized the firm commitment of the Group of Asian States to the common goal of fighting corruption. 43. The representative of Algeria expressed his satisfaction with the results of the joint efforts. He underlined that the Ad Hoc Committee had endeavoured to produce an effective instrument for fighting corruption. He expressed the hope that all States would ensure that their people could live in a society characterized by integrity, morality and transparency. He was confident that the new convention would be the key to efforts to strengthen the security and stability of States and to promote the rule of law and sustainable development. He noted that Algeria would make every effort to ensure the full implementation of the new convention. He thanked the Acting Chairman, the Rapporteur and the secretariat of the Ad Hoc Committee for their cooperation and support. He also paid tribute to the memory of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Hector Charry Samper. 44. The representative of China congratulated the Acting Chairman on the success of the Ad Hoc Committee and paid tribute to the late Chairman for his contributions to the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. He also expressed his gratitude to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for its support. He emphasized that flexibility, pragmatism and the constructive attitude demonstrated by all delegations in order to reconcile different positions had enabled the Ad Hoc Committee to successfully conclude its work in accordance with General Assembly resolution 56/260. The new convention would be an international legal instrument of great importance, reflecting the determination of the international community to prevent and combat corruption. Stressing that the new convention would be both comprehensive and multi-disciplinary, he expressed confidence that the new convention would prove useful in strengthening national efforts against corruption and in promoting international cooperation, in particular in the area of asset recovery. 45. The representative of the United States of America associated herself with all the statements made in regard to the significance of the work achieved by the Ad Hoc Committee. She expressed her gratitude to all the vice-chairmen of the Ad Hoc Committee for their able leadership, as well as to those who chaired all the informal consultations. She also expressed her appreciation to all the interpreters and translators for their support. 46. In closing the session, the Acting Chairman expressed his appreciation to all delegations for their efforts, which had enabled the Ad Hoc Committee to achieve its goal within the time limit set by the General Assembly. He noted that the new convention would enhance international, regional and national efforts to curb corruption, which posed a threat to national security and stability and undermined respect for the rule of law and the legitimacy of Governments. The members of the Ad Hoc Committee had ample reason to be proud for having completed the negotiations, which had been arduous at times. He urged Governments to continue to demonstrate their commitment to making the convention a reality by participating in the High-level Political Signing Conference to be held in Merida, Mexico, in December 2003, in order to ensure a high number of signatories to the new convention. Annex I States Albania Zef Mazi, Albana Dautllari Algeria Rabah Fassih, Nabil Hattali, Thouraya Benmokrane, Abdelmadjid Mahreche, M'hamed Oualitsene, Lotfi Boufedji, Mustapha Laharch, Aziz El-Afani, Linda Briza Angola Dulce Gomes Argentina Elsa Kelly, Eugenio M. Curia, Betina Pasquali de Fonseca Australia Richard Fairbrother, Elizabeth Day Austria Thomas Stelzer, Johann Froehlich, Helmut Tichy, Michael Postl, Wolfgang Spadinger, Hans Almoslechner Azerbaijan Vaqif Sadiqov, Faxraddin Qambarov, Eldar Mahmudov, Gülmirza Cavadov Barbados Louis Tull Belarus Viktar Gaisenak, Igor Mishkorudny Belgium Jean-Marie Noirfalisse, Jean-Cedric Janssens de Bisthoven Benin Anne Cica Adjaï, Louis Lino Hadonou, Fortune Luc Olivier Guezo Bolivia Mary Carrasco Monje, Guadalupe Cajías, Sergio Olmos, Miriam Siles Crespo Bosnia and Herzegovina Nada Janković Botswana T. Katlholo Brazil Roberto Abdenur, Enio Cordeiro, Marcos Pinta Gama, José Antonio Dias Toffoli, João Elias Cardoso, Renato de Alencar Lima Brunei Darussalam Mohammad Juanda A. Rashid, Nabil Daraina Badaruddin Bulgaria Peter Poptchev Burkina Faso Noëllie Marie Béatrice Damiba, Rita Solange Bogore Burundi Jean-Bosco Butasi Cameroon Egbe Achou Hillmann, Nicolas Nzoyoum, Esther Ngo Moutngui Canada Keith Morrill, Douglas Breithaupt, Alain Tellier, Simon Cridland, Yves Beaulieu Chile Raimundo González Aninat, Luis Plaza Gentina China Zhang Yan, Wang Dong, Tian Lixiao, Jiang Xiuyuan, Guo Xiaofeng, Liu Xiaoyan Colombia Rosso José Serrano Cadena, Ciro Arevalo, Carlos Rodriguez Bocanegra, Nohra Maria Quintero Correa, Diana Patricia Mejia Molina Congo Antoine Pesse Costa Rica Stella Aviram Neuman Côte d'Ivoire Mathieu Gbayoro Theny, Edmé Koffi, Bakassa Bakayoko Croatia Željko Horvatić, Vesna Vuković Cuba José R. Cabanas Rodriguez, Julio-César González Marchante Cyprus Stavros A. Epaminondas, Andreas Nicolaides Czech Republic Jan Vidrna, Oldrich Krulík, Petr Habarta, Jaroslav Stepanek Denmark Lars Lichtenstein Ecuador Byron Morejón-Almeida, Manuel Garcia Jaén, Ali Lozada Prado, Rosa Vásquez de Messmer Egypt Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, Iskandar Ghattas, Abdel Megid Mahmoud, Salah Eldin Zidan Taha, Mahmoud Ezzat, Hassan El Laithy, Mohsen El Yamany Ibrahim, Soliman Abdel Moneim, Khaled El Mekwad, Reham Amin Estonia Tonu Miller Finland Tom Grönberg, Jaakko Halttunen, Tarja Kangaskorte France Patrick Villemur, Michèle Ramis-Plum, Julien Deruffe, Gisèle Clément, Olivia Diego, Arnaud Freyder Gabon Adolphe Monsard Germany Herbert Honsowitz, Joerg Werner Wolfgang Marquardt, Stephan Husemann, Michael Ott, Ursula Elbers, Dorothea Neumann Greece Evangelia Grammatika Guatemala Federico Urruela Prado, Sandra Noriega Urizar, Sylvia Wohlers de Meie Holy See Ladislav Nemet Hungary István Horváth, Jozsef Villanyi, Zsolt Bunford India T. P. Sreenivasan, S.N.P.N. Sinha, Hamid Ali Rao, U. S. Dutt, Hemant Karkare, W. R. Reddy, Partha Satpathy Indonesia T. A. Samodra Sriwidjaja, Romli Atmasasmita, Bambang Prayitno, Yusuf Sjakir, Eddy Pratomo, Budi Bowoleksono, Krishna Pandji, Odo Rene Mathew Manuhutu, Andhika Chrisnayudhanto, Otto Cornelis Kaligis, Purwaning Iran (Islamic Republic of) Pirooz Hosseini, Ali Hajigholam Saryazdi, Mahmoud Khani Jooyabad, Esmael Baghai Hamaneh Ireland Ronan Murphy, Maeve Clery, Victoria Cahill, Fearghas De Stok Israel Esther Efrat-Smilg Italy Claudio Moreno, Gioacchino Polimeni, Alfonso Papa, Silvia Della Monica, Nicola Maiorano, Francesco Troja Japan Yukio Takasu, Seiji Morimoto, Hirokazu Urata, Kenichi Nishikata, Taro Higashiyama, Keiko Ishihara, Satoko Toku Jordan Muhyieddeen Touq, Jamal Al-Shamayleh, Mohamed Fahed Ibrahim Alkemeen, Yousef Masarweh, Sabah Al-Rafie, Raya Kadi Kenya Patrick S. Wamoto, James Kihwaga, Sharon S. Konchellah Kuwait Bader Al-Masad, Zakaria Al-Ansari, Zeiad AlAnbaie Lebanon Samir Chamma, Pierre Antoun Kanaan, Talal AlHajj, Walid Koleilat, Sarkis Tadros, Joumane Khaddage Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Abdulhakim H. Abouhmaida, Otman Salem Mohammad Daouki, Mustfa M. Omar Debara, Abdalkarim Ali Almednini, Jalal El Geidi Liechtenstein Patrick Michael Ritter Lithuania Sarunas Adomavicius, Lina Ruksteliene Luxembourg Paul Faber, Pierre Franck, Luc Reding Malaysia Dato Zulkipli bin Mat Noor, Munawar Kabir Mohd Zainal Abidin, Rushan Lufti Mohamed, Shariffah Norhana Syed Mustaffa Mali Christian Idrissa Diassana Mauritius Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo Mexico Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, Joel Hernández García, Eduardo Héctor Moguel Flores, Luis Javier Campuzano Piña, Raul Carrera Pliego, Sandro Garcia-Rojas Castillo, Julian Juárez Cadenas, Jorge Luis Hidalgo Castellanos Morocco Omar Zniber, Redouane Houssaini, Ahmed Ait Taleb Namibia Daniel R. Smith, Maria Kaakunga, Gerson U. Tjihenuna, Anna-Letu Haitembu, Nada Kruger Nepal Basudev Lamichhane, Mohan Prasad Banjade, Madhab Prasad Paudel Netherlands Jaap Ramaker, Hans Abma, Anke Ter HoeveVan Heek, Jock Geselschap, Lenny van der Spek, Just Wiarda, Sandra Belder New Zealand Barbara Bridge, Warren Waetford Nicaragua Julio César Saborío Argüello Nigeria Mustapha M. Akanbi, Uriah Angulu, T. B. Ingawa, M. O. Laose, Olawale Idris Maiyegun, Ibrahim Pam, Onome Obuotor Norway Guro Hansson Bull, Kamilla H. Kolshus Oman Khamis bin Salim bin Khamis Al-Khalili, Ahmad bin Said Al-Hasani, Mohamed bin Khalfan AlDughaishi Pakistan Ali Sarwar Naqvi, Ahmer Bilal Soofi, Mohammed Kamran Akhtar Panama Jorge Enrique Halphen Perez Paraguay Oscar Cabello Sarubbi, Claudia Aguilera Peru Javier Paulinich, Hugo Portugal Carbajal, Carmen Azurín, Luis Rodríguez Philippines Simeon A. Datumanong, Victor G. Garcia III, Margarito P. Gervacio, Jr., Dario C. Rama, Ruben Carranza, Ricardo Paras III, Mary Anne A. Padua, Leah Tanodra Armamento, Jose F. Ignacio, Marlon A. Wui Poland Mariusz Skowronski, Anna Grupinska, Agnieszka Stawiarz, Renata Kowalska, Irena Potapinska Portugal Carlos Neves Ferreira, Liliana Araujo, Maria do Carmo Da Conceição da Costa Qatar Abdulla Yousef M. Al-Mal, Fahad Ali Al Hinzab, Mohammed Jassim Al-Sulaiti, Ahmad Abdullah Hussain Othman Al Houti, Najat Al-Khalaf Republic of Korea Kim Chong-Hoon, Yoon Yeon-jin Romania Liviu Bota, Nicoleta Iliescu, Sorin Tanasescu, Bebe Ciubotaru, Alina Niculescu Russian Federation Ilya I. Rogachev, Mikhail I. Kalinin, Valentin I. Mikhailov, Arkady V. Tonkoglas, Vladimir N. Fomin, Oleg P. Sidorov, Valery A. Grobovoy, Albert I. Mikulshin, Anna G. Filimonova, Alexander V. Zhironkin, Dmitry R. Okhotnikov, Alexander A. Borisov Saudi Arabia Omar Mohammed Kurdi, Abdulrahim Al-Ghamdi, Abdullah Abdulrahman Al-Yousef, Saleh Abdullah Al-Ghamdi, Hamad S. Al-Natheer, Saad bin Yahya Khwaji, Majed Abdul-Mohssen Al Hamid, Ahmad Mohammed Al-Khwaiter, Saud Al-Mutlaq Senegal Ibrahima Sory Sylla Serbia and Montenegro Branislav Milinković, Jovica Čekić Sierra Leone Neneh Dabo Singapore Mathew Joseph Slovakia Vladimir Kotulic, Tomas Hrbac, Roman Goga, Pavol Slopovsky, Maria Ondruskova Slovenia Nina Radulovic, Dragica Urtelj, Goran Kriz South Africa A. P. Rapea, A. T. Moleah, I. K. Bodasing, M. Foolo, N. S. Memela, S. V. Mangcotywa Spain Antonio Nuñez García Saúco, Francisco de Miguel Álvarez, José María de las Cuevas Carretero, Francisco Javier González Ibáñez, Ignacio Baylina Ruíz Sri Lanka D. L. Mendis, W. A. T. Gunatillake Sudan Yousif Saeed Muhammad Ahmed, Omer Ahmed Mohamed, Abdelrahman Elamin, Kamal Bashir Ahmed Khair Sweden Håkan Öberg, Åsa Gustafsson Switzerland Heinrich Reimann, Bernard Jaggy, Lorenzo Schnyder Von Wartensee, Martin Strub, Andrea Candrian, Monika Matti, Carole Bichet-Anthamatten Syrian Arab Republic Safwan Ghanem, Abboud Al-Sarraj, Hasan Khaddour Thailand Karn Chiranond, Wanchai Roujanavong, Pongpat Riangkruar, Uthai Arthivech, Piyatida Jermhansa, Phasporn Sangasubana, Rongvudhi Virabutr, Pimwadee Sovaratanapong The former Yugoslav Republic Aleksandar Tavciovski, Zoran Todorov of Macedonia Togo Koffi Maxime Assah, Awoki Panassa Tunisia Afif Hendaoui, Naceur Ben Frija Turkey Aydin Sahinbas, R. Bülent Tarhan, Namik Güner Erpul, Tufan Höbek, Sadin Ayyildiz, Rafet Ufuk Önder, Sinan Esen Uganda Richard Buteera, Elizabeth Musoke, G. Singh Ukraine Anatolii Redka, Valeriy Ratsiuk, Svitlana Pylypets, Liubov Butenko, Oleksiy Horaschenkov, Volodymyr Omelyan United Arab Emirates Mohamed Mahmoud Al Kamali, Ali Hasan Al Shirawi, Abdullah Yousef Al Shamsi, Yaaqoub Yousef Al Hosani, Abdulrahim Mohamed Sinkais Al Awadi, Murad Mohamed Murad Ali United Kingdom of Peter Jenkins, Alison Crocket, Ian Richards, Kate Great Britain and McCleery Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania Robert M. Mayaya, Awadh Mohamed, Baraka Haran Luvanda United States of America Elizabeth Verville, Thomas Heinemann, Stephen V. Noble, John Brandolino, Kenneth Harris, Howard Solomon, Scott Thompson Uruguay Elsa Borges, Gustavo Alvarez Uzbekistan Doniyor Ibragimov Venezuela Gustavo Márquez Marín, Miriam García de Pérez, Victor Manzanares, Ernesto Navazio Viet Nam Pham Truong Giang, Ha Trong Cong, Nguyen Ngoc Anh, Vo Van Tuyen, Bui Huu Tru, Nguyen Thi Thanh Ha Yemen Ali Hameed Sharaf, Mulhi Ahmed Alwan, Asharafi Ali Hassan, Nageeb Ahmed Obeid, Atiqa Ali Hamza, Abdulghani Thabit Al-Maktari Zambia Rosewin Mutinta Wandi Zimbabwe T. J. Kangai, Benjamin T. Mhiripiri, Vova Abednigo Chikanda, Barbra Chimhandamba, James Nyakotyo Specialized agencies of the United Nations system International Monetary Fund, United Nations Industrial Development Organization Other intergovernmental organizations African Union, Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization, Asian Development Bank, Caribbean Community Secretariat, Council of Arab Ministers of the Interior, Council of Europe, Council of the European Union, Customs Co-operation Council, European Commission, Francophone Agency, League of Arab States, Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Entities maintaining permanent observer offices Sovereign Military Order of Malta Non-governmental organizations General consultative status: Asia Crime Prevention Foundation, International Council of Women, International Federation of Business and Professional Women, Soroptimist International Special consultative status: International Council on Alcohol and Addictions, Italian Centre of Solidarity, National Council of German Women's Organizations, Pax Romana (International Catholic Movement for Intellectual and Cultural Affairs and International Movement of Catholic Students), Socialist International Women, Transparency International Document symbol Title or description A/AC.261/3/Rev.5 Revised draft United Nations Convention against Corruption A/AC.261/22 Report of the Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption on its sixth session, held in Vienna from 21 July-8 August 2003 A/AC.261/23 Annotated provisional agenda and proposed organization of work A/AC.261/24 and Corr.1 Report of the consistency group A/AC.261/L.252 Netherlands: amendments to the draft resolution contained in document A/AC.261/L.233 A/AC.261/L.253 Japan: amendments to the draft resolution contained in document A/AC.261/L.233 A/AC.261/L.254 Results of the informal consultations on paragraph 9 of article 53 A/AC.261/L.255 Brazil: amendment to the draft resolution contained in document A/AC.261/L.233 A/AC.261/L.256 Draft report A/AC.261/L.257 Revised draft United Nations Convention against Corruption A/AC.261/CRP.11 Results of the informal consultations on paragraph 9 of article 53 