%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|COSTS|DOCUMENTATION|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|

Fifty-eighth session First Committee Agenda item 73 General and complete disarmament Conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established Note by the Secretariat concerning the responsibilities entrusted to the Secretary-General under draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.19 1. Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 5 and 8 of draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.19, the General Assembly would: (a) Decide to hold, before the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, a conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established; (b) Also decide to establish a preparatory committee, open to the participation of all States parties and signatories to treaties and instruments by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established, which would hold two sessions, the first to be held in New York during the second quarter of 2004; (c) Request the preparatory committee to decide on the date and venue of the conference, and to make recommendations on all relevant matters, including the draft agenda, draft rules of procedure, the modalities of participation of States parties to the protocols to the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties and other interested States, as well as of non-governmental organizations, and a draft final document, and to decide on background documents to be made available in advance; (d) Decide that the first session of the preparatory committee should have a duration of two working days and the second session a duration of three working days, and that the conference should have a duration of three working days; (e) Request the Secretary-General to assist and provide the necessary services for the conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established. 2. Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.19, assistance from the Secretariat would be required for servicing the conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established and its preparatory committee. 3. The activities referred to above relate to programme 2, Disarmament and programme 6, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference services, of the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005, as revised by the General Assembly,1 and section 4, Disarmament,2 and section 2, General Assembly affairs and conference services,3 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. The costs of the activities associated with the aforementioned conference and its preparatory committee would be met in accordance with the arrangements made by the parties and signatories to the treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established, and no additional costs would be borne by the regular budget of the United Nations. 4. In order to reflect the provisions of the draft resolution, the narrative of section 4 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 would be modified to amend the outputs already foreseen in respect of subprogramme 2, Weapons of mass destruction. Subject to the decision of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, that narrative would be incorporated into the final version of the programme of work of section 4 of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. Outputs Under paragraph 4.28 (a), "Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies, regular budget", add a new subparagraph (v), reading: "(v) Conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established: "a. Substantive servicing of meetings: Conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established (6); first and second sessions of the preparatory committee for the conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established (10); "b. Parliamentary documentation: Conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established: official documents and working papers (7); final document (1); first and second sessions of the preparatory committee for the conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established: official documents and working papers (26); reports of the preparatory committee on the work of its sessions (2)." And renumber current subparagraph (v) as subparagraph (vi). 5. Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.19, it is the understanding of the Secretary-General that secretariat assistance and substantive support services would be required for its implementation. Accordingly, pursuant to operative paragraph 8 of the draft, the Department for Disarmament Affairs would serve as the substantive secretariat for the conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established, and its preparatory committee. In accordance with operative paragraph 4, the Department would assist in the preparation of the draft agenda, draft rules of procedure and a draft final document. The Department would also facilitate the provision of background documents to be made available in advance of the sessions of the preparatory committee. 6. Further, related requirements for conference servicing and other costs are envisaged. The first session of the preparatory committee is scheduled to be held in the first quarter of 2004 in New York. Without prejudice to the decision to be taken by the States parties and signatories at the first session of the preparatory committee on the dates and venues for holding the second session of the preparatory committee and the conference itself, conference-servicing costs for the conference and both sessions of the preparatory committee have been estimated on the assumption that all meetings would be held in New York. The conference-servicing costs are therefore estimated at $480,900. 7. Additionally, it is expected that non-conference-servicing requirements amounting to $95,000 would be needed in respect of general temporary assistance for the equivalent of six work-months at the P-3 level and six work-months of General Service (Other level) to provide substantive and administrative support in connection with the preparatory work for, and servicing of, the sessions of the conference and its preparatory committee. 8. It should be noted that activities related to international conventions or treaties that, under their respective legal instruments, are to be financed outside the regular budget of the United Nations may be undertaken by the Secretariat only when sufficient funding is received, in advance, from the States parties. Further, in accordance with established procedures, the United Nations would levy a charge at a rate of 13 per cent of expenditures for such activities, to defray the administrative and other support costs incurred in their implementation. Such expenses, estimated at $74,900, would also be borne by the States parties and signatories. In addition, in accordance with established policies and procedures in the United Nations, a provision of $97,700, corresponding to 15 per cent of the estimated costs of the meetings (inclusive of support costs), would be required as a contingency reserve to cover eventual shortfalls and final expenditures. 9. A summary of the estimated costs of the assistance and services to be rendered to the conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established and its preparatory committee is presented below: Conference of States parties and signatories to treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established and its preparatory committee (United States dollars)a (a) Conference-servicing costs Meeting servicing Pre-session documentation In-session documentation Post-session documentation Other conference services Subtotal (a) (b) Non-conference-servicing costs Six work-months of temporary assistance at the P-3 level Six work-months of temporary assistance by GS (OL) staff Subtotal (b) Total ((a) + (b)) (c) Programme support costs (13 per cent) Total ((a) + (b) + (c)) (d) Reserve for contingency (15 per cent) Grand total a All figures are rounded to the nearest $100. 10. The costing provided herein is for indicative purposes only. The States parties and signatories to the treaties by which nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established would have to bear in full the actual costs of holding the conference and the sessions of its preparatory committee. 11. Therefore, should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.19, no additional requirements would arise under the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. Notes 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/57/6/Rev.1). 2 A/58/6 (Sect.4). 3 A/58/6 (Sect.2). 