%%%MILITARY BASES|AIR BASES|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|GREECE|CYPRUS QUESTION|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/52/866 S/1998/299 3 April 1998 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH GENERAL ASSEMBLY SECURITY COUNCIL Fifty-second session Fifty-third year Agenda item 61 QUESTION OF CYPRUS Letter dated 1 April 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 1 April 1998, addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Aytuğ Plümer, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which contains a letter of His Excellency Mr. Rauf R. Denktaş, President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, dated 25 March 1998 (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 61, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Hüseyin E. ÇELEM Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page ANNEX Letter dated 1 April 1998 from Mr. Aytuğ Plümer addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the letter dated 25 March 1998 addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Rauf R. Denktaş, President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, concerning the plans of the Greek Cypriot administration to deploy Greek combat aircraft at the Paphos military airbase in South Cyprus (see appendix). I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its appendix circulated as a document of the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 61, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Aytuğ PLÜMER Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus APPENDIX Letter dated 25 March 1998 from Mr. Rauf R. Denktaş Further to my letter dated 25 January 1998 concerning the Paphos military airbase which has been taken over by the Greek Cypriot administration on 24 January for use by the Greek air force, I would like to bring to your kind attention a new disturbing development regarding the plans of the Greek Cypriot administration to establish an air force which, if pursued, would constitute a serious destabilizing factor both in the island and the region. In a recent interview published in the Greek newspaper, Eksusia on 18 March 1998, the Greek Cypriot Defence Minister, Mr. Yannakis Omiru, stated, inter alia, that he favoured the creation of a Greek Cypriot air force and that it was now being seriously considered. It is also noteworthy in this context that, according to various sources, including the Greek Cypriot press, the permanent deployment of Greek combat aircraft which will bear the official symbol of the so-called "Republic of Cyprus" as a precaution in the face of possible international reaction, is included in the plans. In view of the fact that such provocative steps by the Greek Cypriot side, namely, the decision to deploy S-300 missile systems in South Cyprus and the construction of the Paphos military airbase itself for the use and deployment of Greek combat aircraft, have brought the parties concerned to the threshold of new crises in the past one and a half years, recent revelations prove beyond doubt that the Greek-Greek Cypriot military moves are aimed at disturbing the existing military balance in the island the eastern Mediterranean in their favour, at all costs, and in complete violation of the international treaties governing Cyprus. It will be appreciated that this provocative and highly adventurous stance of the Greek-Greek Cypriot front does not augur well for their intentions and is further poisoning the political atmosphere of the island at a time when goodwill and mutual trust are most needed as we are trying to establish a new basis for dialogue. The Turkish Cypriot side is well aware of the fact that the efforts of the Greek Cypriot side, both at the military and the political front, is aimed at destroying the internal and the external balances created by the 1960 treaties between the two constituent peoples and the two motherlands respectively, and is determined to stand in the way of this Greek-Greek Cypriot aspiration. We hope that you will do your utmost in impressing upon the Greek Cypriot leadership to abandon their current confrontational stance and refrain from taking irresponsible steps in the interest of peace and stability at this crucial juncture in the Cyprus question. (Signed) Rauf R. DENKTAŞ President 