%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|

Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Summary record of the 24th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 28 May 2003, at 3 p.m. Chairman: Mr. Maitland (South Africa) Contents Agenda item 78: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (continued) Completion of the Committee's work The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m. Agenda item 78: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (continued) (A/57/767, A/C.4/57/L.21) 1. The Chairperson recalled that, by its resolution 56/225 B, the General Assembly had decided that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations should continue its efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, and should review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in that field. Those proposals were contained in paragraphs 39 to 206 of the Special Committee's report (A/57/767). 2. Mr. Abu Zeid (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, introduced the report of the Special Committee, which provided a narrative account of its general debate and presented its proposals, recommendations and conclusions. The report emphasized the guiding principles that remained essential for peacekeeping operations: strict observation of the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter and full respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence, as well as non-intervention in matters which were essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. 3. He drew attention to the recommendations contained in the report beginning with paragraph 39, and said that the Special Committee had particularly welcomed the view expressed in the report of the Secretary-General on implementation of the Special Committee's recommendations (A/57/711) that six issues deserved the particular attention of the Secretariat and Member States in 2003: integrating lessons learned and best practices into strengthened operational planning and coordination, developing and implementing comprehensive strategies for recurrent challenges faced by complex peacekeeping operations, enhancing rapid and effective deployment capability for United Nations peacekeeping operations, strengthening the effectiveness of training, minimizing disciplinary problems and strengthening regional peacekeeping capacities (particularly in Africa). Lastly, the Special Committee supported the Secretary-General's plans for the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit to play a more active role in the work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Draft resolution A/C.4/57/L.21 4. Mr. Zhang (Deputy Secretary of the Committee), speaking on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution, recalled that through paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would endorse the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee, contained in paragraphs 39 to 206 of its report (A/57/767). In that connection, he wished to point out that some of the actions referred to in the report had potential programme budget implications in the context of peacekeeping: enhancing the capacity of the United Nations for peacekeeping (paragraph 68), training (paragraphs 108 and 109), gender and peacekeeping (paragraph 117), safety and security of United Nations and associated personnel (paragraph 158), financial issues (paragraphs 177 and 179), conduct and disciplinary issues (paragraph 181) and language skills (paragraph 190). The financial requirements of the actions listed would be met from the resources allocated to individual peacekeeping missions and the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 or in the context of budgets for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005. 5. The Chairperson said that the sponsors of the draft resolution had requested that it should be adopted without a vote. 6. Draft resolution A/C.4/57/L.21 was adopted. 7. The Chairperson declared that the Special Political and Decolonization Committee had completed its work for the fifty-seventh session. The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m. 