%%%NIGER|

Fifty-eighth session Fifth Committee Agenda item 124 Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations Letter dated 1 October 2003 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee I have the honour to transmit to you herewith, for appropriate action by the Fifth Committee, a letter dated 26 September 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to the United Nations, Ousmane Moutari, concerning a request for exemption for his country under Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations (see annex). (Signed) Julian R. Hunte I am fully aware that requests for exemption under Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations have to be considered by the Committee on Contributions, and that any such request has to be submitted by the Committee at least two weeks before its session, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 54/237 C of 23 December 1999. Had it been possible to anticipate the situation, Niger would have appeared before the Committee on Contributions and provided the fullest possible supporting information, including information on economic aggregates, government revenues and expenditure, foreign exchange resources, indebtedness, difficulties in meeting domestic or international financial obligations and any other information that might support the claim that failure by Niger to make necessary payments had been attributable to conditions beyond its control. Unfortunately, due to unforeseen circumstances, Niger has not been able to fully pay its contributions and, as a result, has lost the right to vote in the General Assembly since 1999. The causes of non-payment are, inter alia, the coup d'état of April 1999 and the military transition of one year to set up a democratic regime. After the free and democratic elections of December 1999, the new democratic regime was obliged to pay more than 12 months of salary in arrears for civil servants, pensions and scholarships. This problem has now been partly solved and Niger has signed a financial agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Niger, although, one of the least developed countries, has, since becoming a member of the United Nations in 1960, always faithfully paid its contributions. Despite the economic and social difficulties faced by Niger, my Government is actively working to obtain the necessary amount to restore its right to participate in the work of the United Nations. My Government hopes that an improvement in its situation would permit payments in the near future and is planning to submit a schedule for the payment of its contributions and arrears at a later date. On instructions from my Government, I kindly request that, on exceptional basis and in light of the well-known, genuine difficulties faced by Niger, that consideration be given to granting Niger exemption under Article 19, until June 2004. I would be grateful if the present letter could be issued as a document of the General Assembly and be considered under item 124, Scale of assessment for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations, during the main part of the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly. (Signed) Ousmane Moutari Ambassador Permanent Representative 