%%%ELECTRONIC COMMERCE|TREATIES|

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Thirty-seventh session New York, 14 June-2 July 2004 Report of the Working Group on Electronic Commerce on the work of its forty-second session (Vienna, 17-21 November 2003) Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction II. Organization of the session III. Summary of deliberations and decisions IV. Electronic contracting: provisions for a draft convention 18-50 General comments Article 8 [10]. Legal recognition of data messages Article 9 [14]. Form requirements Article 10 [11]. Time and place of dispatch and receipt of data messages Article 11 [15]. General information to be provided by the parties Article 12 [9]. Invitations to make efforts Article 13 [8]. Use of data messages in contract formation Article 14 [12]. Use of automated information systems for contract formation Article 15 [16]. Availability of contract terms 1. At its thirty-third session, in 2000, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) held a preliminary exchange of views on proposals for future work in the field of electronic commerce. Three topics were suggested as indicating possible areas where work by the Commission would be desirable and feasible: electronic contracting, considered from the perspective of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (the "United Nations Sales Convention"); online dispute settlement; and dematerialization of documents of title, in particular in the transport industry. 2. The Commission welcomed the proposal to study further the desirability and feasibility of undertaking future work on those topics. The Commission generally agreed that, upon completing the preparation of the Model Law on Electronic Signatures, the Working Group would be expected to examine, at its thirty-eighth session, some or all of the above-mentioned topics, as well as any additional topic, with a view to making more specific proposals for future work by the Commission at its thirty-fourth session, in 2001. It was agreed that work to be carried out by the Working Group could involve consideration of several topics in parallel as well as preliminary discussion of the contents of possible uniform rules on certain aspects of the above-mentioned topics. The Working Group considered those proposals at its thirty-eighth session on the basis of a set of notes dealing with a possible convention to remove obstacles to electronic commerce in existing international conventions (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.89); dematerialization of documents of title (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.90); and electronic contracting (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.91). 3. The Working Group held an extensive discussion on issues related to electronic contracting (see A/CN.9/484, paras. 94-127). The Working Group concluded its deliberations on future work by recommending to the Commission that work towards the preparation of an international instrument dealing with certain issues in electronic contracting be started on a priority basis. At the same time, it was agreed to recommend to the Commission that the Secretariat be entrusted with the preparation of the necessary studies concerning three other topics considered by the Working Group: (a) a comprehensive survey of possible legal barriers to the development of electronic commerce in international instruments; (b) a further study of the issues related to transfer of rights, in particular rights in tangible goods, by electronic means and mechanisms for publicizing and keeping a record of acts of transfer or the creation of security interests in such goods; and (c) a study discussing the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, as well as the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, to assess their appropriateness for meeting the specific needs of online arbitration (see A/CN.9/484, para. 134). 4. At the thirty-fourth session of the Commission, in 2001, there was wide support for the recommendations made by the Working Group, which were found to constitute a sound basis for future work by the Commission. Views varied, however, as regards the relative priority to be assigned to the different topics. One line of thought was that a project aimed at removing obstacles to electronic commerce in existing instruments should have priority over the other topics, in particular over the preparation of a new international instrument dealing with electronic contracting. It was said that references to "writing", "signature", "document" and other similar provisions in existing uniform law conventions and trade agreements had already created legal obstacles and generated uncertainty in international transactions conducted by electronic means. Efforts to remove those obstacles should not be delayed or neglected by attaching higher priority to issues of electronic contracting. 5. The prevailing view, however, was in favour of the order of priority that had been recommended by the Working Group. It was pointed out, in that connection, that the preparation of an international instrument dealing with issues of electronic contracting and the consideration of appropriate ways for removing obstacles to electronic commerce in existing uniform law conventions and trade agreements were not mutually exclusive. The Commission was reminded of the common understanding reached at its thirty-third session that work to be carried out by the Working Group could involve consideration of several topics in parallel as well as preliminary discussion of the contents of possible uniform rules on certain aspects of the above-mentioned topics. 6. There were also differing views regarding the scope of future work on electronic contracting, as well as the appropriate moment to begin such work. Pursuant to one view, the work should be limited to contracts for the sale of tangible goods. The opposite view, which prevailed in the course of the Commission's deliberations, was that the Working Group on Electronic Commerce should be given a broad mandate to deal with issues of electronic contracting, without narrowing the scope of the work from the outset. It was understood, however, that consumer transactions and contracts granting limited use of intellectual property rights would not be dealt with by the Working Group. The Commission took note of the preliminary working assumption made by the Working Group that the form of the instrument to be prepared could be that of a stand-alone convention dealing broadly with the issues of contract formation in electronic commerce (see A/CN.9/484, para. 124), without creating any negative interference with the well-established regime of the United Nations Sales Convention (see A/CN.9/484, para. 95), and without interfering unduly with the law of contract formation in general. Broad support was given to the idea expressed in the context of the thirty-eighth session of the Working Group that, to the extent possible, the treatment of Internet-based sales transactions should not differ from the treatment given to sales transactions conducted by more traditional means (see A/CN.9/484, para. 102). 7. As regards the timing of the work to be undertaken by the Working Group, there was support for commencing consideration of future work without delay during the third quarter of 2001. However, strong views were expressed that it would be preferable for the Working Group to wait until the first quarter of 2002, so as to afford States sufficient time to hold internal consultations. The Commission accepted that suggestion and decided that the first meeting of the Working Group on issues of electronic contracting should take place in the first quarter of 2002. 8. At its thirty-ninth session, the Working Group considered a note by the Secretariat discussing selected issues on electronic contracting, which contained an initial draft, tentatively entitled "Preliminary draft convention on [international] contracts concluded or evidenced by data messages" (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.95, annex I). The Working Group further considered a note by the Secretariat transmitting comments that had been formulated by an ad hoc expert group established by the International Chamber of Commerce to examine the issues raised in document A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.95 and the draft provisions set out in its annex I (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.96). 9. The Working Group began its deliberations by considering the form and scope of the preliminary draft convention (see A/CN.9/509, paras. 18-40). The Working Group agreed to postpone discussion on exclusions from the draft convention until it had had an opportunity to consider the provisions related to location of the parties and contract formation. In particular, the Working Group decided to proceed with its deliberations by first taking up articles 7 and 14, both of which dealt with issues related to the location of the parties (see A/CN.9/509, paras. 41-65). After it had completed its initial review of those provisions, the Working Group proceeded to consider the provisions dealing with contract formation in articles 8-13 (see A/CN.9/509, paras. 66-121). The Working Group concluded its deliberations on the draft convention with a discussion of draft article 15 (see A/CN.9/509, paras. 122-125). The Working Group agreed that it should consider articles 2-4, dealing with the sphere of application of the draft convention, and articles 5 (Definitions) and 6 (Interpretation), at its fortieth session. The Working Group requested the Secretariat to prepare a revised version of the preliminary draft convention, based on those deliberations and decisions, for consideration by the Working Group at its fortieth session. 10. At its fortieth session, the Working Group was also informed of the progress that had been made by the Secretariat in connection with the survey of possible legal obstacles to electronic commerce in existing trade-related instruments. The Working Group was informed that the Secretariat had begun the work by identifying and reviewing trade-relevant instruments from among the large number of multilateral treaties that were deposited with the Secretary-General. The Secretariat had identified 33 treaties as being potentially relevant for the survey and analysed possible issues that might arise from the use of electronic means of communication under those treaties. The preliminary conclusions reached by the Secretariat in relation to those treaties were set out in a note by the Secretariat (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.94) that was submitted to the Working Group at its thirty-ninth session, in March 2002. 11. The Working Group took note of the progress that had been made by the Secretariat in connection with the survey, but did not have sufficient time to consider the preliminary conclusions of the survey. The Working Group requested the Secretariat to seek the views of member and observer States on the survey and the preliminary conclusions indicated therein and to prepare a report compiling such comments for consideration by the Working Group at a later stage. The Working Group took note of a statement stressing the importance that the survey being conducted by the Secretariat should reflect trade-related instruments emanating from the various geographical regions represented on the Commission. For that purpose, the Working Group requested the Secretariat to seek the views of other international organizations, including organizations of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations, as to whether there were international trade instruments in respect of which those organizations or their member States acted as depositaries that those organizations would wish to be included in the survey being conducted by the Secretariat. 12. At its thirty-fifth session, in 2002, the Commission considered the report of the Working Group on the work of its thirty-ninth session. The Commission noted with appreciation that the Working Group had started its consideration of a possible international instrument dealing with selected issues related to electronic contracting. The Commission reaffirmed its belief that an international instrument dealing with certain issues related to electronic contracting might be a useful contribution to facilitate the use of modern means of communication in cross-border commercial transactions. The Commission commended the Working Group for the progress made in that regard. However, the Commission also took note of the varying views that had been expressed within the Working Group concerning the form and scope of the instrument, its underlying principles and some of its main features. The Commission noted, in particular, the proposal that the Working Group's considerations should not be limited to electronic contracts, but should apply to commercial contracts in general, irrespective of the means used in their negotiation. The Commission was of the view that member and observer States participating in the Working Group's deliberations should have ample time for consultations on those important issues. For that purpose, the Commission considered that it might be preferable for the Working Group to postpone its discussions on a possible international instrument dealing with selected issues related to electronic contracting until its forty-first session (New York, 5-9 May 2003). 13. As regards the Working Group's consideration of possible legal obstacles to electronic commerce that might result from trade-related international instruments, the Commission reiterated its support for the efforts of the Working Group and the Secretariat in that respect. The Commission requested the Working Group to devote most of its time at its fortieth session, in October 2002, to a substantive discussion of various issues that had been raised in the Secretariat's initial survey (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.94). 14. At its fortieth session (Vienna, 14-18 October 2002), the Working Group reviewed the survey of possible legal barriers to electronic commerce contained in document A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.94. The Working Group generally agreed with the analysis and endorsed the recommendations that had been made by the Secretariat (see A/CN.9/527, paras. 24-71). The Working Group agreed to recommend that the Secretariat take up the suggestions for expanding the scope of the survey so as to review possible obstacles to electronic commerce in additional instruments that had been proposed for inclusion in the survey by other organizations and explore with those organizations the modalities for carrying out the necessary studies, taking into account the possible constraints put on the Secretariat by its current workload. The Working Group invited member States to assist the Secretariat in that task by identifying appropriate experts or sources of information in respect of the various specific fields of expertise covered by the relevant international instruments. 15. The Working Group used the remaining time at its fortieth session to resume its deliberations on the preliminary draft convention, which it began by a general discussion on the scope of the preliminary draft convention (see A/CN.9/527, paras. 72-81). The Working Group proceeded to consider articles 2-4, dealing with the sphere of application of the draft convention and articles 5 (Definitions) and 6 (Interpretation) (see A/CN.9/527, paras. 82-126). The Working Group requested the Secretariat to prepare a revised text of the preliminary draft convention for consideration at its forty-first session. 16. At its forty-first session (New York, 5-9 May 2003), the Working Group resumed its deliberations on the preliminary draft convention by holding a general discussion on the purpose and nature of the preliminary draft convention (see A/CN.9/528, paras. 28-31). The Working Group noted that a task force that had been established by the International Chamber of Commerce had submitted comments on the scope and purpose of the draft convention (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.101, annex). The Working Group generally welcomed the work being undertaken by private sector representatives, such as the International Chamber of Commerce, which was considered to complement usefully the work being undertaken in the Working Group to develop an international convention. 17. The Working Group reviewed articles 1-11 of the revised preliminary draft convention contained in the note by the Secretariat (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.100, annex I). The decisions and deliberations of the Working Group with respect to the draft convention are reflected in chapter IV of the report on its forty-first session (see A/CN.9/528, paras. 26-151). The Secretariat was requested to prepare a revised version of the preliminary draft convention, based on those deliberations and decisions, for consideration by the Working Group at its forty-second session (Vienna, 17-21 November 2003). 18. In accordance with a decision taken at its fortieth session (see A/CN.9/527, para. 93), the Working Group also held a preliminary discussion on the question of excluding intellectual property rights from the draft convention (see A/CN.9/528, paras. 55-60). The Working Group agreed that the Secretariat should be requested to seek the specific advice of relevant international organizations, such as the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and the World Trade Organization, as to whether, in the view of those organizations, including contracts that involved the licensing of intellectual property rights in the scope of the draft convention so as to expressly recognize the use of data messages in the context of those contracts might negatively interfere with rules on the protection of intellectual property rights. It was agreed that whether or not such an exclusion was necessary would ultimately depend on the substantive scope of the convention. 19. The Working Group also exchanged views on the relationship between the draft convention and the Working Group's efforts to remove possible legal obstacles to electronic commerce in existing international instruments relating to international trade within the context of its preliminary review of draft article X, which the Working Group agreed to retain in substance for further consideration. 20. At its thirty-sixth session, in 2003, the Commission took note of the reports of the Working Group on the work of its fortieth (Vienna, 14-18 October 2002) and its forty-first (New York, 5-9 May 2003) sessions (A/CN.9/527 and A/CN.9/528, respectively). 21. The Commission noted the progress made by the Secretariat in connection with a survey of possible legal barriers to the development of electronic commerce in international trade-related instruments. The Commission reiterated its belief in the importance of that project and its support for the efforts of the Working Group and the Secretariat in that respect. The Commission noted that the Working Group had recommended that the Secretariat expand the scope of the survey to review possible obstacles to electronic commerce in additional instruments that had been proposed to be included in the survey by other organizations and to explore with those organizations the modalities for carrying out the necessary studies, taking into account the possible constraints put on the Secretariat by its current workload. The Commission called on member States to assist the Secretariat in that task by inviting appropriate experts or sources of information in respect of the various specific fields of expertise covered by the relevant international instruments. 22. The Commission further noted with appreciation that the Working Group had continued its consideration of a preliminary draft convention dealing with selected issues related to electronic contracting and reaffirmed its belief that an international instrument dealing with certain issues related to electronic contracting would be a useful contribution that would facilitate the use of modern means of communication in cross-border commercial transactions. The Commission observed that the form of an international convention had been used by the Working Group thus far as a working assumption, but that did not preclude the choice of another form for the instrument at a later stage of the Working Group's deliberations. 23. The Commission was informed that the Working Group had exchanged views on the relationship between the preliminary draft convention and the Working Group's efforts to remove possible legal obstacles to electronic commerce in existing international instruments relating to international trade within the context of its preliminary review of draft article X, which the Working Group had agreed to retain for further consideration (see A/CN.9/528, para. 25). The Commission expressed support for the Working Group's efforts to tackle both lines of work simultaneously. 24. The Commission was informed that the Working Group had, at its forty-first session, held a preliminary discussion on the question of whether intellectual property rights should be excluded from the draft convention (see A/CN.9/528, paras. 55-60). The Commission noted the Working Group's understanding that its work should not be aimed at providing a substantive law framework for transactions involving "virtual goods", nor was it concerned with the question of whether and to what extent "virtual goods" were or should be covered by the United Nations Sales Convention. The question before the Working Group was whether and to what extent the solutions for electronic contracting being considered in the context of the preliminary draft convention could also apply to transactions involving licensing of intellectual property rights and similar arrangements. The Secretariat was requested to seek the views of other international organizations on the question, in particular WIPO. II. Organization of the session 25. The Working Group on Electronic Commerce, composed of all States members of the Commission, held its forty-second session in Vienna from 17 to 21 November 2003. The session was attended by representatives of the following States members of the Working Group: Austria, Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, China, Colombia, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lithuania, Mexico, Morocco, Russian Federation, Singapore, Spain, Thailand, Uganda, United States of America and Uruguay. 26. The session was attended by observers from the following States: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Belgium, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Indonesia, Ireland, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Serbia and Montenegro, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Venezuela and Yemen. 27. The session was also attended by observers from the following international organizations: (a) organizations of the United Nations system: Economic Commission for Africa, World Bank and United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; (b) intergovernmental organizations: Asian Clearing Union, European Union and Hague Conference on Private International Law; (c) non-governmental organizations invited by the Commission: American Bar Association, Center for International Legal Studies, International Bar Association and International Chamber of Commerce. 28. The Working Group elected the following officers: Chairman: Jeffrey CHAN Wah Teck (Singapore) Rapporteur: Ligia Claudia González Lozano (Mexico). 29. The Working Group had before it a newly revised version of the preliminary draft convention, which reflected the deliberations of the Working Group at its forty-first session (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.103, annex). The Working Group also had before it papers summarizing the research conducted by the Secretariat on some of the main issues that had been discussed by the Working Group in connection with its deliberations on the draft convention (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.104 and Add.1-4) and comments received on the draft convention from a task force of the International Chamber of Commerce (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.105) and WIPO (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.106). 30. The Working Group adopted the following agenda: 1. Opening of the session. 2. Election of officers. 3. Adoption of the agenda. 4. Electronic contracting: provisions for a draft convention. 5. Other business. 6. Adoption of the report. III. Summary of deliberations and decisions 31. The Working Group resumed its deliberations on the preliminary draft convention by holding a general discussion on the scope of the preliminary draft convention (see paras. 33-38 below). 32. The Working Group reviewed articles 8 to 15 of the revised preliminary draft convention contained in the annex to the note by the Secretariat (A/CN.9/WG.IV/WP.103). The decisions and deliberations of the Working Group with respect to the draft convention are reflected in chapter IV below. The Working Group began its deliberations by holding a general exchange of views on the purpose and scope of the preliminary draft convention. The Working Group noted that the text of the preliminary draft convention had been extensively revised and restructured to reflect the Working Group's deliberations at its forty-first session (New York, 5-9 May 2003). The Working Group was reminded that when it had first considered the possibility of further work on electronic commerce after the adoption of the Model Law on Electronic Signatures, it had contemplated, among other issues, a topic broadly referred to as "electronic contracting" and measures that might be needed to remove possible legal obstacles to electronic commerce under existing international conventions. After its review of the initial draft of the preliminary draft convention at its thirtyninth session (see A/CN.9/509, paras. 18-125) and of the Secretariat's survey of possible legal obstacles to electronic commerce under existing international conventions at its fortieth session (see A/CN.9/527, paras. 24-71), the Working Group had agreed that it should attempt to identify the common elements between removing legal barriers to electronic commerce in existing instruments and a possible international convention on electronic contracting (see A/CN.9/527, para. 30). The Working Group reiterated its understanding that both projects should as much as possible be carried out simultaneously, a working assumption that was reflected in the current text of the preliminary draft convention. The Working Group was reminded of the concerns that had been expressed at its thirty-ninth session concerning the risk of establishing a duality of regimes for contract formation: a uniform regime for electronic contracts under the new instrument and a different, not harmonized regime, for contract formation by any other means, except for the very few types of contract that were already currently covered by uniform law, such as sales contracts falling under the United Nations Sales Convention. The Working Group noted that a task force had been established by the International Chamber of Commerce to develop contractual rules and guidance on legal issues related to electronic commerce, tentatively called "E-terms 2004". The Working Group was informed that the expected outcome of that work would be a pragmatic document, reflecting practical problems and solutions, which would also take into account the different needs of large and small companies. E-terms 2004 would be a voluntary instrument not conflicting with party autonomy. The scope of E-terms 2004 was said to be based on a careful assessment of the practices and needs of companies of various sectors and sizes. Underlying that work was the belief that an international instrument might not be the best way to resolve several problems related to electronic commerce, but rather that legal certainty in electronic contracting could be provided by giving users a combination of voluntary rules, model clauses and guidelines. The advantage of that approach would be its flexibility in that business could take up components of the standards or model clauses that could be amended easily if necessary. The Working Group welcomed the work being undertaken by the International Chamber of Commerce, which was considered to complement usefully the work being undertaken in the Working Group to develop an international convention. The Working Group was of the view that the two lines of work were not mutually exclusive, in particular since the draft convention dealt with requirements that were typically found in legislation and legal obstacles, being statutory in nature, could not be overcome by contractual provisions or non-binding standards. The Working Group expressed its appreciation to the International Chamber of Commerce for the interest in carrying out its work in cooperation with UNCITRAL and confirmed its readiness to provide comments on drafts that the International Chamber of Commerce would be preparing. As regards the organization of the work at the current session, the Working Group agreed that it should focus initially on matters that were common to its efforts of both removing legal obstacles in existing instruments and formulating a broader legal framework for electronic contracting, which were contained in chapter III of the preliminary draft convention. The text of the draft article was as follows: "1. Any communication, declaration, demand, notice or request that the parties are required to make or choose to make [in connection with an existing or contemplated contract] [in the context of the formation or performance of a contract] [, including an offer and the acceptance of an offer,] may be conveyed by means of data messages and shall not be denied validity or enforceability on the sole ground that data messages were used for that purpose. "[2. Nothing in this Convention requires a person to use or accept information in the form of data messages, but a person's consent to do so may be inferred from the person's conduct.] "[3. The provisions of this article do not apply to the following: [...] [The provisions of this article do not apply to those matters identified by a Contracting State under a declaration made in accordance with article X.]" As a general comment, it was said that draft article 8 was both ambitious and modest in scope. Ambitious because providing that contract-related communications might be conveyed by means of data messages seemed to create a positive enabling rule that went beyond the principle of functional equivalence. Did that mean, for example, that data messages would always be valid in a contractual context, even though one of the parties might not expect or even wish to entertain data messages? At the same time, however, the draft article was said to be modest in scope, since the last phrase of paragraph 1 was limited to restating the principle of non-discrimination of data messages that had been laid down in article 5 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce. The question was asked whether it would not be more useful to go a step further and provide general positive criteria for the validity of data messages. The Working Group agreed that the draft article should not create the impression that it created a substantive rule on the validity of data messages. For that purpose, there was general support for redrafting paragraph 1 in a manner that emphasized more clearly its function as a non-discrimination rule. One possibility to achieve that result might be to replace the phrase "any communication, declaration, demand, notice or request [...] may be conveyed by means of data messages" with a phrase such as "where a communication, declaration, demand, notice or request is conveyed by means of data messages". The prevailing view within the Working Group, however, was that, as a whole, the paragraph should be retained as a non-discrimination rule and that it should not venture into providing conditions for the legal validity of data messages. Electronic commerce involved the use of various types of communications and technologies and it would not be advisable to attempt to formulate rules or criteria for their validity. Where the law imposed form requirements, draft article 9 already provided criteria for functional equivalence. In connection with the set of alternative words in square brackets, the general preference was for retaining the reference to "existing or contemplated contract", although there was also support for the alternative reference to "the formation and performance of a contract", which was felt by some to be more technical. As regards the second set of words in square brackets, the Working Group generally accepted to retain in the text the reference to "offer and acceptance". The Working Group noted, however, that the inclusion of that phrase in draft article 8 might render paragraph 1 of draft article 13 redundant and decided that it might revisit its decision once it had reviewed draft article 13 (see paras. 117-121 below). The Working Group noted that the purpose of draft paragraph 2 was to state the principle that parties should not be forced to accept contractual offers or acts of acceptance by electronic means if they do not want to do so (see A/CN.9/527, para. 108). However, as the provision was not intended to require that the parties should always agree beforehand on the use of data messages, the second phrase of the draft paragraph provided that a party's consent might be inferred from its conduct. There was strong support in the Working Group for including a provision such as draft paragraph 2. In that connection, the question was asked whether under the draft article a person that offered goods or services through a letter or a published advertisement would be bound to accept a reply by a data message. In response, it was said that the draft did not affect the way in which the applicable law treated the exchange of communications between the parties. Where the law did not provide a form requirement, it was conceivable that an oral reply to a written offer might constitute a valid reply, in much the same way as a data message would under the draft article. Where a form requirement existed, the draft article was expressing a legislative policy choice to ensure the equivalence between data messages and paper-based writings. It was suggested, however, that the second part of the draft paragraph should be deleted, since the word "consent" might be misunderstood to mean consent to the underlying transaction. The Working Group preferred however to retain the entire draft paragraph subject to rephrasing the second sentence so as to reflect the idea that the "consent" referred to therein related only to the use of data messages. There were varying views within the Working Group regarding draft paragraph 3. While there were expressions of support for excluding specific matters from draft article 8, greater support was expressed for limiting any possibility of exclusions to declarations submitted by Contracting States under draft article X. The prevailing view within the Working Group, however, was that it was preferable to limit the possibility of exclusions to exclusions from the entire instrument and not from specific provisions. It was agreed that the draft paragraph should be deleted, since both possibilities contemplated therein were found to be undesirable in view of the importance of the principle of non-discrimination and in the interest of ensuring the widest possible uniformity of law. Subject to the above remarks and amendments, the Working Group generally approved the substance of draft article 8 and requested the Secretariat to prepare a revised version for consideration at its forty-third session. "[1. Nothing in this Convention requires a contract or any other communication, declaration, demand, notice or request that the parties are required to make or choose to make [in connection with an existing or contemplated contract] [in the context of the formation or performance of a contract] to be made or evidenced in [a particular form, including written form] [by data messages, writing or any other form] or subjects a contract to any other requirement as to form.] "2. Where the law requires that a contract or any other communication, declaration, demand, notice or request that the parties are required to make or choose to make in connection with a contract should be in writing, that requirement is met by a data message if the information contained therein is accessible so as to be usable for subsequent reference. "3. Where the law requires that a contract or any other communication, declaration, demand, notice or request that the parties are required to make or choose to make in connection with a contract should be signed, or provides consequences for the absence of a signature, that requirement is met in relation to a data message if: "Variant A "(a) A method is used to identify that person and to indicate that person's approval of the information contained in the data message; and "(b) That method is as reliable as appropriate to the purpose for which the data message was generated or communicated, in the light of all the circumstances, including any relevant agreement. "Variant B "... an electronic signature is used which is as reliable as appropriate to the purpose for which the data message was generated or communicated, in the light of all the circumstances, including any relevant agreement. "4. An electronic signature is considered to be reliable for the purposes of satisfying the requirements referred to in paragraph 3 of this article if: "(a) The signature creation data are, within the context in which they are used, linked to the signatory and to no other person; "(b) The signature creation data were, at the time of signing, under the control of the signatory and of no other person; "(c) Any alteration to the electronic signature, made after the time of signing, is detectable; and "(d) Where the purpose of the legal requirement for a signature is to provide assurances as to the integrity of the information to which it relates, any alteration made to that information after the time of signing is detectable. "5. Paragraph 4 of this article does not limit the ability of any person: "(a) To establish in any other way, for the purposes of satisfying the requirement referred to in paragraph 3 of this article, the reliability of an electronic signature; "(b) To adduce evidence of the non-reliability of an electronic signature." The Working Group recalled that, in accordance with a suggestion made at the Working Group's thirty-ninth session (see A/CN.9/509, para. 115), article 9 incorporated the general principle of freedom of form contained in article 11 of the United Nations Sales Convention and restated the essential criteria for functional equivalence between data messages and paper documents, in the same manner as article 6, paragraph 2, in respect of writing and article 7, paragraph 3, in respect of signatures of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce It was also noted that article 9 contained two variants in paragraph 3. Variant A recited the general criteria for the functional equivalence between hand-written signatures and electronic identification methods referred to in article 7 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce, whereas variant B, which was more detailed and also included paragraphs 4 and 5, was based on article 6, paragraph 3, of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signatures. Paragraph 1 It was suggested that the draft paragraph could be simplified, since some of its substance was already contained in paragraph 2 of draft article 8. It was suggested that the paragraph should be revised to spell out more clearly that the draft article did not impose expressly or implicitly any form requirements that might affect the validity of communications or notices but simply provided rules for meeting those requirements, where imposed by the applicable law. It was suggested that paragraph 1 could be redrafted to provide that nothing in the convention subjected a contract or any communication, declaration, demand, notice or request to any requirement as to form. The Working Group agreed that the draft paragraph could be rephrased as suggested. Paragraph 2 The Working Group noted that the draft paragraph set out the criteria for functional equivalence between data messages and paper documents, in the same manner as article 6 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce. A suggestion was made that the term "writing" should be defined (see A/CN.9/509, paras. 116 and 117). It was suggested that a possible definition could be taken from the Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment and its Protocol on Matters Specific to Aircraft Equipment) adopted on 16 November 2001 by a Diplomatic Conference held in Cape Town, South Africa (the "Cape Town Convention") which provided that writing meant "a record of information (including information communicated by teletransmission) which is in tangible or other form and is capable of being reproduced in tangible form on a subsequent occasion and which indicates by reasonable means a person's approval of the record." That suggestion was objected to on the ground that the technique used in the Cape Town Convention had been to formulate a definition of "writing" that could accommodate the use of data messages. UNCITRAL, by contrast, had chosen to defer to domestic law on the definition of what constituted a "writing" and to provide instead criteria for the functional equivalence between data messages and written documents. That fundamental difference made the definition of writing in the Cape Town Convention unsuitable for being incorporated into the draft Convention. It was suggested that the draft paragraph should include an additional criterion for functional equivalence, namely, that a data message should not be susceptible of being unilaterally altered. In response, it was pointed out that the proposed addition was concerned with ensuring the integrity of the data message and that, as such, it was more akin to the notion of "original" than to the notion of "writing", since writing requirements were typically concerned with ensuring the existence of an accessible record, but were not necessarily concerned with the integrity of such record. It was noted, in that connection, that the Working Group had not thus far felt the need for adding a provision dealing with the functional equivalence between data messages and "original" records to the draft convention. Legal requirements relating to the production or retention of original records were typically in connection with rules on evidence in court proceedings and in exchanges with the public administration. A functional equivalence rule of that type was not felt to be needed in an instrument that dealt only with exchanges of a commercial nature. Paragraph 3 With respect to variants A and B, concern was expressed that both variants included a requirement relating to the reliability of a signature. It was noted that both draft variant A and variant B were based on the requirements set out in the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce13 and the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signatures respectively. It was noted that some States had not imposed a separate requirement that an electronic signature be reliable provided that it was possible to identify the maker of the signature and the intention by that maker. The Working Group took note of that view. 