%%%SETTLEMENT POLICY|SEPARATION BARRIERS|ISRAEL|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|PALESTINIANS|ARMED INCIDENTS|FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT|DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY|PALESTINE QUESTION|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

General Assembly Security Council Tenth emergency special session Agenda item 5 Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory Fifty-eighth year Identical letters dated 22 October 2003 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council In absolute defiance of international law and the will of the international community, Israel, the occupying Power, has declared its intention to continue building its illegal expansionist wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem. Today, Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Ehud Olmert stated that "the fence will continue being built". Such arrogant declarations of defiance came just a few hours after the General Assembly, convened in its tenth emergency special session, overwhelmingly adopted a resolution in which it, inter alia, "demands that Israel stop and reverse the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, which is in departure of the Armistice Line of 1949 and is in contradiction to relevant provisions of international law". The resolution's overwhelming adoption by a vote of 144 in favour, 4 against and 12 abstentions affirms the international community's firm opposition to the wall and the need for Israel to comply with international law and to cease and reverse its construction of this wall. Moreover, the resolution's request for the Secretary-General to report on compliance with the resolution is an important element that will assist the international community in gauging Israel's adherence to the resolution and to international law and in determining if further actions should be considered within the United Nations system to address this situation. In the event that Israel's continues its intransigent rejection of international law and non-compliance in this regard, the possibility of seeking an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on this very serious matter will be considered. In light of the declarations made today by Israeli officials, it seems regrettably clear that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to confiscate and destroy Palestinian land as it proceeds with the building of the second phase of this expansionist wall deep inside the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Indeed, yesterday the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kieran Prendergast, reported to the Security Council that Israel has actually accelerated construction of the wall in the past month. Moreover, he reaffirmed the fact that the wall is having a detrimental impact on tens of thousands of Palestinians and threatens to seal off Jerusalem from the rest of the occupied West Bank, and reiterated the call upon the Israeli authorities to halt its construction. In addition to the illegal construction of this wall, Israel, the occupying Power, continues to pursue all of its other illegal policies and practices against the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, ensuring the continuing decline of the situation on the ground. Yesterday, the Israeli occupying forces continued to carry out raids throughout Palestinian cities, including Ramallah, Qalqilya and Al-Khalil, killing and wounding several more Palestinians, causing further damage to property, including the destruction of a home, and detaining nearly 20 more Palestinians. These actions come on the heels of the recent series of Israeli military attacks against civilian areas in the Gaza Strip which resulted in numerous casualties and widespread destruction. The present letter is in follow-up to our previous 176 letters to you regarding the ongoing crisis in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, since 28 September 2000. These letters, dated from 29 September 2000 (A/55/432-S/2000/921) to 21 October 2003 (A/ES-10/246-S/2003/1029), constitute a basic record of the crimes committed by the Israeli occupying forces against the Palestinian people since September 2000. For all these war crimes, State terrorism and systematic human rights violations committed against the Palestinian people, Israel, the occupying Power, must be held accountable and the perpetrators must be brought to justice. Accordingly, in follow-up to the above-mentioned letters, it is my regret to inform you that, since my last letter, at least 6 Palestinians have been killed by the Israeli occupying forces, raising the total number of martyrs to 2,598 Palestinians. (The names of the martyrs that have been identified thus far are contained in the annex to this letter.) I would be grateful if you would arrange to have the text of this letter and its annex distributed as a document of the tenth emergency special session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 5, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Nasser Al-Kidwa Ambassador Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations * The total number of Palestinian martyrs killed by Israeli occupying forces since 28 September 2000 is 2,598. Names of martyrs killed by Israeli occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem* (Monday, 20 October, to Wednesday, 22 October 2003) Monday, 20 October 2003 1. Hadi Suleiman Ayyash 2. Ali Mustafa Abu Taha Tuesday, 21 October 2003 1. Fadi Tawik Ali Asas (died from wounds sustained in July 2003) 2. Ramzi Mohammed Ahmed Jaradat Wednesday, 22 October 2003 1. Ahmed Khamis Attiyeh Ahmed 2. Abdelhady Abdelmutlib Taleb Al-Natsheh 