%%%ECONOMIC COOPERATION|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|ECONOMIC GROWTH|POVERTY MITIGATION|GLOBALIZATION|

98-14801 (E) 010698 United Nations A/52/919 General Assembly Distr.: General 28 May 1998 Original: English Fifty-second session Agenda item 97 (a) Sustainable development and international economic cooperation: Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation for development through partnership Letter dated 27 May 1998 from the Chairman of the Second Committee to the President of the General Assembly I refer to your letter of 20 March 1998 (A/52/836) asking me to continue consultations, on your behalf, with reference to the specific focus and participants for the ministerial round tables and informal panels to be held, respectively, as part of and in conjunction with the high-level dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation for development through partnership, which will be held on 17 and 18 September of this year, as part of the fifty-third session of the General Assembly (please also refer to my previous letter dated 13 March 1998 (A/52/832)). I am happy to report that, as a result of consultations held last week and yesterday, delegations have now reached understandings on these issues. An informal paper with proposals prepared by the Secretariat aided our discussions. Delegations were of the view that the overall theme for the high-level dialogue should be, as determined in General Assembly resolution 50/122, “the social and economic impact of globalization and interdependence and their policy implications”. The topic for the first ministerial round table should be “the social and economic impact of globalization: national responses” and, for the second ministerial round table, “the social and economic impact of globalization: international responses”. For the informal panels, the participants should be selected on as balanced a basis as possible. The first panel will be devoted to the theme of the economic impact of globalization and will have as its topic the sustainability of economic growth. The second panel will be devoted to the theme of the social impact of globalization and will have as its topic poverty eradication. Delegations agreed on a list of suggested issues for discussion in each of the panels, attached hereto, which is not to be considered exclusive. A/52/919 I ask that you have the present letter and its annex distributed as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 97 (a). (Signed) Oscar R. de Rojas Chairman of the Second Committee Annex Themes and topics for the informal panels I. First informal panel Theme: Economic impact of globalization Topic: Sustainability of economic growth – Globalization and the implementation of the commitments made at the major United Nations conferences and summits – Enhancing access to global markets – Opportunities and challenges of globalization, including the prevention of marginalization in the globalization process – Financial flows for development, including a durable solution for the external debt problems of the developing countries – The present international financial and monetary system – National financial and monetary systems – Public-private partnership and the increasing role of the private sector – Impact and challenges of rapid technology changes, including technology transfer to developing countries on concessional and preferential terms, taking into account intellectual property rights, as appropriate II. Second informal panel Theme: Social impact of globalization Topic: Poverty eradication – Maintaining and improving social integration: participatory approach; social safety nets; protection of most vulnerable groups; income distribution – International cooperation for poverty eradication 