%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|CONFERENCES|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|GUIDELINES|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|DOCUMENTS|DONOR COUNTRIES|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|SPECIALIZED AGENCIES|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|RULES OF PROCEDURE|REPORT PREPARATION|

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003 [on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/499)] 58/138. Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 56/119 of 19 December 2001 on the role, function, periodicity and duration of the United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, and its resolution 57/171 of 18 December 2002 on preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, Considering that, pursuant to its resolutions 415 (V) of 1 December 1950 and 46/152 of 18 December 1991, the Eleventh Congress is to be held in 2005, Bearing in mind the guidelines for and the new format of the United Nations congresses, as stipulated in paragraph 2 of resolution 56/119, as well as paragraphs 29 and 30 of the statement of principles and programme of action of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, annexed to resolution 46/152, Recognizing the significant contributions of the United Nations congresses in promoting the exchange of experience in research, law and policy development and the identification of emerging trends and issues in crime prevention and criminal justice among States, intergovernmental organizations and individual experts representing various professions and disciplines, Recalling that, in its resolution 57/171, it requested the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, at its twelfth session, to finalize the programme for the Eleventh Congress and to make its final recommendations, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly, Recalling also that, in its resolution 57/171, it decided that the main theme of the Eleventh Congress should be "Synergies and responses: strategic alliances in crime prevention and criminal justice", Recalling further its resolution 57/170 of 18 December 2002 on the followup to the plans of action for the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twentyfirst Century, Stressing the importance of undertaking all the preparatory activities for the Eleventh Congress in a timely and concerted manner, Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 1. Notes the progress made thus far in the preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice; 2. Decides to hold the Eleventh Congress from 18 to 25 April 2005, with precongress consultations to be held on 18 April 2005; 3. Also decides that the highlevel segment of the Eleventh Congress shall be held during the last three days of the Congress in order to allow heads of State or Government or government ministers to focus on the main substantive agenda items of the Congress; 4. Approves the following provisional agenda for the Eleventh Congress, finalized by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twelfth session: 1. Opening of the Congress. 2. Organizational matters. 3. Effective measures to combat transnational organized crime. 4. International cooperation against terrorism and links between terrorism and other criminal activities in the context of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 5. Corruption: threats and trends in the twentyfirst century. 6. Economic and financial crimes: challenges to sustainable development. 7. Making standards work: fifty years of standardsetting in crime prevention and criminal justice. 8. Adoption of the report of the Congress; 5. Decides that the following issues shall be considered by workshops within the framework of the Eleventh Congress: (a) Enhancing international law enforcement cooperation, including extradition measures; (b) Enhancing criminal justice reform, including restorative justice; (c) Strategies and best practices for crime prevention, in particular in relation to urban crime and youth at risk; (d) Measures to combat terrorism, with reference to the relevant international conventions and protocols; (e) Measures to combat economic crime, including moneylaundering; (f) Measures to combat computerrelated crime; 6. Reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to prepare, in cooperation with the institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network, a discussion guide for the regional preparatory meetings and the workshops of the Eleventh Congress; 7. Urges the regional preparatory meetings to examine the substantive items on the agenda and the workshop topics of the Eleventh Congress and to make actionoriented recommendations to serve as a basis for the draft recommendations and conclusions for consideration by the Congress and the Commission at its fourteenth session; 8. Emphasizes the importance of the workshops, and invites Member States, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and other relevant entities to provide financial, organizational and technical support to the Centre for International Crime Prevention of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to the institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network for the preparations for the workshops, including the preparation and circulation of relevant background material; 9. Requests the SecretaryGeneral to include in the discussion guide requested in paragraph 6 above consideration of technical cooperation ideas, projects and documents related to enhancing bilateral and multilateral efforts in technical assistance activities in crime prevention and criminal justice; 10. Invites donor countries to cooperate with developing countries to ensure their full participation in the workshops; 11. Approves the plan for documentation for the Eleventh Congress, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on preparations for the Congress, taking into account the recommendations of the Commission related thereto; 12. Invites Governments and relevant intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to inform the Eleventh Congress about their activities with a view to the implementation of the plans of action for the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twentyfirst Century,1 as guidance for the formulation of legislation, policies and programmes in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice at the national and international levels; 13. Reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to make available the necessary resources for the participation of the least developed countries in the regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress and at the Congress itself, in accordance with past practice; 14. Encourages Governments to undertake preparations for the Eleventh Congress at an early stage by all appropriate means, including, where appropriate, the establishment of national preparatory committees, with a view to contributing to a focused and productive discussion on the topics and to participating actively in the organization of and followup to the workshops; 15. Requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide resources, as required, in accordance with established United Nations budgetary practice and within the overall appropriations of the programme budget for the biennium 2004 - 2005, in order to ensure a wide and effective programme of public information relating to the preparations for the Eleventh Congress, to the Congress itself and to the followup to and implementation of its recommendations; 16. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to be represented at the Eleventh Congress at the highest possible level, for example, by heads of State or Government or government ministers and attorneys general, to make statements on the theme and topics of the Congress and to participate in thematic interactive round tables; 17. Requests the SecretaryGeneral to facilitate the organization of ancillary meetings of nongovernmental and professional organizations participating in the Eleventh Congress, in accordance with past practice, as well as meetings of professional and geographical interest groups, and to take appropriate measures to encourage the participation of the academic and research community in the Congress; 18. Again encourages the relevant specialized agencies, United Nations programmes and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, as well as other professional organizations, to cooperate with the Centre for International Crime Prevention in the preparations for the Eleventh Congress; 19. Requests the SecretaryGeneral to appoint a SecretaryGeneral and an Executive Secretary of the Eleventh Congress, in accordance with past practice, to perform their functions under the rules of procedure for United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice; 20. Requests the Commission to accord sufficient time at its thirteenth session to reviewing the progress made in the preparations for the Eleventh Congress, to finalize in good time all the necessary organizational and substantive arrangements and to make its recommendations through the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly; 21. Requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the proper followup to the present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its thirteenth session. 77th plenary meeting 22 December 2003 