%%%MAPS|HUMAN RIGHTS|SPECIAL MISSIONS|RIGHT TO LIFE|DUE PROCESS OF LAW|FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION|FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION|RIGHT OF ASSEMBLY|CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS|HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS|ARMED FORCES|STATISTICAL DATA|GUATEMALA|IMPUNITY|VERIFICATION|STAFF SECURITY|CENTRAL AMERICA SITUATION|HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS|

United Nations A/52/946 General Assembly Distr.: General 15 June 1998 English Original: Spanish Fifty-second session Agenda item 45 The situation in Central America: procedures for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace and progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala Note by the Secretary-General 1. The attached document contains the report of the Human Rights Area of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) on the verification of compliance with the commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights. In accordance with the practice established since the Mission's inception, I shall convey a copy of this report to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with the request that it be transmitted to the members of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. 2. This report, which is being transmitted by the head of the Mission, is the eighth on the subject, and covers the period from 1 July 1997 to 31 March 1998, during which the Mission continued to carry out its work and verify compliance with the commitments of the Agreement on the Implementation, Compliance and Verification Timetable for the Peace Agreements. The results of the verification of compliance with the Agreement were reported to the General Assembly on 4 February 1998 (A/52/757). 3. I wish to reiterate my thanks to the Government of Guatemala and to the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) for their cooperation with the Mission, without which it would have been unable to function. I also wish to express my gratitude for the ongoing collaboration and support provided by the members of the United Nations system in Guatemala, represented by the Resident Coordinator of Operational Activities for Development of the United Nations System. Annex Eighth report on human rights of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala I. Introduction 1. During the period covered by this report (1 July 1997 to 31 March 1998), the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) continued to verify compliance with all the Peace Agreements signed between the Government of Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG). Among the Agreements, the Mission verifies compliance with the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the “Comprehensive Agreement”), signed on 29 March 1994 (A/48/928-S/1994/448, annex I) and with the human rights aspects of the Agreement on Identity and Rights of Indigenous Peoples (hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement on Indigenous Rights”), signed on 31 March 1995 (A/49/882-S/1995/256, annex). 2. In view of the particular importance of the enjoyment of the human rights accorded priority that were included in the Comprehensive Agreement, as one of the main aspects of the frame of reference for evaluating progress made in the overall peace process, the Mission is continuing to issue a specific report on the subject. This report also refers to the commitments under the Comprehensive Agreement which were not included in the Agreement on the Implementation, Compliance and Verification Timetable for the Peace Agreements (A/51/796-S/1997/114, annex I), as noted in the second report of the Secretary-General on the results of the verification of compliance with that Agreement (A/52/757, para. 5). II. Context in which the Mission carries out its activities 3. During the period under review, the first anniversary of the signing of the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace (A/51/796-S/1997/114, annex II) took place. People from the most diverse sectors of society, representing civil society, the State and the numerous commissions set up under the Peace Agreements, noted the progress made that year, particularly the strengthening of political freedom and the emergence of a culture of dialogue and negotiation. At the same time, the assessment of the first year underscored the need to reschedule major commitments which had not yet been carried out, disseminate more broadly the content of the Peace Agreements and overcome the serious public- security situation and the persistent economic and social difficulties in order to enable the entire population to enjoy the benefits of peace. 4. The changes in the human rights situation in Guatemala have two characteristics. On the one hand, there is a continuing gradual decline in the number of violations of the rights accorded priority under the Comprehensive Agreement, which has been influenced by the end of the armed confrontation and the demobilization of some of its principal participants, such as the Voluntary Civil Defence Committees, military commissioners and URNG. In addition, the violations recorded in the most recent periods, in spite of the grave nature of some of them, are not generally characterized as being politically motivated or in response to government instructions to commit and conceal them. 5. On the other hand, the changes have also been characterized by a continuing high level of criminal violence and a feeling of insecurity on the part of citizens to the extent that, at the current time, the basic problem of protecting human rights has focused on ensuring fulfilment of the State's duty to guarantee these rights and to investigate and punish those who violate them. The social phenomena, excesses and structural shortcomings of the institutions involved in the administration of justice and of the police that seriously affect the enjoyment of basic human rights by the population are part of this situation. The challenge facing the State is to carry out these duties in an effective manner ensuring respect for human rights within the framework of a constitutional system. 6. The phenomenon of crime has evoked a profound feeling of revulsion and indignation on the part of society as a whole, which the Mission fully shares. The State's limitations and shortcomings in dealing with crime and providing security have caused impatience and frustration in society, which feels that it is defenceless. This situation has increased tolerance for various forms of what is called “taking justice into one's own hands”, actions carried out outside the law, such as lynchings and “social cleansing” operations. A/52/946 7. There is no doubt that the State institutions are essential for combating crime and, for that reason, the Peace Agreements accord priority to strengthening their capacity to prevent, investigate and punish crime. Nevertheless, the fact that the State still does not have that capacity, since strengthening it is a gradual process to be carried out in the medium term, cannot justify the use of illegal practices. Many believe that any method is permitted in combating crime. In this regard, the Mission reiterates that it is unacceptable and harmful to combat unlawfulness by means that are also unlawful and that, moreover, breaking the law is unnecessary. In fact, observance of the law is essential for ensuring the legitimate use of law enforcement personnel; and strict respect for the law leads to greater effectiveness in combating crime, since this alone guarantees due process and makes it possible to prove culpability and punish those responsible. There is no contradiction between the legitimacy of action by the State and its effectiveness in combating crime. This report analyses the progress made and setbacks experienced by State institutions with regard to the commitment to combat impunity with strict adherence to the law. 8. In order to deal with the lack of security and owing to the shortcomings of the National Police and the limitations of the recently formed National Civil Police, the Government instructed the army to support the police in this task. This has led to the participation of military personnel in joint patrols, whose real impact is difficult to assess. The crime statistics would indicate that they have not achieved the desired effect and that, moreover, in their activities they have not refrained from committing violations (see para. 40). In the past, we had reported on activities by specialized squads which the army participated in or led. During the period under review, cases of enforced disappearances in operations having these characteristics (see para. 34 ff.) have been reported. 9. Instances of irregularities with respect to crime are not limited to the State. The Mission has noted the existence and growth of two phenomena which, viewed as a reaction to the inability of the State to provide security and punish crime, coincide with the objective of killing alleged criminals. This involves on the one hand, the phenomenon of lynchings (see para. 21 ff.) and, on the other, the murder of alleged criminals within the framework of the so-called “social cleansing” activities (see para. 84 ff.). Both situations, together with the emergence of illegal security bodies and irregular armed groups (see para. 81 ff.), represent an additional challenge for the State as well as society as a whole, which must also combat these acts, which are as violent and unlawful as those that they are intended to eliminate. 10. Lastly, while this report was being written, but not during the period under review, the Most Reverend Juan José Gerardi, Auxiliary Bishop of the Diocese of Guatemala and Coordinator of the Archdiocese Human Rights Office, was murdered. His death, two days after the submission by the Office of the report on the results of the “Project for the Recovery of Historical Memory”, which provides an account of the human rights violations that occurred during the 36 years of the internal armed conflict, had a profoundly disturbing effect at both the national and the international level. 11. The Mission has been monitoring the activities of the bodies responsible for investigating this abhorrent crime since the night on which it was committed. On that basis, it urged the competent authorities to redouble their efforts to overcome the traditional shortcomings of the judicial investigation system, provide the responsible bodies with all the human and material resources required for carrying out their duties and give the investigation service all the information that might be useful in order to promote confidence in the possibility of halting impunity. III. Verification of respect for human rights and of compliance with other commitments made in the Comprehensive Agreement 12. The mandate given by the parties under the Comprehensive Agreement authorized the Mission to receive, consider and follow up complaints regarding possible human rights violations and to collect the necessary information and interview any person or group of persons freely and privately. The parties also made MINUGUA responsible for establishing whether the competent national institutions were carrying out the necessary investigations autonomously, effectively and in accordance with the Political Constitution and international human rights norms. 13. Lastly, they gave MINUGUA the function of determining whether or not a violation of human rights had occurred on the basis of whatever information it might obtain in the exercise of its powers. While the statistics contained in the appendix are a quantitative reference in considering the human rights situation, the conclusions set forth in these reports are based not only on them, but also on a qualitative analysis of the situation. Commitment I. General commitment to human rights Analysis of verification of the rights accorded priority under the Comprehensive Agreement 14. During the period covered by this report (1 July 1997- 31 March 1998), the Mission admitted for verification 219 complaints. Since a complaint may include one or more violations, the total number of complaints admitted involved 1,842 alleged violations of the rights accorded priority. The figures on violations verified during the period under review include complaints admitted during previous periods. 15. An analysis of the complaints admitted indicates a decline in alleged violations of the right to individual liberty, due process and freedom of association and assembly. On the other hand, there was an increase in complaints concerning the right to life, integrity and security of person and freedom of movement and residence. 16. The complaints verified during the period under review refer both to events resulting from actions carried out directly by State agents in the exercise of their functions and to situations which indicate that the State failed in its duty to provide guarantees (see A/52/330, para. 12). This duty is not discharged when institutions fail to comply with the legal obligation to provide, in a timely manner, means of guaranteeing the full exercise of human rights or of carrying out speedy, exhaustive and effective investigations when such rights have already been affected. Right to life 17. During the period under review, 110 alleged violations of the right to life were recorded and 109 proved to be founded (28 extrajudicial executions, 42 attempted executions and 39 death threats). In the verified cases where there was direct government involvement, National Police officers, members of the army and municipal authorities are most often the ones claimed to be responsible. The Mission considers it a matter of special concern that there was a rise in alleged violations of the right to life during the period. 18. There were instances where extrajudicial executions were the result of ill-treatment of detainees, as happened in the case of César Augusto Morales López, arrested for the commission of an offence and taken to the Chiquimulilla jail, where four National Police officers beat him to death. At other times, death resulted from an excessive use of force, as in the case of Miguel Domingo Xol, who was killed, according to eyewitnesses, by a shot fired from the area where security officers were stationed, on 4 September 1997 in Sayaxché, Petén, as he fled the scene carrying a club. The killing occurred during a clash between the Police Special Forces, the Treasury Guard and a group of peasants, following their eviction from the El Cedral and El Santoespíritu farms. On other occasions, deaths resulted from the Government’s failure to supervise its agents. Such was the case of José Luis Ruiz Risso, shot to death by a drunken off-duty National Civil Police officer, identified as Byron Geovanni Hernández Nájera, who was carrying his service revolver at the time. Hernández was arrested by National Civil Police officers and taken to the local police substation, but he managed to escape. The authorities, it should be noted, reacted properly, because once it had been ascertained that the agents holding him in custody had done nothing to secure his detention, they were discharged. Hernández, charged with homicide, is a fugitive, and he too has been discharged from the National Civil Police. 19. Especially disquieting are the deaths in the wake of farm evictions. They can be attributed to a 1996 legal provision making squatting a criminal offence and mandating the security forces to carry out court orders for eviction without determining whether the persons claiming to be the owners actually have legal ownership; in very many instances, this provokes clashes between peasants and government agents. The Mission believes that using conflict- resolution techniques could be one solution to these confrontations, which often result in death or injury among members of the security forces or among those being evicted. 20. During the period under review, the Mission registered several violations of the right to life of individuals singled out as being criminals or homosexuals, as part of a pattern of “social cleansing”. The Mission verified, in some cases, that planned, coordinated activities had actually been behind the extrajudicial execution of such persons (see paras. 84 ff.). 21. Another particularly serious matter is the occurrence of lynchings. These are grave and violent actions that frequently end in the cruel death of persons reported or mistakenly taken to be criminals, with no proof of their guilt and no opportunity for due process of law. This practice, a serious infringement of, among others, the fundamental right to life, has taken on particular importance because it is becoming more widespread and becoming accepted by a significant segment of the population, who consider it an understandable reaction in view of the inadequacy of the State bodies responsible for maintaining order and judging and punishing criminals. This is one more challenge for the Government, which also has the duty to protect the fundamental rights of lynching victims and not to let the instigators and perpetrators enjoy impunity. 22. The Mission classified the available data on 120 lynchings that had taken place in the last two years (27 March 1996 to 1 April 1998), in the course of which some 100 persons were murdered and another 100 injured. Such occurrences, previously fairly isolated, have become markedly more frequent, to the point that there are now one or two lynchings a week. The data indicate that the phenomenon is basically a rural one (85.7 per cent), the usual motive being an alleged crime against property (67 per cent) that normally involves goods of very little value. On a few occasions, the lynchings have been a response to crimes against life (7.5 per cent) or sexual crimes (4.2 per cent). In most cases, no investigation whatever was conducted; in 24 cases the Public Prosecutor's Office undertook inconclusive investigations; and only two cases have been scheduled for trial. 23. As regards the instigators, it is difficult in most instances to uncover solid evidence to prove who was responsible. However, verification by the Mission shows that most of the lynchings occurred in places where the Voluntary Civil Defence Committees were very active and in control in the community and that several times former members of those Committees were identified as the instigators. It has been brought out that municipal authorities were also involved in some of these cases. 24. The rise in the number of lynchings has prejudiced the social and institutional view of indigenous customary law, because such acts have been cited as examples of traditional indigenous justice, an unfounded attribution that is emphatically denied by indigenous organizations and representatives. 25. With regard to the enforcement of the death penalty, various efforts to encourage its abolition have been and are being carried out under the auspices of the United Nations. For instances, the Second Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, was opened for signature, ratification and accession and is now in force, although Guatemala is not yet a party to it. Also, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights has called on States which have not yet abolished capital punishment to consider suspending executions with a view to the eventual abolition of the penalty. The worldwide trend towards abolition of the death penalty does not seek to create a tolerance for crime. It is prompted by the inhumanity of the penalty and the statistical proof that its application has not succeeded in reducing the frequency or seriousness of crimes. 26. Accordingly, the Mission reiterates that, under Guatemalan law and, in particular, the Constitution of the Republic: (a) it is illegal to impose capital punishment for crimes which were not punishable by the death penalty before the entry into force of the American Convention on Human Rights; (b) the authorities, especially the courts, have the weighty responsibility of condemning a person to death only after a trial in which all the guarantees of due process have been strictly observed; (c) given the recognized technical shortcomings of the penal system, there is a real danger of committing irreversible judicial errors and executing innocent persons, and in that connection, there is a constitutional prohibition (article 18) against imposing the death penalty on the basis of “circumstantial evidence”; and (d) under article 18 of the Constitution, a death sentence cannot be executed until “all appeals” have been exhausted; this article does not distinguish between domestic judicial remedies and international judicial remedies. 27. Prosecutors, judges, lawyers and human rights workers are still subject to death threats. During the period under review, there were threats against, among others, the prosecutor in the “Patrol 603” case. In addition, the judge of the trial court of Coban, in charge of the Xamán case, was harassed. Threats were also made against the forensic anthropologists of the Forensic Anthropology Institute of Guatemala involved in the exhumations in Panzós, Alta Verapaz, and against the attorney from the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation who was joint plaintiff in the Xamán case (see paras. 66 and 90 ff.). Right to integrity and security of person 28. In connection with the right to integrity of person, 47 complaints covering 1,254 alleged violations were admitted and 954 of them were verified, most of them (858) on the grounds of excessive use of force; in addition, the following violations were confirmed: 7 cases of torture, 21 cases of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 47 cases of ill-treatment and 21 cases of threats other than death threats. Most of the complaints were in connection with two instances of evictions from farms, in Sayaxché, Petén, in September 1997 and in Naranjo, Petén, in November 1997. In the latter incident, the Police Special Forces used a disproportionate number of tear-gas canisters and smoke bombs in an operation that indiscriminately affected houses and shops in the vicinity of a demonstration. Several people were hit directly by the tear-gas canisters, children were sickened by tear gas and other persons were roughed up by the police. 29. Torture is all the more grave when its victims are minors. In the case described here, although according to the investigation report the youth in question did not suffer serious physical injury, his age made him more vulnerable both physically and psychologically and he was entitled to special protection by the State. Domingo Gamalies Sales Bautista, age 16, was arrested by three auxiliary mayors on 15 September 1997 in a bar in the hamlet of 7 de Febrero, San Marcos, for not having paid the 50 centavos he owed. After being taken to the town hall, his hands and feet were tied and he was beaten. Later, he was blindfolded, beaten and burnt with cigarettes to force him to reveal the names of persons in his circle of friends and companions who were suspected of wrongdoing. 30. Verification has shown that cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is not today a systematic practice of the National Police. However, cases continue to come to light like that of Luis Gustavo Gómez Castellano, who was arrested with excessive force by four National Police officers in Zacapa when he was in a drunken state on the night of 18 July 1997. His wife, Glenda Janeth Aguirre, was also beaten as she tried to get into the car in which her husband was being taken to the local Second Corps precinct of the National Police. The Mission considers it especially serious that, perhaps in reprisal for the visit made by MINUGUA observers to Second Corps precinct to verify the alleged incident, the detainee was beaten by one of his captors and sustained a serious injury to his mouth. Right to individual liberty 31. During the period covered by the report, 83 alleged violations of the right to individual liberty were recorded and 78 were confirmed. Of the confirmed cases, 34 were arbitrary detentions, 41 were detentions in violation of legal guarantees, 2 were enforced disappearances and 1 was a kidnapping. 32. Three aspects of the right to individual liberty stand out during the period under review: first, that in some departments, like Escuintla, Alta Verapaz and Petén, detentions in violation of legal guarantees are a widespread, recurrent practice; second, that although violations are occurring less frequently, the perpetrators still seem to be mainly National Police officers and auxiliary mayors; lastly, that normally this kind of deprivation of liberty goes hand in hand with ill-treatment or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including torture. A case in point is that of Ramiro Gabriel Coronado and Margarito Pérez Gabriel, who were arrested on 29 September as they walked through the town of El Duraznal, San Marcos, even though they had done nothing illegal and no arrest warrant was served. After being taken to the auxiliary mayor’s office by a group of persons led by the auxiliary mayor himself, they were hung by the legs and doused with gasoline under threat of being set afire if they did not confess to having committed various robberies. 33. Another cause for concern in the period under review is the occurrence of harassment and threats against demobilized members of URNG. On 3 February 1998, Alexander Arturo Cuéllar Ortega, a university student who had been demobilized from URNG, was arbitrarily detained, threatened and beaten by two officers of the Second Corps of the National Police while he was travelling in a bus from Zone 1 of the capital to the University of San Carlos. Thanks to a rapid investigation by the Office of Professional Accountability of the National Police, the officers responsible were quickly discharged and the Public Prosecutor’s Office was notified so that appropriate legal action could proceed. 34. During the period under review, four claims of enforced disappearance were admitted. In two of the cases it was confirmed that there had been a violation and in the other two, even though they are still in the process of being verified, the Mission has sufficient evidence to impute responsibility to government agents. The resurgence of this exceptionally grave human rights violation is a very serious and disquieting development, even where no political motivation is involved. 35. On 11 September, around 8.30 p.m., three individuals fleeing in a car from a group of persons unknown to them reached Zone 13 in Guatemala City and entered the home of one of them, Ricardo II Figueroa Delgado. The operation mounted by their pursuers included about 15 persons dressed in civilian clothes and wearing ski masks, heavily armed with pistols and submachine guns and equipped with communications devices. Figueroa was arrested and taken away in an unmarked vehicle. Eyewitnesses corroborated these facts. The other two persons apparently managed to escape. To date, the man arrested is still considered a disappeared person and his arrest has not been acknowledged by the police or any other security body. The three were alleged to have been involved in the kidnapping of a Danish pharmaceutical company executive, Christian Erichsen. 36. Figueroa’s mother brought the case before the Office of the Counsel for Human Rights, which submitted two applications for the remedy of habeas corpus to no avail. On 2 October, a third remedy was applied for, requesting that he be sought in the military intelligence premises, again without producing results. During the course of its verification, MINUGUA was denied entry into one of the military premises, in clear non-compliance with the Comprehensive Agreement. 37. The second case occurred a few hours after the arrest of Figueroa, in an operation carried out in Zone 12 of Guatemala City by 25 anti-kidnapping agents and 35 members of the Police Special Forces, at the behest of the head of the anti-kidnapping squad of the criminal investigation service of the National Police. During this operation, the Danish businessman referred to earlier was freed. The National Police maintains that it received an anonymous telephone call to its emergency number at 7.10 p.m. on 11 September, telling them where the kidnapping victim was being held. On the basis of that information they undertook a surveillance operation. 38. Around 10 p.m., Isaac Valdés Mayén drove away from the building in his car, was shot at and intercepted by the security officers, and was then forced into their car. The scene was observed by a witness who reported it as a kidnapping to the same National Police emergency telephone number. The arrest has not been acknowledged by the National Police or any other security body. Valdés Mayén too is still considered a disappeared person. 39. In the case of the enforced disappearance of Juan José Cabrera Rodas (A/52/330, paras. 28 ff.), the investigation carried out by the Public Prosecutor’s Office has produced no results so far. Although the authorities made statements to the prosecutor, and the Ministry of the Interior gave him the names of the agents who had participated in the operation in which Rafael Baldizón had been arrested, none of those authorities took steps to summon the agents for a hearing. Furthermore, the Public Prosecutor’s Office did not use its full powers of investigation and has been ineffective in making headway in clearing up the case. 40. The Mission ascertained that, as part of the Government’s effort to combat crime, the army continued to perform public security functions, particularly by participating in combined patrols with National Police officers. Although this kind of activity is legal under Government Decree No. 90-96, there have been verified cases in which the actions of military personnel have gone beyond what the law allows. Cases in point are those of Ramiro Vásquez Benítez in the town of El Astillero, Guazacapán, Santa Rosa and other illegal arrests in Sololá, Escuintla and Zacapa. Right to due process of law 41. During the period under review, 90 complaints related to this right were admitted, containing 191 alleged violations; 451 were confirmed. As in previous reports, the majority of violations confirmed (392) referred to the legal duty of the State to prevent, investigate and punish. 42. The Mission reiterates what it stated in previous reports concerning violations of this legal right through omission and delay on the part of officials of the Public Prosecutor’s Office in the investigation of crimes, the typical slowness of court procedures and the lack of coordination among the various components of the justice system in carrying out arrests, raids, searches and other urgent operations. 43. Verification reveals that in a considerable percentage of cases, the right to defence is not guaranteed, an especially serious failing in those where capital punishment is being sought for the defendant. In those cases there is a formal defence, which cannot be considered as meeting the requirements of article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In the case of Pedro Rax Cucul, for example, who was condemned to death by the trial court of Cobán on 25 June 1997, the public defender did not present any evidence in the defendant’s behalf throughout the entire trial. Moreover, even though the psychiatric expert had stated that a more thorough examination was required because “it could not be established whether, at the time the act was committed, the individual was suffering from a mental illness ...”, that examination was never conducted and it was impossible to know whether, as the accused asserted, he had acted under emotional duress. 44. In the case of the murder of Myrna Mack, the Mission has noted positive developments in the criminal proceedings. On 12 August 1997, the Constitutional Court received a petition from the remedy of amparo against a resolution of the Supreme Court of Justice that established the competence of the criminal court of first instance to hear the case and determined that the trial should be governed by the derogated criminal procedure law. In granting amparo, the Court decided that the body of law applicable was the new Code of Criminal Procedure and clarified that the proceedings carried out by the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the military judge, far from being rescinded, maintained their validity and would serve as the basis for the investigation of the facts. 45. In this same case, the Supreme Court decision of 22 October 1997, which rejected an appeal lodged by the accused members of the military attempting to invoke the National Reconciliation Act, represented a milestone in the effort to combat impunity and endorsed the application of a restrictive judicial interpretation. 46. One of the guarantees of due process is the right to be assisted by an interpreter if a defendant does not understand or speak the language of the court, a right which has special importance in a multilingual country like Guatemala. In that regard, the Mission has once again noted the absence of translators in the courts, which has seriously hampered the right to defence in trials of indigenous persons. 47. The traditional laws of indigenous peoples are an essential element in regulating society in their communities. Derived from a specific philosophy, they possess an authority system and provide for their own procedures. Indigenous peoples have the right to exercise these procedures, within the limits established in article 8 of International Labour Organization Convention 169, “where these are not incompatible with fundamental rights defined by the national legal system and with internationally recognized human rights”. 48. The Agreement on Indigenous Rights, Convention No. 169 and article 58 of the Constitution are the foundations for institutional recognition of the law practised by indigenous peoples. The procedure and mechanisms for this recognition were analysed and discussed in the framework of the peace process, and it is for the Congress to issue the rules for coordination to ensure that indigenous communities are recognized as being entitled to manage their internal affairs in accordance with their customary law. The indigenous peoples must participate in this process. Indigenous law will continue to be an effective tool for conflict resolution, especially when the authorities and procedures are clearly identified. Right to freedom of expression 49. During the reporting period, the Mission took note of the controversy that arose between the communications media and the public authorities over freedom of expression. While the former asserted that government actions were illegally limiting that right, the Government maintained that it had acted within the law and that, on the contrary, some representatives of the media, by omitting or twisting information, did not respect the citizens’ right to information. The Counsel for Human Rights, in a resolution of 10 December 1997, declared that the violation existed and called for “harmony and dialogue among the opposing institutions”. 50. On 26 March the Mission accepted a formal complaint by the magazine Crónica against the Government for conducting a policy intended to “impede the free expression of views”. The alleged policy was carried out by placing pressure on the communications media critical of the official line, including “... visits to advertisers and advertising agencies to request them not to buy advertising space in those publications”. According to the complaint, it was a question of undue interference by the political authorities in the private sphere, and although the Government could disseminate through the media such official propaganda as it found appropriate, it was not legally entitled to intervene in the field of private commercial relationships for the purpose of economic harassment of a particular communications medium. That, along with restrictions on free access to official sources of information, would limit freedom of expression and constituted the substance of the complaint received by the Mission, which immediately began the appropriate verification process. Freedom of association and assembly 51. During the reporting period, 11 complaints involving these rights were admitted, including 183 alleged violations. Verification to date has confirmed 233 violations. Some cases make reference to the right to association of neighbourhood groups which propose the establishment of human rights committees or associations to promote social action in the municipalities. In those cases, actions or omissions by the municipal authorities which have blocked these initiatives have been verified. For example, in the case of the Human Rights Committee of the hamlet of Ceiba Amelia in Escuintla, the local authorities did not know what administrative actions were needed to respond to a petition for municipal endorsement. 52. With regard to freedom of association for trade unions, the Mission has received complaints holding the public authorities responsible, as in the cases of the Tiquisate hospital and the municipality of Zacapa. As for the effective enjoyment of trade union freedoms in Guatemala, the Mission has recently reported that “although the procedures for the authorization of trade unions have been streamlined, the situation with regard to worker organization remains precarious, as the signs of anti-union practices at the time of the first collective actions indicate. This could be one of the reasons for the drop in the number of applications for recognition of trade union organizations” (A/52/757, para. 50). 53. One example is what took place at the Nueva Florencia ranch in Colombia, Quetzaltenango, where 32 workers were fired when they formed a union. In this case, the workers had organized a provisional executive committee and also, seven days before being fired, had submitted to the Labour Inspector’s Office a notification that they were forming a trade union. The day they were fired they had sent an application for legal recognition of the trade union to the Ministry of Labour. Political rights 54. During the period under review, no reports were received about violations of political rights. The absence or small number of complaints is normal, since attention is focused on these rights mainly during electoral periods, when the right to elect and to be elected is exercised. Nevertheless, the State’s obligation is not only to respect the exercise of these rights in an election period, but also to create the necessary conditions for citizens to be able to exercise them, including the issuance of personal documents to the broad sectors of the population who currently lack such documentation, largely as a consequence of the armed conflict. The Mission attaches great importance to the steps taken by the State to remedy this situation. 55. The Mission notes in this regard that the Congress of the Republic has adopted the Temporary Special Act on Personal Documentation of the Population Uprooted by the Internal Armed Conflict, with the aim of providing personal documentation to uprooted populations. This Act, which has been in force since 16 October 1997, requires the Ministry of the Interior to issue rules and instructions for action to be taken by civil registrars. These rules and instructions have not been issued, however, on the grounds that they would impinge on the autonomy of municipalities. As a result, civil registrars are refusing to implement the law and are failing to provide documentation to uprooted populations. For its part, the Ministry of the Interior has failed to make available the lists of municipalities which were destroyed by the violence, a basic requirement for the effective enforcement of the law. Finally, there is need for a special documentation programme to be launched with a view to the upcoming elections, since a large part of the population, especially women, will be unable to exercise their right to vote because they lack personal documentation. 56. Political rights include the right to participate in the management of public affairs, either directly or through representatives. This right has particular relevance for the indigenous peoples, who have been traditionally marginalized from political decision-making. The Mission therefore welcomes as a major step forward the ratification by Guatemala of International Labour Organization Convention 169, article 6 of which states that: “In applying the provisions of this Convention, governments shall: (a) consult the people concerned, through appropriate procedures and in particular through their representative institutions, whenever consideration is being given to legislative or administrative measures which may affect them directly ...”. This rule is fully consistent with the Agreement on Indigenous Rights, in which the Government undertook to promote legal and institutional reforms to facilitate, regulate and guarantee the participation at all levels of indigenous people and to involve the representatives of indigenous organizations in planning the reforms. 57. To this end, more effective compliance with this principle must be steadily promoted, a task for which the Joint Commission on Reform and Participation, which was established pursuant to the Agreement on Indigenous Rights, has a major responsibility. This Commission is required to propose arrangements for consulting indigenous peoples whenever legislative and administrative measures that are likely to affect them are to be considered. Commitment to promote rules and mechanisms for the protection of human rights 58. With regard to the commitment undertaken by the Government to promote rules and mechanisms for the protection of human rights, the Congress of the Republic of Guatemala, in its Legislative Decree No. 78-96, adopted in September 1996 the “Code on Children and Youth”. The Code was due to enter into force on 27 September 1997, but the Supreme Court of Justice requested the Congress to extend the deadline for its implementation on the grounds that adequate budgetary resources were not available to establish the corresponding courts. Consequently, Legislative Decree No. 84-97 of 25 September 1997 deferred the entry into force of the Code to 27 March 1998. Finally, the Mission notes with concern the further delay provided for in Legislative Decree No. 23-98, which once again postpones the entry into force of the Code. 59. Not much progress has been made either with regard to the enactment of legislation to govern adoption, despite the importance of this issue to Guatemalan society and in the light of the complaint by Casa Alianza, a non-governmental organization, about the existence of a network that traffics in children. During the period under review, the draft legislation on adoption, which is presently in the Congressional Commission on Women, Minors and the Family, was sent to various institutions concerned with the issue of children and to national and foreign experts for their comments. 60. On 25 November, on the occasion of the International Day against Violence against Women, numerous forums were organized on the subject, both in the capital and in other departments of Guatemala. Concern was expressed in these forums over the limited awareness of and failure to effectively implement the Act on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Domestic Violence, which has been in force since 24 November 1996. Commitment II: Commitment to strengthening institutions for the protection of human rights 61. In the Comprehensive Agreement, the Government committed itself to respect the autonomy and protect the freedom of action of the judiciary and the Public Prosecutor’s Office, based on the belief that support for these institutions strengthens the rule of law. It also undertook to support the human rights functions assigned to the Office of the Counsel for Human Rights. 62. During the period in question, the Mission has noted some progress towards fulfilling the commitments to strengthen these institutions, which were undertaken in the Agreement on the Strengthening of Civilian Power and on the Role of the Armed Forces in a Democratic Society (A/51/410-S/1996/853, annex), the timetable for which is set out in the Agreement on the Implementation, Compliance and Verification Timetable for the Peace Agreements. Of particular note in the judicial branch is the work of its modernization commission, whose aim is to bring about substantial improvements in the administration of justice by implementing a large number of reforms in 1998. The Public Prosecutor’s Office completed the elaboration of the internal restructuring plan to improve the technical and administrative capacity of the institution. These innovations are intended to improve the efficiency of the investigation of criminal acts, to facilitate their prosecution through the courts and to improve access to the justice system. As regards the commitment to support the work of the Office of the Counsel for Human Rights, the main concern has to do with the limitations on its sustainability and the broadening of the scope of its activities, owing to the inadequate budgetary allocation for 1998 (A/52/757, para. 6). 63. With regard to the commitment to protect the autonomy and freedom of action of the institutions responsible for the protection of human rights, it should be pointed out that, during the period under review, the army’s general attitude was one of a lack of cooperation in efforts to clarify the involvement of its senior officers in human rights violations. Because of this attitude, the official investigations have stopped at the responsibility of the actual perpetrators, who are often junior officers, and there appear to have been no judicial decisions that determined who the instigators were. 64. It has also been noted that the relationship between some State organs and their members or former members involved in violations of human rights is not confined to providing them with attorneys for their defence, including cases involving self-defence. In certain cases, actions or omissions have been observed which may adversely affect the independence and impartiality of the courts and impede the investigations, a practice whose net effect is to provide institutional cover for the act. 65. In this connection, mention should be made of the heavy presence of officials of the armed forces during the oral proceedings in the case of Sas Rompiche (A/52/330, para. 58). During the public hearing, which was held on 2 February 1998, a large group of members of the Presidential General Staff was present in the room where the hearing was being conducted by the trial court. The Mission noted that the above-mentioned officials filmed and took photographs of those present, posing in some cases as journalists from the government programme Noticiero Avances. 66. The Mission also notes with concern that both the President of the trial court of Cobán, by whom the Xamán case is being tried, and the attorney of the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation, a joint complainant in the same case, were victims of harassment and threats during the period prior to the start of the oral proceedings in the case. According to National Civil Police (PNC) reports, some 20 judges have complained of acts of intimidation against them and therefore receive some form of protection or police guard, which may be a bodyguard or a guard on location. 67. This commitment refers to the full enjoyment of the guarantees and resources required by the judiciary and the Public Prosecutor’s Office to enable them to discharge their duties efficiently, a guarantee which covers all persons involved in the conduct of judicial proceedings. Special attention should be paid to the difficult situation of persons who are brought before the courts as witnesses, since the justice system has neither the financial resources nor the necessary infrastructure to protect their right to integrity and security of person. Indeed, the Act for the Protection of Persons Involved in the Conduct of Judicial Proceedings and Persons Linked to the Administration of Criminal Justice, which was adopted in August 1996, did not lead to any real progress in this area, owing to the fact that a prescriptive rule cannot be issued until such time as funds become available to enforce it. To date, only a few isolated initiatives have been taken, which do not constitute a comprehensive solution to the problem. In this connection, the public was shocked to learn of the murder last October of Edgar Motta González, who had testified as a witness for the prosecution in the “Patrol 603" case. The Mission has noted that, following this incident, potential witnesses have refused to appear in trials for human rights violations. Commitment III. Commitment against impunity 68. The Mission has continued to focus on the performance of the State bodies and authorities whose functions are connected with meeting this commitment. As in the previous period, the explanation for most verified violations is basically the persistence of serious structural shortcomings in the criminal investigation system and in the administration of justice (A/52/330, para. 55). Therefore, the responsibility for most of the verified violations can be attributed to National Police officers, officials of the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the judiciary. 69. Although strictly speaking it is the executive branch of the Government that is responsible for taking action against impunity under the Comprehensive Agreement, the commitment is a legal obligation and a social demand that concerns the State as a whole. Investigating crimes and violations and trying and punishing those responsible is a process which, if it is to succeed, requires all the institutions with jurisdiction in that area – the police, the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the judiciary – to do their jobs effectively and in a timely manner. By its very nature, impunity can be combated effectively only by means of a comprehensive programme that is coordinated between these institutions and has resolute backing from the executive branch. 70. With a view to moving forward in these areas, a Coordinating Authority for the Modernization of the Justice Sector, composed of the Ministry of the Interior, the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the judiciary, has been set up and provided with an executive secretariat. 71. In this context, it has been established that serious limitations persist in meeting this commitment. Most of the judicial proceedings investigating human rights violations or serious crimes that have been followed up by the Mission are still at almost the same procedural stage as reported in the previous report, with a few notable exceptions such as the progress made in the cases of Mack (see para. 44) and Alioto López. As a result of the extremely slow proceedings and the lack of impetus, there have been no advances in the trials of the most serious and representative cases, such as those of Carpio, González Dubón, Noriega, Saquic and Xamán (A/52/330, para. 58). 72. The slowness and disarray of the proceedings project the image of a justice system that is incapable of making progress in clearing up crimes and violations, thereby fomenting a social perception of impunity. One of the decisive factors behind this slowness is the widespread practice among lawyers of using all possible legal remedies to stall and delay. This situation, which is an abuse of law and dilutes the purpose of those remedies, generates paralysis in trials and overloads the courts, which find themselves forced to spend much of their scarce time in settling groundless appeals. The best example of this are applications for amparo against legal decisions: once these applications are lodged, under an entrenched legal practice that nevertheless lacks any legal foundation, they cause trials to be adjourned until the amparo proceeding is settled, months later. That these applications for amparo are merely stalling tactics is reflected in the fact that, according to Constitutional Court statistics for 1996 and 1997, about four out of five amparo applications are dismissed. 73. The Mission has established that this practice has also affected cases concerning serious human rights violations. In the Xamán case, as was indicated in previous reports, the defence kept up a policy of lodging appeals with a view to causing an unwarranted delay in the proceedings: indeed, this has resulted in successive postponements of the beginning of the oral argument, with it now being two and a half years after the fact. In November 1997, the defence yet again lodged an appeal with the trial court of Cobán, alleging loss of part of the case file, despite the question’s having previously been resolved by the lower court of Cobán at a hearing with all parties present. The appeal forced the holding of an additional hearing before the trial court of Cobán, at which it was confirmed that the case file was complete. This delaying tactic is all the more serious in that it is coming from lawyers hired by a State institution, the army, which is responsible for meeting the commitment. 74. The legal duty of the State to investigate, punish and prevent human rights violations is not restricted to the area of criminal law, but includes the administrative area also. In this context, verification has shown that over and above the shortcomings in the criminal law area, when it comes to investigation the authorities frequently fail to issue the indictments that would establish the administrative accountability that applies when any public official is accused of human rights violations. In other cases, when it comes to punishment, the proceedings are left incomplete, so that even though there is an investigation, the legal penalties are either not imposed or are insufficient. Lastly, the practice of taking preventive measures, such as suspending State employees under investigation for serious violations or crimes from their jobs or from some of their duties, is unheard of. 75. The case of José Obdulio Villanueva, former member of the Presidential staff, is a good example of this situation: although accused in the death of Pedro Haroldo Sas Rompiche, he is still an officer in the army. There have also been cases where the Office of Professional Accountability of the National Police has investigated policemen accused of human rights violations and proved that they were responsible without imposing any punishment whatsoever on them. In other cases which might appear more like crimes, the police forwarded the records to the Public Prosecutor’s Office for criminal proceedings to be started without taking the above-mentioned preventive measures, thus basically preventing administrative sanctions from being imposed until the result of the case is known. In the Public Prosecutor’s Office, some cases have been proved where officials, even though they were defendants in criminal cases or were under administrative indictment, carried on with their jobs as before. In the judiciary, the case of the former secretary of the magistrate’s court in San Ildefonso Ixtahuacán, Huehuetenango, stands out: he has a decision by the Counsel for Human Rights hanging over him which gives an account of his possible criminal liability for crimes committed in the course of his duties, and yet for several months he went on carrying out his tasks as an officer of the judiciary. 76. Verification of the right to due process has shown that in many cases the lack of inter-agency coordination is limiting the scope of criminal trials in the sense that only the actual perpetrators, or the lower levels and street soldiers of organized crime, are found guilty, while the instigators remain unidentified. 77. An example of this is the case of Fernando Miculax Tuctuc, who was sentenced during this period and has various kidnapping cases against him. The case of Beverly Sandoval is also worth mentioning; he has 11 similar cases against him. In none of the above cases has there been any progress in identifying the instigators. 78. That situations like these persist despite the efforts deployed makes it possible for illicit associations with links to kidnapping, drug trafficking and other ordinary crimes to continue in existence; most of these associations could not function without the tolerance or acquiescence of State officials (A/52/330, para. 56). Impunity is also the common denominator in cases of “social cleansing”, regardless of whether State employees may have taken part. 79. Within its general mandate of verifying respect for the due process guarantees, the Mission has identified those cases in which there has been a request for the National Reconciliation Act to be applied in order to extinguish criminal liability. It should be pointed out that no accusations have been received that the benefits of the Act are being applied wrongly or too extensively. Commitment IV. Commitment that there are no illegal security forces and clandestine structures; regulation of the bearing of arms 80. During the period under review, the Mission learned of cases of human rights violations which had taken place in the context of the campaign against organized crime. In these cases, unidentified persons dressed in civilian clothes, whose actions showed a high degree of organization and who were well armed, took part in anti-kidnapping operations during which enforced disappearances took place. This was the case in an incident of 11 September 1997 involving Isaac Valdés Mayén and Ricardo II Figueroa, persons who had been linked to the kidnapping of a Danish businessman (see para. 34 ff.). The same thing happened in the case of three young men, Julio Enrique Albanés Silva, Edy Norberto Beteta Pineda and José Alberto Soto Galicia, who had been identified as members of a band of kidnappers and were arrested on 7 November 1997, after which date they disappeared. In none of these cases have the government authorities acknowledged taking any part whatsoever, nor have the investigations carried out by the competent authorities succeeded in shedding any light on them. 81. As it did in its previous report (A/52/330, paras. 67-68), the Mission regards as serious and disturbing the recurrence of such acts, which show signs characteristic of the activity of security forces employing illegal methods. The verification of these activities indicates that they are carried out with at least the acquiescence or tolerance of government authorities. Such practices have hindered investigation and clarification of the facts and obstructed the determination of responsibility and the prosecution and punishment of all those who may be involved in these reprehensible crimes. 82. During the period under review, the Mission received complaints about the activities of an illegal security body calling itself “Guardians of the Neighbourhood”, operating in Zaculeu Central, Zones 8, 9 and 10 of Huehue-Tenango. Verification showed that this group, which consisted of several dozen persons led by a former member of a Voluntary Civil Defence Committee, assumed the functions of a State body, carried out patrols and assigned itself the role of the “protection of citizens”, all this with the professed goal of putting an end to crime. In this context, it was determined that the group carried out illegal detentions and the mistreatment of a number of citizens. Although it has ceased operating since August 1997, it is known that the Ministry of the Interior has been requested to approve its operation. Information has also been received that former civilian patrols are being reorganized, but there has been no indication that these groups are operational. 83. The Mission also received reports concerning the activities of a number of irregular armed groups. In the departments of Sololá, Suchitepéquez and Chimaltenango, at least two groups have announced their existence and activity. One of them, calling itself the “Armed Rebel Movement”, issued a communiqué in recent months in which it presented itself as “one of the alternatives for helping to put an end to social injustice in the country”, at the same time announcing its decision to “attack all the groups of criminals, bandits and corrupt authorities and officials found at every level”. Two other groups were operating in the departments of Quetzaltenango and Retalhuleu. It has not been possible to determine their composition or activities with any certainty, although the Mission has been informed that they have been linked to various attacks and other criminal activities. 84. During the last three months, the Mission verified 10 cases of murder committed in La Libertad, Petén, in which the means employed by those presumed responsible and what was known about the persons killed indicated that these were extrajudicial executions carried out as a part of “social cleansing” operations. The throats of two of the victims were cut, one was decapitated and the others, including a young boy, were shot to death. One of the bodies was found with its hands tied behind its back and a note reading “We are sorry, but this has to be done because it is our job to cleanse communities ...”. After the executions, all the bodies were taken to the town of Vista Hermosa, and several of them were thrown in front of the houses of persons who had also been threatened. In fact, the executions began after a first list of “persons condemned to death” was circulated in which the persons listed were accused of being bandits. 85. This illegal group then went on to kill the persons named in the list one after another, frightening others into fleeing the town. Threats were also made against the parents of those listed, telling them not to protect their children if they wished to go on living. The Mission learned that the group travelled in three well-trained and well-armed units of eight, wearing dark clothing, with their faces covered with ski masks. After committing a murder they left a note saying that “they were sorry, but it was necessary to cleanse the town and there were many people still left”. These murders terrified the population because of their special cruelty. In one case the victim was killed in the presence of his young son, who was left abandoned next to the body until it was found. In two other cases the victims’ throats were cut while they were still alive and their tongues were cut out. These acts traumatized the population. 86. The last incident recorded occurred on 28 March in the neighbourhood of Cooperativa El Arbolito, Petén. A note was found there saying, “Within 24 hours we are going to cleanse the cooperative of marijuana smokers and thieves, especially those of Arbolito. Don’t leave – if you do, we will start with you. UTIC.”This “social cleansing” group was made up, among others, of two former army officers who had been the heads of Voluntary Civil Defence Committees. As part of the verification of this incident, reports are being checked that the places in which the bodies have appeared are the same as those in which the army has recently stepped up its patrols. 87. In this context, the authorities’ reaction has been clearly insufficient, as only the National Civil Police has shown an interest in investigating the situation. Moreover, owing to the fear which it has instilled, the victims’ families often do not even demand the bodies. Since the deployment of the National Civil Police in the department of Petén in November 1997, crime rates have fallen in areas where a permanent police presence has been introduced. Conversely, crime rates have risen in areas such as the so-called Bethel Route, La Libertad, which are far from police stations. In addition, the Mission is verifying other similar situations, such as that of four young people who were murdered on 22 September on the highway leading to Ciudad Quetzal, and the case of a known “marero” (gang member) who was murdered on 18 June in Melchor de Mencos, Petén, in the presence of at least two witnesses, who were subsequently executed. 88. Article 38 of the Guatemalan Political Constitution recognizes the right to possess and bear arms. Like many of the rights established in the Constitution, this right is not without limits, but is subject to legal and judicial restrictions. For the regulation of this right, article 38 should be interpreted in the light of article 3, which imposes on the State the duty to protect the life, integrity and security of persons, and in the light of statistical studies showing that the proliferation of weapons causes the death or injury of innocent people much more often than it serves its legitimate purpose of defence. This is the basis for the concern expressed by the parties to the peace process in Commitment IV of the Comprehensive Agreement. 89. In this connection, the Mission found that, during the second half of 1997, the legal and illegal proliferation of firearms in the country continued, with obvious consequences for the Government’s public safety policies. Although the authorities responsible for transferring the records of the army’s Arms and Munitions Control Department to the Ministry of the Interior have stated that they do not have exact figures on this increase, information reported in the media indicates that both the purchase and sale of firearms and imports of ammunition increased considerably in the final months of the year. Commitment VII: Commitment to safeguard and protect individuals and entities working for the protection of human rights 90. In its preceding report (A/52/330, para. 74), the Mission indicated that it had noted a decline in the number of complaints concerning this commitment. Nevertheless, during the reporting period there was an increase in complaints of threats and intimidation against individuals and entities working for the protection of human rights in various parts of the country. 91. For example, in Chajul, El Quiché, anonymous pamphlets containing threats against the Asociación Chajulense and Rosolino Biancetti, a parish priest, were circulated in July. In September, María Elena Bustamante, a member of the Alliance against Impunity, heard shots fired near her home and received a visit from two strangers who said that they belonged to the Secretariat of the President’s Office. 92. Other examples of this situation are the events surrounding the exhumations carried out in Panzós, Alta Verapaz. On 11 September, the Guatemalan forensic anthropology team reported that a group of unknown persons in a pick-up truck parked across from the hotel where the team was staying in El Estor, Izabal, repeatedly called to the team’s photographer, asking him to come and speak with them, but he did not do so. A few days later, the photographer was coerced by a group of strangers into handing over a number of photographs. Both the forensic anthropology team and the members of the Brigadas para la Paz (Peace Brigades) and of the Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos de Guatemala (Families of Disappeared Detainees in Guatemala) (FAMDEGUA) witnessed these acts, which they believe were intended to intimidate the anthropologists. A specialist from the FAMDEGUA committee on clandestine cemeteries reported this information to the press on 22 September 1997. 93. Also in September, shots were fired from a moving vehicle across from the cemetery of the city of Panzós, where the exhumation was being carried out, while the families of the victims and members of the Coordinadora de Viudas Maya Achí (Maya Achí Widows’ Coordinating Committee) were celebrating a Mayan ceremony. 94. On 22 November, two human rights workers, Felipa Toj Gómez and Manuela Macaria Morales, who belong to the “Runujel Junam” Council of Ethnic Communities (CERJ), reported to the press that they had been forced to leave their home in the municipality of Chinique, El Quiché. According to CERJ, a group of six heavily armed men wearing hoods and olive-green clothing similar to army uniforms threatened to kill the two activists. CERJ believes that this incident is related to the threats which had been made by two members of the community in which the women live, who had accused them of belonging to URNG. IV. Final observations 95. Today, one of the main factors militating against the enjoyment of human rights in Guatemala is criminal violence. The Mission acknowledges the State’s efforts to improve the administration of justice and the deployment of the National Civil Police in various departments of the country, but also notes that serious shortcomings persist with respect to the investigation, prosecution and punishment of offenders. The process of modernizing the justice sector is and will continue to be a long-term undertaking that will require a sustained commitment on the part of the State and society. At the same time, it is important to stress that, slow and frustrating as this process may be, these problems can never justify recourse to illegal methods or to the practice of taking justice into one’s own hands. The Mission, which has already commented on the lynchings that have taken place (A/52/330, para. 62), reiterates its belief that this phenomenon, like the cases of “social cleansing” and the possible resurgence of illegal security forces and irregular armed groups, is fundamentally incompatible with the rule of law. These phenomena, which account for some of the criminal violence and which exacerbate the sufferings of the Guatemalan people, should be given priority on the State’s security agenda. 96. To prevent an increase in recourse to lynchings and “social cleansing” operations, which are encouraged by the fact that they go unpunished, the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the police should coordinate their efforts to prevent such acts and to investigate and prosecute their instigators and perpetrators. Social, political, intellectual and spiritual leaders also have an essential role to play in preventing these phenomena. They should strive to create a culture of non-violence, particularly for the benefit of new generations. 97. The Public Prosecutor’s Office and the police should redouble their efforts to combat organized crime, for which purpose it is legitimate to maintain confidentiality where necessary for the effectiveness of their investigations. However, it is imperative that this effort should be carried out within the framework of the law and without tolerance of or participation in illegal or clandestine methods, which give rise to serious human rights violations. 98. In order to win the population’s trust and collaboration, the police must eradicate tolerance and inertia with respect to abuses and excesses committed by its agents, through the application of effective measures or sanctions in response to these phenomena. To this end, it is necessary to design and implement a decentralized internal oversight system which is accessible to ordinary citizens and through which complaints can be investigated promptly and preventive and punitive administrative measures can be taken and reported to the complainants, without prejudice to the possibility of prosecuting such agents in the courts and cooperating with related criminal investigations. 99. Likewise, to ensure that the institution is not held responsible for illegal acts committed individually by its members or former members, the army should cooperate actively with the competent State agencies to elucidate such acts and punish their perpetrators, and should issue clear instructions to its members to refrain from committing any act that could affect the independence and impartiality of the courts or obstruct official investigations. 100. With respect to the army’s involvement in public safety efforts, the relevant legislation (Government Decree No. 90-96) should be made more precise so as to establish clearly the transitory nature of such involvement and to reaffirm that the civilian authorities, headed by the Minister of the Interior and the departmental governors, are in charge of such matters. 101. The Mission reiterates the unavoidable need to regulate the sale of firearms and to ensure that the competent authorities effectively supervise the exercise of the right to use, possess and bear arms. In this connection, it is important to make further progress in complying with paragraph 33 of the Agreement on the Strengthening of Civilian Power and on the Role of the Armed Forces in a Democratic Society, which concerns the promotion of the reform of the Arms and Munitions Act. 102. To ensure the effectiveness of efforts to combat impunity with respect to violations and offences, the State institutions concerned must coordinate their actions not only in terms of investigating, prosecuting and punishing the culprits, but also in terms of providing minimum safety guarantees for judges, prosecutors, witnesses and other participants in such trials. The Mission hopes that, with the establishment of the Coordinating Authority for the Modernization of the Justice Sector, progress will be made towards the effective coordination of these institutions at the operational and/or territorial levels. In this connection, it is vitally important to adopt the necessary administrative and budgetary measures to ensure the effective implementation of the Act for the Protection of Persons Involved in the Conduct of Judicial Proceedings and Persons Linked to the Administration of Criminal Justice. 103. To avoid excessive delays in judicial proceedings, which foster a perception of impunity on the part of the population, the Mission believes it is necessary to promote administrative and legal initiatives to avoid lengthy appeals processes which are without merit, as in the case of applications for amparo with respect to judicial decisions, and to provide for appropriate sanctions against those who file appeals in a manner which distorts their purpose. 104. The Mission believes that, to correct the shortcomings identified with respect to the right of defence at trial, it is necessary to increase the number of public defenders and court interpreters. 105. In view of the disturbing increase in threats against individuals working for the promotion and protection of human rights, the Mission makes a special appeal to the authorities to guarantee full compliance with the commitment to take special measures to protect such persons, particularly in view of the forthcoming publication of the final report of the Commission to Clarify Past Human Rights Violations and Acts of Violence That Have Caused the Guatemalan Population to Suffer. 106. To ensure that the right of assembly of neighbourhood groups wishing to form committees or associations in the municipalities is no longer affected by obstacles which are generated, for the most part, by the complexity of the regulations in force and by widespread ignorance of their mechanisms and purposes (to promote, and not obstruct, the exercise of this right), it is advisable to clarify and disseminate these regulations and to eliminate unnecessary requirements for the recognition of forms of association. 107. With respect to the State’s obligation to create the conditions necessary for the exercise of political rights, the Mission urges the Government to adopt appropriate legal and administrative measures to ensure the efficient implementation of the Temporary Special Act on Personal Documentation. 108. In the interest of enhancing compliance with the commitment to promoting and perfecting norms and mechanisms for the protection of human rights, the Mission urges the Government to deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations its instrument of ratification of the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, by means of a special declaration, to recognize the competence of the Committee against Torture and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to receive communications from individuals. These actions will enable persons within the jurisdiction of the State of Guatemala to submit communications to the Human Rights Committee, the Committee against Torture and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 109. The Mission, which has observed with concern the successive postponements of the entry into force of the Code on Children and Youth, urges the relevant institutions and Guatemalan society to ensure that any amendments introduced prior to the Code’s final entry into force are in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which Guatemala is a party. Likewise, it urges the institutions concerned to revive the debate on the adoption law. 110. In relation to the commitment to foster, in the international community, recognition of enforced or involuntary disappearances as crimes against humanity, the Mission considers that the time has come for the Government to complete the process of ratifying the Inter-American Convention on Forced Disappearance of Persons of 9 June 1994 by depositing the relevant instruments with the Organization of American States. 111. The strengthening of the State’s capacity to meet its obligations with respect to human rights is inseparable from the mobilization of national resources for the institutions responsible for public safety and the administration of justice. This means that the justice sector and the Office of the Counsel for Human Rights must be given the resource base they need to pursue the process of reform and modernization. It is essential that the resource allocations in the preliminary draft budget for 1999 should reflect the priority to be given to efforts to ensure public safety and to combat impunity. It is also important that the State and the population should become aware of the need to provide a fiscal basis for the modernization and democratization of the State, so as to guarantee the viability of these processes. Appendix Statistics on human rights violations during the period from 1 July 1997 to 31 March 1998 Complaints admitted Violations alleged verified* confirmed* Extrajudicial executions or deaths in violation of legal guarantees Attempted extrajudicial executions Death threats Total Torture Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment Ill-treatment Excessive use of force Other threats Arbitrary detention Detention in violation of legal guarantees Kidnapping Hostage-taking Enforced disappearance Forcible, unjust or discriminatory recruitment Right to due process Right to be presumed innocent Right to be judged by a competent, independent and impartial judge Right to be tried within a reasonable time Right to defence and to be assisted by a lawyer Right to be assisted by an interpreter Right not to be compelled to testify against oneself Right of appeal Right of habeas corpus Right of access to the justice system Obstruction of the work of the National Police, the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the judiciary Legal duty of the State to investigate and punish Right to compensation Legal guarantees for the victim Right to have access to public service Right to be registered on the electoral roll Right to vote Right to hold political office Right to freedom of association and assembly Right to freedom of association Right to organize Freedom of assembly Right to freedom of movement and residence Deprivation of documents Enforced population displacement Freedom of movement Grand total * Some cases opened in other periods are included in these figures. The calculations are based on the date the violation was verified. 