%%%LANDMINES|EXPLOSIVES|

GROUP OF GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS OF THE STATES PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION ON PROHIBITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS WHICH MAY BE DEEMED TO BE EXCESSIVELY INJURIOUS OR TO HAVE INDISCRIMINATE EFFECTS CCW/GGE/VI/WG.2/WP.6 ENGLISH Original: Sixth session Geneva, 17-24 November 2003 Agenda item 9 Working Group on Mines Other Than Anti-Personnel Mines Improvised explosive devices Prepared by the Russian Federation 1. In the opinion of the Russian Federation, the inhumane character of landmines other than anti-personnel mines (MOTAPMs), when used by the regular armed forces, as far as the civilian population is concerned, is to a large extent exaggerated. That has been proved not only by our own experience of hostilities and special operations in recent years, but also by the experience of the armies of other countries. 2. It has been also confirmed by the data provided by ICRC on the number of MOTAPMs rendered harmless by different demining organizations between 1993 and 2000. MOTAPMs constitute no more than 2-6 per cent of the total number of these mines. We can state with confidence that today the overwhelming number of losses among military personnel and the civilian population during and after armed conflicts are caused by improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and anti-personnel mines. 3. At the previous session of the Group of Governmental Experts the Russian delegation submitted several observations concerning the nature of the current use of IEDs, taking into account experience in counter-terrorist operations in the Chechen Republic. It was pointed out that the data provided by different non-governmental organizations on vehicles carrying civilians and humanitarian cargo which were blown up using MOTAPMs were not fully substantiated. GE.03-65194 (E) 211103 211103 4. According to various statements, blowing up of transport vehicles was largely attributable to MOTAPMs. But no one confirmed these conclusions by means of documentary evidence proving that the incidents that occurred were caused by that type of mines and not by other explosive devices. 5. It should be taken into account in this context that even for explosives experts it is rather difficult to identify the type of a device when it has already exploded. Experience in the Russian Federation proves that only highly skilled experts using up-to-date instruments can carry out this kind of analysis. But even in such cases there will still remain certain doubts about the conclusions. 6. In the opinion of the Russian Federation, there is a growing tendency for unofficial armed formations and terrorist groups to use improvised explosive devices on a mass scale. This has been proved, for instance, by reports in the mass media on the number and nature of explosions which have destroyed military vehicles in Iraq. Analysis of those reports demonstrates with a high degree of probability that IEDs were used for blowing up vehicles in practically all cases there. 7. In this connection, we consider it important to draw the attention of the members of the Group once again to the urgent need for a thorough study of the humanitarian danger of improvised explosive devices, with a view to finding possible ways of resolving this problem. 