%%%NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|ARMS LIMITATION|TERRORISM|

CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT ENGLISH FINAL RECORD OF THE NINE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH PLENARY MEETING Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, on Thursday, 23 January 2003, at 10.25 a.m. President: Mr. Rakesh Sood (India) GE.03-60190 (E) 050203 170203 : I declare open the 916th plenary meeting of the Conference on Disarmament. At the outset, allow me to extend a warm welcome, on behalf of this Conference and on my own personal behalf, to the Foreign Secretary of India, His Excellency Mr. Kanwal Sibal, who will address the Conference today. His presence among us today is a testimony of his personal interest in our work and the long-lasting commitment of the Government of India to the Conference on Disarmament. I am sure that his statement will be followed with great interest by us all. I also have on my list of speakers for today Ambassador Lint of Belgium, who will speak on behalf of the five former presidents of the Conference, Ambassador Dembri of Algeria, Ambassador Vega of Chile, Ambassador Reyes of Colombia, and Ambassador Salander of Sweden, and himself, of course. In addition, I have Ambassador Dembri of Algeria as a speaker for today and Ambassador Miranda of Spain. I now invite the Foreign Secretary of India, His Excellency Mr. Kanwal Sibal, to address the Conference. Mr. SIBAL (India): Mr. President, thank you for the warm welcome extended to me. It is a special pleasure for me to be here at this time, when India holds the presidency of the Conference on Disarmament, at the beginning of 2003, a critical juncture when new concerns and uncertainties loom large on the international security scene and, therefore, for your deliberations. The Conference on Disarmament is a unique institution, evolving during the cold war and emerging as the sole multilateral negotiating forum in the field of disarmament. Its origins lie in the Ten-Nation Committee on Disarmament established in the 1950s, with representatives from opposing military blocs. With the early induction of a small number of neutral and non-aligned countries, a more resilient and representative forum emerged that has become progressively multilateral in character in succeeding decades. The ideological conflict of the erstwhile superPowers and their allies was a fact of daily life in the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament and its successor bodies. The Cuban missile crisis, war in Afghanistan and the deployment of intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe, were some of the moments during the cold war when confrontation levels rose and tensions escalated. And in the Council Chamber, negotiations stalled, replaced by rhetoric. The significance of this institution lay in the engagement of key players, however, reflecting a desire for stability, and this engagement, in the final analysis, strengthened multilateralism. With the end of the cold war began a change in which new threats have emerged. After 11 September 2001, the Western countries, led by the United States of America, have become acutely aware of the threat posed by international terrorism, recognition of which was absent earlier. Terrorism itself is not a new phenomenon. In the last century, we witnessed leftwing and right-wing terrorism as well as terrorism to promote secessionist claims or redress perceived wrongs and injustices by recourse to violence even against the innocent. Today's terrorism is different, however, in its scale, in its targets, in the nature of its cause and the identification of the enemy. Its roots lie in fundamentalism; its target is modern civilization, democracy, pluralism and an individual's basic right to think and act independently. It nourishes its sense of false grievance against the world through intense religious propaganda, fed by a distorted reading of history and an exaggerated sense of its own capacity to resist its course. Finances are raised globally, as are its recruits. The global terrorist finds refuge not only in places and regions where sovereignty is weak and lacking, in failed States and States that are adrift, where Governments are neither legitimate nor effective, but the networks of terrorism exist all over, even in developed countries. Some Governments consciously use terrorism as an instrument of State policy. The technical means and sophisticated planning of these networks show that they exploit the inter-connectivity of the globalized world to their advantage. This new terrorism is both a physical phenomenon and a mindset. The physical phenomenon can be dealt with more easily than the mindset, but it is the mindset that continues to provide new recruits to this menace even as elements of it are physically eliminated. In our immediate neighbourhood we have seen this phenomenon grow for many years, spawned in the mujahidin training camps and the madrasahs. In the early 1990s, al-Qa'idah emerged and in 1998 Osama bin Laden established an international front for terror, with terrorist groups operating out of several countries. Many of these groups are now banned nationally and internationally, but the Western world became aware of the magnitude of the threat only after the 11 September attacks. The large number of innocent victims of the attacks and their undetected meticulous planning in Western countries has forced democracies the world over to re-examine their laws, security doctrines and their institutions. How are societies to be protected against such threats, especially against a growing possibility that such attacks in future may also involve the use of weapons of mass destruction? How can such attacks be deterred? How can these determined terrorists be disarmed? Faced with threats which are anonymous or non-State, and unpredictable, what is the legitimate action that deters, and failing that, what constitutes legitimate force? Who does one coerce and with whom does one negotiate? How does the international community prevent failing States from becoming black holes that spread instability and chaos? How does the international community develop a consensus to deal with sovereign States whose policies, social ethos and institutions breed the mindset that sustains this kind of international terrorism? It is relevant to recall that, for the first time in history, both the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council unanimously recognized the necessity for a military response to the 11 September terrorist attacks. NATO followed by invoking article V of the North Atlantic Treaty, on collective security. The United States too declared war against global terror. It was no longer a question of crime prevention or law enforcement. In democratic societies the bar for legitimacy in exercise of force is set high and parliament, the judiciary, the media and civil society provide restraint and oversight on executive authority. How does this square with the pre-emptive exercise of force, especially when it is based on real-time intelligence, which is a highly perishable commodity? Clearly, a decision to treat countering terrorism as "war" rather than law enforcement changes the paradigm and new questions arise about the nature of the threat as well as the means of dealing with it. All these questions do not strictly fall within the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament but it is time that this body took cognizance of the new security threats that have emerged. There is now a frightening link between these new threats and the old threats that have been the staple of the Conference in the past. States that use terrorism as a policy instrument today possess weapons of mass destruction and fears have been expressed about the danger of their weapons falling into the hands of terrorist outfits. Such States are today collaborating in transfers of nuclear and missile technologies, gravely endangering the security of democracies. It is a matter of regret that such serious challenges to international security are not being addressed with the rigour that they demand. We do not seem to have any viable long-term alternatives for dealing with these new threats. There exists a growing realization that no single country, acting alone, can deal with them. Multilateral action to discern threats before they emerge and united fronts to deter and defend against such threats are required. Moral clarity is necessary. No terrorist can be a freedom fighter. There is no acceptable terrorism - irrespective of whether the terrorist acts are committed in New York or Bali, Jammu and Kashmir or Chechnya. We need to put our heads together and come up with practical measures and the necessary legally binding instruments that will prevent terrorists of all hues from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. The Indian-sponsored resolution on measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, which was adopted by consensus by the United Nations at its fifty-seventh session, was an initiative to seek collective action. I understand that, at a seminar held in this room only last month, many of you looked at the FMCT as a possible step that could help prevent fissile materials from falling into the hands of terrorists. This aspect was not under consideration when the concept of an FMCT was originally mooted. The Conference on Disarmament does, however, have the inherent flexibility to adapt to new developments. India is committed to participating actively in the much awaited FMCT negotiations in this forum, as announced by the Prime Minister of India soon after our nuclear tests in 1998. Our position is based on the fact that India is not seeking a nuclear arms race with any other nuclear Power. We exercised our nuclear option, without violating any international obligation, in order to deter any nuclear threats that would have compromised our national security and our strategic autonomy, necessary for pursuing the development goals of our people. We have a well defined nuclear doctrine. It reaffirms India's commitment that it will not be the first to use nuclear weapons and would not use these weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States. The entirely defensive doctrine is buttressed by a command and control system which is fully under civilian political authority. Regrettably, our own region is confronted with aggressive nuclear posturing and irresponsible threats of the use of nuclear weapons by military leadership. Our doctrine also reaffirms India's readiness to join multilateral negotiations for the reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons, for an FMCT and for effective export controls. As has been stated before, India is ready to multilateralize its no-first-use commitment so as to lower the salience of nuclear weapons in the strategic realm. The residual threats of their accidental and unauthorized use can be addressed by moving towards the progressive de-alerting of nuclear forces. These measures should be within our grasp, given the non-adversarial relations among the major Powers. At the ninetieth session of the Indian Science Congress, held in Bangalore earlier this month, the President of India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, a well-known space scientist, unveiled a vision for a global space community and the potential that space technology offers in dealing with man-planet conflict areas, namely, crises in energy, environment, ecology, water and mineral resources, as the world moves towards a knowledge-based society. In calling for a common minimum global space mission to address these issues, he cautioned: "Above all, we must recognize the necessity for the world's space community to avoid terrestrial geopolitical conflict being drawn into outer space, thus threatening the space assets belonging to all mankind." We would like to see the early commencement of negotiations to prevent an arms race in outer space. We would not like to see outer space weaponized as a consequence of the ongoing revolution in military affairs, a development which has then to be chased by follow-on disarmament measures. In the interest of substantive work commencing in this Conference, we are, however, willing to consider, in a spirit of flexibility, a less than negotiating mandate on this subject, without necessarily ruling out the possibility of future negotiations. India's commitment to global nuclear disarmament within a time-bound framework has not diminished because of our pursuit of a minimum credible deterrent. This Conference has to find practical ways to address the issue of nuclear disarmament in a comprehensive and nondiscriminatory manner, as it was mandated to do by the United Nations General Assembly at its tenth special session. In doing so, we need to go beyond the futile exercise of the past century that sought to perpetuate the asymmetric advantage of a handful of countries at the expense of collective global security. We have always held that a discriminatory treaty will not be effective and will collapse, owing to its own inherent contradictions and flaws. Let us remind ourselves in this context that this is a Conference on Disarmament and not a "Conference on NonProliferation". While finding ways of dealing with new threats, it is important to remember that the old threats have not disappeared - the existential threat posed by nuclear weapons is yet to be dealt with; outer space is yet to be secured as the common heritage of mankind. The threat of radiological weapons seems more real today with the spectre of the "dirty bomb" than it did two decades ago. Moreover, developments in the biotechnology field remind us that treaties cannot remain static in a world driven by technology. Treaties need to keep pace with changing reality, whether political or technological, in order to retain validity. And in all of this, multilateral approaches are the only viable approaches. Even where we perceive inadequacies in multilateral agreements, the answer lies in pursuing solutions through the multilateral route rather than resorting to further ad hoc technology controls. The experience with such ad hoc controls has been that responsible developing countries adhering to the rule of law and transparent policies are then constrained, but not the clandestine proliferators. These become instruments of coercion against societies eager to develop and move up the development ladder but prove ineffective against those who genuinely threaten peace and stability. It is just a decade since the Chemical Weapons Convention was opened for signature in Paris in January 1993. The CWC remains the only international instrument to outlaw an entire category of weapons of mass destruction comprehensively, verifiably and without discrimination. This year will see the first Review Conference of the CWC, which provides the occasion to ensure that the principal prohibitions and obligations of this Convention are respected and implemented with the cooperation of all the States parties. We should also stand guard against extraneous demands in the course of the Review Conference, lest it fall into the disarray which befell the Biological Weapons Convention in its review process. India has consistently advocated that the Conference on Disarmament should engage in substantive work. It is for this reason that India expressed support for the Amorim proposal in 2000, which brought us close to agreeing on a programme of work. In 2002, we were similarly motivated to extend support to the cross-group initiative of the five ambassadors, in the hope that it could bridge the gap between key players to overcome this deadlock. Despite all the sabre-rattling from different quarters - and perhaps because of the very provocative nature of recent events in the international arena - we have every reason to make the Conference on Disarmament work. We cannot afford to allow the Conference to be suspended or to atrophy because of the hurdles that obstruct it or because our frustrations tempt us to throw up our hands in resignation. Diplomacy, particularly multilateral diplomacy, requires us to keep our faith and patience while seeking solutions. The role of the Conference on Disarmament is to negotiate legal instruments that have significant and long-lasting collective security benefits. Any discussion that is undertaken in this body, based on the agreed agenda, has therefore to be with that objective in mind. If there is evidence of necessary political will in the concerned quarters, the Conference on Disarmament can resume its intended role. Mr. President, I am sure that you will spare no efforts during your term to overcome the prevailing differences among key countries and to seek a positive outcome that will enable this Conference to have a productive 2003. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Foreign Secretary for his important statement and for his kind words. I am sure that his statement has given us considerable food for thought. I now give the floor to Ambassador Lint of Belgium. Mr. LINT (Belgium) (translated from French): Mr. President, I am taking the floor today on behalf of Ambassador Dembri of Algeria, Ambassador Vega of Chile, Ambassador Reyes of Colombia, Ambassador Salander of Sweden and on my own behalf, the group of diplomats known in this Conference as the five ambassadors. Thus, on our behalf, I would like first of all to congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the Conference on Disarmament and to thank you and your predecessors, Ambassador Volker Heinsberg of Germany and Ambassador András Szabó of Hungary, for the encouragement that you have always given us in our initiative. We would also like to salute the efforts made by Ambassador Reimaa of Finland to get the work of this Conference under way. You may rest assured, Sir, of our full cooperation in your endeavours to move the Conference out of its current impasse. The statement by the United Nations SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, read to us at our meeting on 21 January by Mr. Ordzhonikidze, SecretaryGeneral of the Conference on Disarmament, lent close support to our initiative and gives us great encouragement at the very time when we are making our proposal official. Indeed, after many consultations and with your agreement, we are today officially submitting our proposal, which is to be found in document CD/1693. We believe that this text offers a realistic and constructive approach to the adoption of a programme of work. I would like here to remind you of the origins and the content of that proposal. Two important statements on the future of the Conference on Disarmament were made on 13 September 2001, after the tragic events in the United States. I shall read them in the original English as they appear in document CD/PV.888. In their farewell statements, our American and Brazilian colleagues spoke, successively, as follows. First, Ambassador Gray of the United States said: (continued in English) "Successive presidents of the Conference built on each other's insights, eventually producing a plausible mechanism for getting the Conference back to work. Yet this accretive and progressive process effectively ended on 24 August 2000, when Ambassador Celso Amorim of Brazil tabled the work programme proposals contained in CD/1624. If we do not move collectively to grasp that opportunity soon, this institution will become even more irrelevant in the future than it has been for the last four years and, inevitably, the business of disarmament will shift to other venues." (continued in French) Ambassador Amorim, currently Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil, said: "When looking at the report of the 2001 annual session, I am seized by an ambivalent feeling. On the one hand, I feel honoured to see that we are recommending that document CD/1624 [...] will remain a reference text for the Conference in its search for consensus on a programme of work. On the other hand, the mere fact that this document remains on the table, after more than one year has elapsed, is evidence of our collective failure. And nobody likes to be associated with failure." These statements set the tone and the extent of our discussions in 2002. On 30 May 2002, our Brazilian colleague, Ambassador Celina Valle Pereira, faced with the lack of movement in the Conference, stated, as recorded in document PV/903: continued in English) "Although accepted by the Conference as a basis for consultations on the possible adoption of a work programme, the Amorim proposal nonetheless became a device for stalling the resumption of work by the Conference." On 20 June 2002, Ambassador Hubert de La Fortelle of France, then president of the Conference, said: "Let us pay careful heed: unless it is saved by a sudden resumption of activity, the day might come when this theatre closes its doors, perhaps forever. We would have nothing to gain thereby and probably everything to lose." At the time the group of ambassadors had been considering a first option for work, which took the form of a decision to be taken by the Conference on Disarmament to set up ad hoc committees - without defining their mandate - on the following issues: nuclear disarmament; a treaty prohibiting the production of fissile material for arms manufacture and other nuclear explosive devices; prevention of an arms race in outer space; and effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of those weapons. This idea was abandoned because it ran into problems with the rules of procedure contained in document CD/8/Rev.8* of 17 August 1999, which, in article 23, states: "[...] the Conference may establish subsidiary bodies [...] The Conference shall define the mandate for each of such subsidiary bodies [...]". At the end of June 2002, we opted for another solution, which involved taking separate decisions on each of the four major issues before the Conference on Disarmament. Given the different regional sensibilities in the group and the fact that we are working on a compromise basis, it did however appear that this initiative was moving us towards drawing up a programme of work which would incorporate all those elements which all members of the Conference on Disarmament felt to be fundamental and which would continue along the line of previous proposals. That is why, when he introduced our first draft on 31 July 2002, Ambassador Dembri stated that this draft was not a new start: it was a draft that had clear links with all previous proposals. Nor, he pointed out, did our draft intend to propose a definitive text or one that was subject to any specific conditions: no, it needed to be further corrected, amended and supplemented by all delegations, so that ultimately it could evolve and be subject to substantive and formal amendments that would turn it into a text chosen by all and for all. On 29 August 2002, following many consultations and discussions in the Conference on Disarmament, our colleague, Ambassador Dembri, submitted an informal document which took into account all the improvements that had been submitted. That non-paper has since then received support from many delegations at the plenary meetings of the Conference on Disarmament in 2002 and we would like to thank them for their support. In their statements of support, most colleagues expressed their appreciation of the interregional and intergroup approach, pointing out that what made this initiative so unusual was that it had emerged from a group of countries which were concerned about disarmament. They felt that such a group was in an ideal position to represent the collective will of the international community in the field of disarmament because it went beyond any differences of interests. They also expressed their appreciation of the very thorough nature of the proposal. They pointed out that our proposal reflected all those issues before us which we had not been able to resolve over the last four years and, finally, that it was a forward-looking one and would be able to evolve over time. All delegations who spoke commended us on our efforts and declared themselves ready to work together with all the parties to draw up a programme of work. The text which has now been given official status is virtually identical to that which was read on 29 August 2002 by Minister Labbe from Chile. To take due account of the realities of our work, we made it clear in the last sentence of the presidential declaration that our efforts to achieve convergence would respect the rules of procedure. To sum up, the proposal provides for the establishment of four ad hoc committees, on negative security assurances; nuclear disarmament; a fissile-material cut-off treaty; and the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and the appointment of three special coordinators, entrusted with consultations on new types of weapons and weapon systems of mass destruction; a general disarmament programme; and transparency in armaments. The arguments set forth by our colleague Ambassador Dembri are still valid and I invite you to re-read them. You will find them in document CD/PV.912 of 29 August 2002. I would still like to repeat what my Algerian friend said, to ensure that there is absolutely no ambiguity about our initiative. Our group's initiative builds on other proposals designed to arrive at a programme of work acceptable by and for everybody. It is by no means our intention for our initiative to replace earlier proposals or to cast aspersions on them. Instead, it forms part of a sort of continuum of the initiatives that have been tabled thus far and endeavours to establish bridges between them. The sole concern of our group is to create a working climate conducive to openness, and exchange of views and dialogue, so that we can achieve the necessary evolving compromises which will enable the Conference to fulfil its mandate. In our proposal we have retained the presidential declaration, because it notes the positive effect of collective efforts to arrive at a programme of work and it recommends that the members of the Conference on Disarmament engage in dialogue in order to reach the necessary compromises. This is why all the provisions in our initiative, including the draft presidential declaration, are still subject to amendment and revision. During intersessional consultations we felt that, given the necessary political will, it would be possible to move forward in a positive direction towards a text that should be acceptable to all. We are convinced that, thanks to this document, which can further evolve and is not set in stone, agreement on a programme of work is clearly within our grasp and we would urge all parties to do their utmost to iron out as soon as possible their differences - which, in our view, are not that great - to enable this Conference to get back on the road The PRESIDENT: I thank the distinguished Ambassador of Belgium for his statement and for the kind words addressed to the Chair. I now give the floor to the distinguished representative of Algeria, Ambassador MohamedSalah Dembri. Mr. DEMBRI (Algeria) (translated from French): Mr. President, since my friend, Ambassador Lint, has congratulated you on behalf of our group, let me just assure you of our full support and cooperation in ensuring that your tenure brings benefit to the whole Conference on Disarmament. Strictly speaking, I do not really have a statement to make as such but, following on from Ambassador Lint, I would merely like to add a few elements which we can consider as we continue our work. In the last two days we have received some important messages. The first, as was pointed out in Ambassador Lint's statement, was from the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. While regretting the lack of progress in our work, he did, nonetheless, underscore the positive features which might lead us towards some positive and specific achievements and now, today, the distinguished speaker whom we have just heard, the Foreign Secretary of India, Mr. Sibal, has outlined for us the new elements of analysis and has described the current situation, identifying new postures, new concerns and new uncertainties, thus demonstrating to us the extent of the asymmetrical conflicts in the world today and the risks that these pose for the whole international community. By so doing, he has brought us facetoface with our responsibilities. It is for that reason that I simply wish to recall the two important points set forth by the message from the Ambassador of Belgium on behalf of the five former presidents of the Conference on Disarmament. The first relates to priorities: it is clear to us that the need to set out mandates and to appoint special coordinators is an absolute priority but there is no hierarchy among these mandates, whether on negative security assurances, nuclear disarmament, fissile materials or the prevention of an arms race in outer space. They are all at the same level of priority and this might ultimately make it possible for us to start working on one or another mandate, as we reach agreement on them, while awaiting agreement on the others. Clearly, if we were now to try and establish any priority among these mandates, we would soon discover that not everybody necessarily accords the same priority to the same mandate. The second point relates to the fact that this text can evolve. Clearly this text is not the Bible or the Koran, it is not the Gospel, or the Vedas - I could go on listing the holy texts. No: this is a human endeavour which can be improved upon as we all talk together and this is why discussion remains open. Of course there are hopes that we must express, hopes that all the resources of the Conference on Disarmament can be applied to ensure positive and creative work. This is something that we all need in these tense and difficult times. We must also ensure that the collegial nature of this forum is used to bring to the fore, not antagonism and contradiction, but the best achievements that our intellect and sense of commitment can bring us. Perhaps then the Conference on Disarmament - and here, with your permission, I shall rephrase the historic utterance of Winston Churchill, speaking about the United Nations - perhaps then the Conference on Disarmament will be able, not to bring us to heaven, but to save us from hell. The PRESIDENT: I thank the distinguished representative of Algeria for his statement and for the kind words and assurances of cooperation addressed to the Chair. I now give the floor to the distinguished representative of Spain, Ambassador Carlos Miranda. Mr. MIRANDA (Spain) (translated from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the Conference on Disarmament, although in truth it is ourselves we should be congratulating at having you at the helm of the Conference, because, in the short time I have been in Geneva, I have had many opportunities to admire your justly acclaimed personal and professional acumen. I hope that, during your presidency, we will be able to reach a consensus which enables us to embark on the substantive work of the Conference, or that we will at least be able to make significant progress towards such consensus, so necessary not only for the prestige, survival and effectiveness of the Conference on Disarmament but also for peace and stability in the world. Now that last sentence may sound somewhat pompous but, Mr. President, this is the very raison d'être of the Conference on Disarmament: to deal with and negotiate on issues which affect our collective security and thus strengthen peace and stability in the world through disarmament and arms control measures, reducing the risk of conflict and preventing arms races. For such has been its achievement in the past and this Conference does have a successful track record which should not be tarnished by the continuation of its current inactivity. The Conference has been stalled for a number of years and, in this new era of international relations ushered in by the fall in 1989 of the infamous Berlin Wall, it is unquestionably counterproductive and even dangerous that the Conference should not be engaged in dialogue on issues of substance, such as negotiations on issues which affect the security not only of its member States but also of all the other States which share this planet with us. Not all the member States of the Conference on Disarmament have an equal responsibility for this inexcusable impasse. Currently, there are major crises in the world which threaten its peace and stability and there has been a very real increase in the risk of the use of weapons of mass destruction, including by non-governmental agents and terrorists. The time has come, therefore, for all members of the Conference to make the necessary and indispensable efforts to ensure that the Conference gets back to work. I would now like to turn to the programme of work drawn up by the five ambassadors. Their proposal was already introduced orally by Ambassador Dembri, Ambassador Lint, Ambassador Reyes, Ambassador Salander and Ambassador Vega last August and I was able to convey my country's favourable reaction to that initiative in this forum on 3 September 2002. I stressed that the text was very balanced, as it was submitted by these five ambassadors representing five countries from different regional groups, and that they hoped in that way to form a bridge linking the various groups. They also demonstrated that there were countries in all regional groups which were anxious to relaunch the Conference on Disarmament and that those countries represented the majority in their respective groups. The five ambassadors have now decided to table their proposal in a formal manner. I believe that this is a wise and important decision because now no person and no country can pretend that the proposal does not exist or does not matter. I also believe that this proposal is not only balanced but also flexible and open to further evolution, as its authors assert. This means that the text does not necessarily have to remain crystallized in its present wording if it were necessary to amend it in any way, so as to achieve consensus. Spain can accept the proposal as currently worded. We believe the text reasonably covers all the concerns that the member States of this Conference have in matters of security and disarmament. Accordingly, Mr. President, my country, apart from offering its cooperation, would like to encourage all members of this Conference to make the necessary effort to accept this proposal or, if they wish to amend it, to do so constructively, so as to move positions closer together and not to raise insurmountable obstacles. The PRESIDENT: I thank the distinguished representative of Spain for his statement and for the kind words addressed to the Chair. That concludes my list of speakers for today. Does any delegation wish to take the floor at this stage? That does not appear to me to be the case. I would like to draw your attention to document CD/1692, which is before you. It contains a letter from the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations addressed to me in my capacity as President of the Conference, transmitting to this Conference all the resolutions on disarmament and international security matters adopted by the General Assembly at its fiftyseventh session, including those addressing specific requests to the Conference. The secretariat has informed me that all other language versions of this document are available at the documents distribution counter in room C111, just opposite the Council Chamber. As you are aware, in accordance with its decision contained in document CD/1036, the Conference shall hold two plenary meetings for the first two weeks of the annual session. Accordingly, the next plenary meeting of the Conference will be held on Tuesday, 28 January 2003, at 10 a.m. in this conference room. So far, I have one speaker on the list for this plenary, namely, Ambassador Sanders of the Netherlands. As I indicated to you earlier, I have been undertaking consultations and would like to enlarge the scope of these consultations. Therefore, on 28 January, after our formal plenary meeting, we will continue in an informal plenary setting in order to discuss ways and means of getting the Conference on Disarmament back to work. I hope that we will be able to have a fruitful and productive discussion. I have one procedural announcement to make, which is that I believe all of you have received an invitation for a reception that I am hosting this evening. The time indicated for the reception was 6.30 p.m. I would request that, as the Foreign Secretary of India has to catch a flight later in the evening today, we change the time and I therefore request you to come at 6 o'clock instead. Thank you very much for your understanding. The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m. 