%%%COUNTRY PROGRAMMES|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA|REPUBLIC OF KOREA|CARIBBEAN REGION|GUYANA|

First regular session 2004 23-30 January 2004, New York Item 5 of the provisional agenda Country programmes and related matters Extensions of country cooperation frameworks Note of the Administrator Summary The present note contains information on the first one-year extensions of the second country cooperation frameworks (CCFs) for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, and the first one-year extension of the first subregional cooperation framework (SCF) for the countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and Barbados. The Governments concerned requested the extensions. In accordance with established procedures, the Administrator approves the first one-year extension of CCFs, while requests for extension into a second year or two-year extensions are submitted to the Board for approval. Table 1 presents information on the first one-year CCF extensions approved by the Administrator since the last meeting of the Executive Board. The Executive Board may wish to take note of the first extensions of the second CCFs for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, and of the first extension of the first SCF for the countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and Barbados for a period of one year from 1 January 2004 to 31 December 2004, in table 1, and approve the two-year extension of the CCF for Guyana listed in table 2. Table 1. Extensions of CCFs approved by the Administrator since September 2003 Country Original CCF period Year proposed for new extension Reason and explanation United Nations harmonization In-country political development Implementation and/or other issues Democratic People's Republic of Korea More time is requested in order to complete ongoing development activities. Republic of Korea Since the Republic of Korea is a net contributor country, the country office defined a new cooperation modality through consultations and developed a revitalized trust fund, new partnership and future office presence for further discussions and eventual agreement with the Government. SCF for the countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and Barbados To allow the country office with other development partners and national Governments to build on ongoing programmes and activities aimed at strengthening the subregional integration process instrumental for future direction and targets of UNDP/OECS cooperation frameworks. Table 2. Extensions of CCFs for which the approval of the Executive Board is sought Years covered by original CCF Year covered by any extension already approved Year(s) proposed for new extension Extension 2nd one year Two years Other Guyana None X To align the UNDP programming period with the agreed United Nations programming cycle, scheduled to start in January 2006. 