%%%CONSULTATIVE STATUS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations Resumed 2003 session 15-19 December 2003 Quadrennial reports, 1998-2001, submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Addendum Contents Page 1. Centre Europe-Tiers Monde 2. Interfaith International 3. International Council of Chemical Associations 4. International Federation of Settlements and Neighbourhood Centres 5. International First Aid Society 6. MiraMed Institute 7. World Organization against Torture (General consultative status granted in 1988) * Report is being issued without formal editing. The organisation's background and present situation The Europe-Third World Centre (CETIM) was created in 1970 within the framework of the Association du Foyer John Knox (Geneva) and became independent on 17 June 1975. It is an international organisation that has no affiliation with any other NGO enjoying consultative status. It is connected to a vast network of partners and endeavours - by its publications, its campaigns of sensitisation and its interventions in the different organs of the United Nations - to promote reflection and discussion on economic, social, civil, political and cultural development in the North as well as in the South. The CETIM's sources of financing have undergone no major changes. In conformity with its statutes, these sources are dues paid by its members, contributions and various donations as well as subsidies. Participation in/ Contribution to the work of the UN During this period, the CETIM participated in the activities of different organs of the UN (Commission on Human Rights; Sub-Commission for the Promotion and the Protection of Human Rights; Committee on Economic. Cultural and Social Rights; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: General Assembly), making both oral and written interventions. It has cooperated with the UN and contributed to implementing the various decisions of its organs by communicating its commentaries and observations, upon request from different UN agencies, by organising conferences and seminars, by publishing books and brochures on certain questions under debate by UN agencies and by carrying on lobbying activities. Commission on Human Rights (1998, 1999, 2000, 2001) The CETIM participated in the work of the Commission on Human Rights (54th, 55th, 56th, and 57th sessions). Its written and oral interventions (43 in number) dealt with the questions of external debt, the right to development, globalisation, transnational corporations, population displacement, the fight against poverty, implementation of the UN Charter, the protection of civil and political rights, the fight against discrimination. Given the abundance of interventions, we cite only the following: E/CN.4/1998/NGO/97; E/CN.4/1998/NGO/87; E/CN.4/1999/NGO/l00; E/CN.4/2000/NGO/93; E/CN.4/2000/NGO/101; E/CN.4/2000/NGO/136; E/CN.4/2001/NGO/103; and E/CN.4/2001/NGO/186. The CETIM organised parallel conferences on the above listed subjects and contributed to the creation of mandates on debt, on globalisation and on the Optional Protocol Relative to Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. It also participated in various working groups on "migrations" (1999)- on "Enhancing the effectiveness of the Mechanisms of the Commission on Human Further, the CETIM co-sponsored an oral intervention during the extraordinary session of the Commission on Human Rights devoted to Palestine (17 to19 October 2000), stressing respect for international law humanitarian law and the role of the UN in the resolution of this conflict. The Sub-Commission for the Promotion and the Protection of Human Rights ( 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001) The CETIM has collaborated very actively with the independent experts of this organ. By means of its interventions. it contributed to the Sub-Commission's work (50th, 5lst, 52nd, sessions). Thus, the CETIM has been actively advocating the nomination of rapporteurs on the right to water, on the Multilateral Accord on Investment and on globalisation, as well as for the creation of a working group on transnational corporations. Moreover, it has contributed to the drafting of a report on impunity for violations of economic, social and cultural rights. Its interventions in this area numbered thirty, among which were E/CN.4/Sub.2/1999/NG0/24; E/CN.4/Sub.2/1999/NG0/25; E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/NG0/5; E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/NG0/13; and E/CN.4/Sub.2/2001/NG0/20. The CETIM also participated in the Working Group on Transnational Corporations during the Sub-Commission sessions of August 1999,2000 and 2001. Within this context, it presented interventions in writing (E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/NGO/l7; E/CN.4/Sub.2/2001/NG0/21) as well as orally, produced brochures, and organized conferences on this subject. It has, as well, during other conferences, brought up the questions of the right to asylum and the consequences of economic sanctions on human rights. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1998, 1999,2000,2001) The CETIM took part in the work of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (l8th, 19th, 21st, 24th, 26th and 27th sessions) dealing with "Globalisation", "Intellectual Property" and "The Development Activities of International Institutions". When the reports of Switzerland and Canada were under examination by this Committee, the CETIM presented a written intervention (E/C. 12/1998/NGO/3) as well as oral interventions. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (1998, 1999. 2000, 2001) The CETIM participated in a consultative meeting between the UNCTAD and NGOs (10 June 1998). "Discussions on the Possibility of a Multilateral Accord on Investment" as well as in the UNCTAD conference held in Lyon (9 to12 November 1998) on the subject "Partners for Development". It also attended the seminar entitled "The Interests of Consumers, Competitiveness, Competition and Development" (17 to 19 October 2001). And the CETIM submitted a written text to the people's consultation on the world's economic and social situation conducted by the UNCTAD in January 2000, the result of which was published under the title "Notebook of Hope from UNCTAD" The United Nations Institute for Social development (UNRISD) The CETIM participated in a seminar organised by the UNRISD on the `Promoting corporate Responsibility" (Geneva. 23 to 24 October 2000). The UN General Assembly Extraordinary Session on Social Development (Geneva, 20 June to 1 July 2000) The CETIM, in collaboration with a group of NGOs, organised in this context a series of social development conferences, among which were "Globalisation and its Alternatives", "The Impact of Neo-Liberal Policies on Western Societies" and "Civil Society". Further, it published a brochure entitled "Globalisation and Alternatives" and took part in the drafting of an NGO declaration entitled "Social and Economic Development" making recommendations for the final declaration of the Social Summit, which was diffused by Organisational Committee of NGOs. Other Activities The CETIM participated in the seminar entitled " Adjudication of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" (Geneva, 5 to 6 February 2001), co-organised by the Finnish government and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, and also participated in another seminar organised by the same Office, on the subject of "Extreme Poverty" (Geneva, 7 to 9 February 2001). 2. Interfaith International* (Special consultative status granted in 1998) Aims and purposes of organisation: :: The organisation will support religious principles which advocate peace, tolerance and co-existence among members of different religions :: The organisation will support and sustain communications between members of different faiths, beliefs and religions for the sake of humanity in general :: The organisation will contest all extremist groups which use religion as a means of terrorism, intimidation or exploitation. :: The organisation will condemn all injustices of falsely incriminating religious groups by baseless charges. :: The organisation will contend against all kinds of apartheid and segregation either by race, colour, nationality or religion. The organisation will contest any systematic violation of human rights in the realm of religious belief :: The organisation will encourage that religious practices be carried on within the laws of the land, not contradict health and moral order, and not harm or undermine other religions During the period under review, our major efforts have been directed towards a multi- religious NGO approach to conflict-solving within and between states, and especially within the context of the United Nations. Interfaith International provides a platform for its members and invited consultants to raise (both outside and within the United Nations) the issues of discrimination related to religious belonging. Our activities in the period 1998-2001 have been concentrated mainly upon holding conferences (in London) and representing our constituency in Geneva at the sessions of the Commission on Human Rights and its Sub-Commission. In particular, during the period 1998-2001 our organisation participated actively in the preparation for the World Conference Against Racism in Durban (2001). Our aim was to elaborate means to combat religious intolerance and ethic discrimination and our members expressed their opinions on this at Durban in several NGO Forum "commissions". With a majority of our members being Muslim (Sunnite and Shi'a) it appears normal that Interfaith International concern itself with situations where Muslims are suffering from human rights violations. A common multi-religious approach has been made to these problems. Our organisation has supported the United Nations principles regarding Iraq and the Saddam regime. Many of our members are Shi'a religious and lay persons from Iraq and Iraqi exiles living abroad. In interventions we have pointed out the continuing violation of the human rights of Iraqis by the Saddam regime. This work implements one of the practical objectives of our organisation, namely "the organisation will favour the preservation of holy places and holy worship against any kind of attack either physical or psychological" and "the organisation will work in favour of preservation of religious heritages" and "encourage associations for the protection of rights of different faith, beliefs and religions". The members of our organisation in their individual capacities have worked within their own countries for religious toleration, ethnic understanding and against racism and xenophobia. During the reporting period the membership included Muslims (Sunni and Shi'a), Hindus, Jews, Buddhists and Christians as well as Indigenous religions and those of no specific religion. The President on numerous occasions (during 1998-2001) was invited to inter-religious sessions in London to promote inter-religious common activities within the United Kingdom. He has also promoted interfaith activities in his capacity as general secretary of WABIL (World Al-U1-Bayt Islamic League). The only noteworthy changes are as follows: previously every applicant for membership in Interfaith International needed a sponsor from within the organisation and two supporting votes of members now by decision of the Executive Committee in February 2001, every new member must be accepted by at least 7 out of the 9 members of the Executive Committee. This decision effectively preserves the organisation as an NGO under no particular religion, movement (political or otherwise) or sect. The organization has grown during the reporting period to over 100 members. Participation in/contribution to/ the Work of the United Nations Meetings of ECOSOC and subsidiary bodies: Participation at every session of the Commission of Human Rights and its Sub Commission on Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in Geneva during the reporting period, beginning with the Sub-Commission in August 1998. Members of our delegation (usually 15-20 in number) have made oral statements before the Commission and Sub-Commission. These have concerned human rights of minorities; violation of human rights in countries (especially Iraq, Bahrain, Pakistan, Kashmir, Sudan, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, India); rights of woman and children; economic, social and cultural rights (in Iraq, India, Kashmir, Afghanistan, Pakistan etc.) and on religious intolerance. During the sessions, Interfaith International has organised mid-day "briefings" on situations in Kashmir and Pakistan, Sikhs in India, "Falun Gong" and on topics related to religious tolerance. During these briefings, a wide range of opinions were expressed and solutions to conflict situations sought. Other NGOs participated actively in these meetings. Interfaith International has co-sponsored some "briefings" in the sessions of the Commission on Human Rights and its Sub-Commission, on the issue of Palestine and Israel and participated in various briefings on situations in African and Latin American countries. Concerning the above-mentioned interventions and "briefings", members of Interfaith International have consulted with governmental delegations, seeking clarifications. Such governments included Bahrain, Sri Lanka, Iraq, Morocco, Afghanistan, U.S.A. etc. Non members of Interfaith International have been included in our delegations during Commission and Sub-Commission meetings, upon invitation or their request (these have included human rights activists from many countries including Indonesia, India, Pakistan, Kashmir, Canada, U.S.A., and representatives of indigenous peoples). Participation in United Nations conferences or special events: Interfaith International participated actively in preparations for the World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa. Our organisation was member of the "Interim Steering Group" which organised the first meeting for NGOs on May 1, 2000 in preparation for the NGO Forum at Durban. It participated in every Geneva "Preparatory Committee" for the WCAR, and were members (by election) of the International Co-ordinating Council for the NGO Forum. Interfaith International had a delegation of 15 members and associates at Durban, and participated actively in the NGO Forum's "Commission on Religious Intolerance" (our Secretary-General was member of the drafting committee for the proposed resolutions of that Commission as well as "liaison" for that Commission with other Commissions. The President of Interfaith International was the panellist representing Islam during presentations of the various religious bodies at that Commission) Members of the Interfaith International delegation spoke before the WCAR on the topic of inter-religious tolerance in Bangladesh. Interfaith International participated actively in meetings at Durban with the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion and Belief, Mr. Abdelfattah Amor. Our Secretary General spoke at a panel on Islamophobia (organised by the Al-Khoei Foundation) during the WCAR in Durban. Other activities of Interfaith International officers related to the WCAR in Durban: The President and Secretary General and other officers organised three meetings in the United Kingdom in preparation for the WCAR in Durban. Our organisation was also represented at the European Preparatory Committee for Durban held in Strasbourg and NGO Preparatory Committees in Tehran and Dakar. Interfaith International is an associate member of CONGO and a member of the Geneva-based CONGO NGO Committee Against Racism (sub-committee of the CONGO NGO Committee on Human Rights). Beginning in autumn 2001 Interfaith International held the secretariat of this Committee Against Racism. Members of this Committee have been responsible for presenting some "briefings" during the Commission on Human Rights and its Sub-Commission in Geneva. Also our organisation has been an active member of the CONGO NGO Committee on Freedom of Religion and Belief as well as the CONGO NGO Committee on the Status of Women during the reporting period. Activities in cooperation with other bodies or specialised agencies in the United Nations system: our work has been concentrated especially on NGO contributions to the Commission on Human Rights and its Sub-Commission and on preparations for the World Conference Against Racism at Durban. Interfaith International has also participated in common activities with the CONGO-related Committees mentioned in the previous paragraph. Within these latter, Interfaith International has had indirect contact with ILO, WHO, UNESCO, UNICEF etc. as information received from those specialized agencies has been discussed and acted upon. Any special activities in support of the overall goals and objectives of the United Nations. Interfaith International has actively promoted an international (United Nations-based) ethic within the Interfaith dialogue process both within and outside the United Nations. It has actively supported the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Religion and Belief in his work and participated with him in several meetings at the World Conference Against Racism (Durban) and in meetings in Geneva. Interfaith International has promoted international law and international Covenants in its activities on behalf of conflict-resolution in various countries (e.g. Bahrain, Iraq, Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, etc.). In keeping with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights, Interfaith International has provided a platform for victims of human rights violations in many countries. Interfaith International has actively supported the Indigenous Peoples for the recognition of their rights. 3. International Council of Chemical Associations* 1. Introduction The International Council of Chemical Associations (ICCA) is the world-wide voice of the chemical industry, representing chemical manufacturers and producers all over the world. It accounts for more than 80 per cent of chemical manufacturing operations with a production exceeding US 1,6 trillion annually. Almost 30 percent of this production is traded internationally. ICCA promotes and co-ordinates Responsible Care and other voluntary chemical industry initiatives. It is also the main channel of communication between the industry and various international organisations that are concerned with health, environment and trade-related issues, including the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation & Development (OECD). Since 1998, there has been no increase in the ICCA membership nor any substantial change in the source of funding. ICCA is not affiliated to any international NGO in consultative status with the United Nations. 2. Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or conferences and other United Nations Since June 1998, when ICCA was granted special consultative status with ECOSOC, oral and written statements have been made on various items of relevance, and ICCA representatives attended, among others, the following meetings: 1) 1st Persistent Organic Pollutants Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (POP INC (Montreal, Canada, 29 June-3 July 1998); 2) Diplomatic Conference to Sign the Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent (PIC DIPCON) (Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 10 September 1998). 1) 2nd Persistent Organic Pollutants Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (POP INC 2) (Nairobi, Kenya, 25-29 January 1999); 2) 20th session of the UNEP Governing Council (Nairobi, Kenya, 1-5 February 1999); 3) 1st meeting of the Persistent Organic Pollutants Criteria Expert Group (POP CEG 1) (Bangkok, Thailand, 26-30 October 1999); 4) 7th session of the United Nations' Commission on Sustainable Development (UN CSD 7) (New York, United States, 19-30 April 1999); 5) 3rd Persistent Organic Pollutants Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (POP INC 3) (Geneva, Switzerland, 6- 11 September 1999); 6) 6th Prior Informed Consent Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (PIC INC 6) (Rome, Italy, 12-16 June 1999). 1) 6th special session of the UNEP Governing Council (Malmoe, Sweden, 29-3 1 May 2000); 2) 4th Persistent Organic Pollutants Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (POP INC 4) (Bonn, Germany, 20-25 March 2000); 3) 8th session of the United Nations' Commission on Sustainable Development (UN CSD 8) (New York, United States, 24 April-5 May 2000); 4) 7th Prior Informed Consent Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (PIC INC 7) (Geneva, Switzerland, 30 October-3 November 2000); 5) 6th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations' Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC COP6) (The Hague, The Netherlands, 13-24 November 2000); 6) 5th Persistent Organic Pollutants Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (POP INC 5) (Johannesburg, South Africa, 4-9 December 2000). 1) 21St session of the UNEP Governing Council (Nairobi, Kenya, 5-9 February 2001); 2) 2nd session of the Interim Chemical Review on the Prior Informed Consent (PIC) (Rome, Italy, 19-23 March 2001); 3) 9th session of the United Nations' Commission on Sustainable Development (UN CSD 9) (New York, United States, 16-27 April 2001); 4) Diplomatic Conference to Sign the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POP DIPCON) (Stockholm, Sweden, 22-23 May 2001); 5) 6th resumed session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations' Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC COP 6) (Bonn, Germany, 16-27 July 2001); 6) 8th Prior Informed Consent Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (PIC INC 8) Rome, Italy, 8-12 October 2001). 3. Co-operation with UN bodies and specialised agencies ICCA co-operated with UN bodies and specialised initiatives by, among other things: :: Taking part in tripartite meetings on Responsible Care with ILO and International Trade Unions representatives, and providing regular reports on the progress and state of implementation of Responsible Care; :: Officially committing to the environmental chapter of the UN Global Compact; :: Holding meetings with UNITAR on the UN Globally Harmonised System (GHS) for the packaging and labelling of chemical substances, with the aim of promoting and speeding the system's implementation, and on the initiative undertaken by ICCA to encourage building of risk management capacity in developing countries. 4. Other relevant activities: (i) Action in implementation of United Nations resolutions ICCA has expressed its full support for several Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs), such as the Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent (PIC), and the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPS). With regard to these Conventions, ICCA urged its members to contact their Governments to ask for rapid ratification and entry into force. (ii) Consultations and co-operation with officials of the United Nations Secretariat ICCA staff regularly meets with high-level United Nations' officials, to discuss issues of common interest and offer technical/ scientific expertise. On 3 October 1998, UNEP's Executive Director, addressed the ICCA Board of Directors to present the re-organisation and priorities of UNEP. Regular meetings and contacts occur between ICCA representatives and representatives of United Nation's various agencies and programmes, such as the Director, UNEP Chemicals; Director, UNEP Technology, Industry & Economics; UNITAR Training Programme on Chemical and Waste Management; and the FAO Regional Office for Europe. In addition, ICCA representatives regularly participate in the Major Group dialogue segment of the CSD sections, and are in regular contact with the CSD Secretariat, especially with Co-ordinator, Major Groups Relationships. (iii) Preparation of papers and/or other material at the request of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies, or of the United Nations Secretariat; In 2001, ICCA drafted and discussed with UNEP and external stakeholders a sectoral report on the challenges faced by the chemical industry in implementing the three elements of sustainable development (environmental, economic, and social). The report, which is available from ICCA Secretariat upon request, aimed at highlighting both challenges and opportunities faced by the industry since the environment and development Rio Summit of 1992. ICCA also sponsored the participation of one stakeholder from a developing country in a stakeholders consultative meeting organised by UNEP on 3 October 2001. (iv) Other examples of consultative and substantive activities, including financial assistance received from or given to the United Nations, field-level collaboration, joint sponsorship of meetings, seminars, studies, etc. Until March 2002, ICCA seconded an expert from the chemical industry to the UNEP Awareness and Preparedness for Emergencies at Local Level (APELL) programme. Moving expenses from and to Germany and travel expenses were also covered by ICCA. 4. International Federation of Settlements and Neighbourhood Centres* (General consultative status granted in 1998) 1. Introduction: The International Federation of Settlements and Neighbourhood Centres (IFS) is an association of national, regional, and local non-governmental multipurpose community based organizations working to strengthen communities around the world. Its membership in over 40 countries includes multi-purpose community based organizations all over the globe, from North America and Europe to South America, Africa, and Asia. During the last five years membership has become more diverse with the addition of several organizations in Africa, India, Eastern and Western Europe and the Americas. Since 1926, the members of IFS have pioneered a wide variety of services and developed innovative and integrated approaches to meeting community needs. The services provided by the members of IFS include care for children, provision of education and culture that improves the quality of life. IFS members represent local agencies ranging in size from small self-help groups to city wide organizations. The structure of IFS has been substantially altered by the transfer of its headquarters and its incorporation from the UK to Canada as well as the election of a new Board of Directors, on November 16th 2002, for a two year term. In addition IFS now has a European headquarters, incorporated in Scotland and an American group incorporated in New York. These incorporations enable IFS to receive funds for European use from the European Community and from Canadian as well as American sources for its activities in the Americas. A three year grant from the Ford Foundation has also, for the first time, made it possible to have a fulltime Executive Director, based in Canada and a European Coordinator based in Scotland. IFS has participated in the social and economic activities of the UN and its specialized agencies since it obtained consultative status in category II (special) in 1956. It has no direct affiliation to any international NGO in consultative status but it works closely with many NGOs in carrying out its participation in the UN. Thus for example it is a member of the Conference of Non Governmental Organizations in Consultative Status with the United Nations (CONGO) and serves on its Board of Directors. 2. Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies. IFS has participated in almost every session of the Economic and Social Council during the last five years both in New York and Geneva. It has submitted written statements in a number of cases (several samples are attached.) It has also made oral statements during the High Level Section of ECOSOC and addressed in particular the desire of NGOs to be employed in the monitoring and evaluation processes undertaken by ECOSOC especially those related to implementation of the Plans of Action resulting from various Summits and Conferences held during this period. Representatives of IFS have participated in each of the sessions of the Commission on Social Development, the Commission on Sustainable Development, and the Commission on the Status of Women, In each of these Commissions a representative of IFS has presented either a written or oral statement. In addition IFS has been signatory to the joint statements issued by the NGO Committees on Social Development, Sustainable Development and UNIFEM. IFS has regularly participated in the NGO Committee on Human Settlements. Although it was not represented at the Commission on Human Settlements which meets in Nairobi, Kenya, it took an active role in the follow up meeting of Istanbul + Five which was held in New York. Similarly IFS has played an active role in the NGO Committee on Human Rights and has occasionally participated at the Commission on Human Rights. IFS has also actively followed the work of the ECOSOC Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations and made some suggestions concerning its methods of work that were accepted by the Committee. 2. Cooperation with UN bodies and specialized agencies IFS has participated in all of the Five Year Reviews. The first of these sessions was that dealing with. Population and Development, known as Cairo Plus Five, which took place in 1999. IFS submitted a written statement and made an oral statement in the Main Committee. This was followed in the year 2000 at Geneva by the Five Year Review of the World Summit on Social Development. IFS was represented by a substantial delegation. It addressed the Main Committee and presented not only the views of IFS itself but also the views of the NGO Committee on Social Development which was chaired by a member of IFS. Its representatives also took part in the round tables organized to further dialogue between NGOs and governments. Beijing Plus Five (The Five year review of the 4~ World Conference on Women) took place in New York in 2000. IFS organized and conducted workshops including one on violence against women, made written statements and co-chaired the Human Rights Caucus. IFS sought to participate actively in the Special Session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS but owing to the rigid application of General Assembly rules it was only possible to attend a limited number of sessions and was only able to participate in the NGO caucus. IFS participated in preparation and during the World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa in September 2001. IFS prepared and conducted a workshop on community based organizations' role in combating racism. IFS also attended the Preparatory Conferences, held in NY, and the Final Conference of Least Developed Countries held in Brussels, Belgium in 2001. Here the experience of its representative was similar to the session on HIV/AIDS where NGOs were again excluded from the debate involving decision making. However they succeeded in making their views known on a number of issues including the validity of requests made by many of the Least Developed Countries. Although IFS did not attend the Monterey, Mexico Conference on Financing for Development, it took an active role in each of the Preparatory Committees and worked with many other NGOs (especially the representatives of the Franciscans and the labour groups) to ensure inclusion of issues such as poverty eradication and debt reduction. The Second World Assembly on Ageing took place in Madrid, Spain in April 2002 where IFS played a very positive role, including an oral statement to the Main Committee. IFS cosponsored with the Franciscans a workshop dealing with Day Care for the Elderly. IFS also participated in the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children that took place at UN Headquarters in May 2002. IFS representatives were involved with street children from Viet Nam and participated in workshops addressing suitable programs for children with multiple problems. In 2002 the World Summit on Sustainable Development (RIO Plus Ten) followed four PrepComs that were held between April 2001 and May 2002. IFS was represented at each of them, including the final one in Bali, Indonesia. WSSD was held in Johannesburg, South Africa Sept.2002. IFS representatives participated in Round Tables and in NGO caucuses, as well as attending both the sessions of the Main Committee, the drafting committees dealing with the Plan of Action and the Political Declaration and, occasionally, the Plenary. IFS was represented at the 1999,2001 and 2002 International Labour Conferences held in June in Geneva. It was particularly concerned with the adoption of the Convention dealing with the elimination of the worst forms of child labour and the discussion of the implementation of the technical assistance program. IFS has been represented by an international lawyer (on its UN team) at the many sessions of preparation for the drafting of the statutes( adopted in Rome) establishing the International Criminal Court and has participated in the work of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute developing rules and regulations regarding the operation of the Court. IFS has been an active participant in the Coalition of NGOs working on these various issues. IFS has also been involved in the work of UNIFEM in supporting NGOs that are preparing shadow reports to CEDAW as well as highlighting the impact of various forms of violence. In 2002 the first Indigenous Forum was held at UN Headquarters. IFS facilitated attendance by Indigenous Representatives from Africa, Asia and South America. IFS is a member of the NGO Committee on UNICEF and participates through the committee in the activities of the Executive Board of UNICEF. It has welcomed the current reorganization both of the NGO Committee itself and of the various joint subcommittees that work with the secretariat of UNICEF. Other NGO Committees with which IFS has worked consistently over many years because they deal with issues at the UN of direct concern to IFS include the NGO Committee on the Family, the NGO Committee on Ageing and the NGO Committee on Youth. From time to time IFS has taken the lead in formulating the programmes supported by these groups. Closely related to these committees, all of which are committees sponsored by CONGO, are the CONGO Committee on Mental Health, the CONGO Committee on Education and the CONGO Committee on Human Rights, whose Vice Chair is an IFS representative. IFS participates regularly in the work of these Committees and in some of their sub-committees. 4) Other relevant activities. The IFS Board meets two (or occasionally four) times a year and always includes on its agenda a report concerning the activities of its representatives at the UN and other international bodies to which it is accredited (such as the Council of Europe) This item provides an opportunity for a written update on all UN activities of concern to IFS and a discussion of the follow-up that the Board as a whole or individual members of IFS should undertake to help implement UN activities. It also is used to instruct IFS representatives on what actions should be taken at the UN and on IFS's international, regional, and bilateral priorities. This discussion also enables IFS representatives to know what support they may expect to receive and what resources (human as well as physical) are available. The IFS Website (www.ifsnetwork.org) provides another tool for the dissemination of information about the UN. Almost all of the UN Updates, and many of the statements made at the UN are reproduced on the website ad can be easily downloaded and distributed. In addition there is an index on the website that tells the reader of references to the UN. IFS also publishes a Newsletter which always includes an extract -or a copy - of statements made by IFS representatives at UN meetings. INTRODUCTION: The International First Aid Society (IFAS)was established on 7th January, 1980 in Greece, with a corresponding office established in Nigeria in March 1980. The Society was incorporated on August 4, 1994. Through a special bilateral agreement of technical co-operation signed with the Federal Government of Nigeria, the Society established her International Operational Headquarters at Abuja, Nigeria in 1997 and co-ordinates her World wide activities through the Abuja office. The Society's office in Greece is still functional but mainly co-ordinates the European activities of the society. The Society has the following aims and purposes: (1) Promotion, of Primary Health Care with special interest in Africa and the developing countries. (2) Promotion of basic education for both children and adults, in literacy, human Rights, general knowledge and skills. (3) Youth Development and empowerment through seminars, workshops and leadership training. (4) Promotion of International friendship and world Peace through active collaboration and support of the United Nations aims, objectives and purposes. (5) Teaching and rendering first aid and related services to the needy, in times of peace and war, especially, to victims of accident, natural disaster, war and refugees. The Society was granted the special category consultative status in 1998 and since then, has been very tenaciously pursuing her stated goals and relating with the United Nations Headquarters and its subsidiary bodies. Since the special category status was granted, the society has added more organizational members in the U.S.A. as follows: (1) IFAS Club of New York (2) IFAS Club of Chicago (3) IFAS Club of Sacramento (4) IFAS Club of Contra Costa and ( 5 ) IFAS Club of San Francisco. The International First Aid Society (IFAS) is an active member of the Conference of Non Governmental Organisations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations - CONGO. Participation in the ECOSOC and the United Nations Meetings The International First Aid Society participated in relevant meetings and conferences of the United Nations and its subsidiary bodies during this four year period (1 998 to 2001). The Society's Representative attended an international meeting at Dakar, Senegal from 16th to18th February, 1998 organised by the World Health Organization's Africa Regional Office with theme "Building partnerships with NGOs through collaboration". The society's Permanent Representative attended the Seoul International Conference of NGOs from October 10 to 16 1999 at The society's Representative attended the special session on the situation in East Timor organized by the commission on Human Rights on 23rd September, 1999 at the UN Geneva office. - The society's Permanent Representative and the assistant representative attended the Millennium Forum organized at the United Headquarters, New York, from 22 - 26 May, 2000. The society participated actively in the 1999 World AIDS campaign and the book launch by Ms Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of UNICEF at Abuja, Nigeria on Wednesday, December 1, 1999. - At the request of the Assistant Secretary General for External Relations in March 1999, The society submitted a written statement on the Secretary General's Report A/53/170 suggesting ways that NGOs in consultative relationship may relate better with the agencies in the UN system. The society jointly sponsored the Federation of UNESCO Clubs in Nigeria, Akwa Ibom branch in commemoration of the 53rd UNESCO anniversary from 14 - 20 November 1999. The Representative of the society attended the United Nations Conference on social development in Geneva, Switzerland from 26 - 30 June, 2000. The Society participated in the drafting of the communique and millennium declaration. The society's Representative attended the third United Nations Conference on the least developed countries (LDC III) from 14 - 20 May, 2001 in Brussels, Belgium. The society participated actively in a WHO convened seminar-workshop with NGOs and stake holders in the Health sector on Emergency and Humanitarian action held in Lagos, Nigeria from 26th - 28th March, 2002. The society regularly publishes an informative article on the aims and activities of the United Nations in the society's Newsletter called "The Floga". The society sponsored and celebrated the following special days and events in all the major cities of Nigeria and in key cities of Greece through seminars and special workshops since 1998 till date. 8th March - United Nations Day for Women's Rights and International Peace. 21st March - International Day for the Elimination of Racial discrimination. 7th April - World Health Day 4th June - International Day for innocent children victims of aggression. 5th June - World Environmental Day 16th June - Day of the African Child 8th September - International Literacy Day. 1st October - International day of older persons. 1st October - International day for the eradication of Poverty. 24th October - United Nations Day. 1st December - World Aids Day. 3rd December - International day of disabled persons. 10th December - Human Rights Day. 1999 - International year of older persons 2001 - International year of Volunteers. The society assisted many disaster areas in Africa during this period by providing relief materials and First Aid services especially in Nigeria during the bomb explosions in Lagos. Relief materials and medicines were donated to displaced persons in Benue State of Nigeria in the year 2000. The society has now established an office in New York with a representative appointed to co-ordinate the work. It is hoped that in the next four years, the relationship between the society and the United Nations shall wax stronger. 6. MiraMed Institute* Brief introductory statement MiraMed is a non-profit, tax exempt public charity providing programs of social protection, education and training for displaced and orphaned children in Russia and coalition- building and human rights advocacy for the prevention of sexual trafficking of girls and young women from Russia. MiraMed Institute was founded by Dr. Juliette Engel, MD in 1991 as an international, non-profit, non-sectarian public charity (501C3 status in USA) to address Russian health and social welfare issues confronting children and women at risk-primarily orphans and young women vulnerable to international sex traffickers. For the first five years of its existence, MiraMed's focus was on health care for women and provision of humanitarian aid to orphanages. The organization established the first Western-style birthing centre in Moscow and was responsible for training hundreds of Russian doctors in Western birthing methods. After establishing a full-time year round presence in Russia (office in Moscow) in 1996, MiraMed began focusing more energy on the problems facing Russian orphans when they are released at age 17. It currently operates four different "MiraMed Independent Living and Social Adaptation Centres" (MILSACs) in Russia, helping almost 1000 orphans ages 15-22 to learn the skills needed to re-enter society as productive adults. Since orphan graduates are so vulnerable to the predatory tactics of sexual traffickers, MiraMed also began Russia's first anti-trafficking educational program in Russia--with funding support from UNIFEM and the U.S. State Department (Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs). In 1999, MiraMed created "The Angel Coalition", a consortium of Russian and NGO's from former Soviet satellite countries working together to educate the public, government and civic sectors about the magnitude of the sexual trafficking crisis in Russia. In 2001, MiraMed and The Angel Coalition conducted Russia's first, largest and most successful multi-media, public education anti-trafficking campaign. The project reached more than 30 million Russians and distributed more than 600,000 pieces of literature, including hundreds of copies of a UN produced radio series about trafficking. Since being granted ECOSOC status, MiraMed has grown from a full time staff of 7 to more than 25 and its budget has more than tripled to approximately $400,000 going into 2002. Participation in ECOSOC and its subsidiary bodies and/or other UN meetings Since 1998 MiraMed has maintained active participation in ongoing UN NGO bodies: - UNICEF Committee on the Girl Child, - Committee on the Status of Women (Chair of Caucus on Women's Global Poverty during Commission on Status of Women), - Task force to end violence against women. Each of the above has significant constituencies that highlight the mission of ECOSOC - to engage in world service through cooperation with peoples' groups. MiraMed has worked steadily to connect MiraMed's strong works in Russia with the working agenda of United Nations bodies. Cooperation with UN bodies and specialized agencies MiraMed played a significant role in the UNICEF/ECPAT "Regional Consultation on Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children: Canada, Mexico and USA," December 2001 Other relevant activities i. This entire report shows ample, consistent action implementing the Secretary General's Resolution to move against the global buying, selling and trafficking of women and girls. ii. In Summer 2001 MiraMed UN began a major planning process to organize and sponsor an NGO panel at the U.N. Johannesburg, South Africa Summit, to take place in August 2002. iii. MiraMed UN organized two solidarity/educational journeys to Russia with NGO leaders: Summer 2000 and Summer 200 1. These journeys specifically highlighted and strengthened connections between United Nations work in New York and MiraMed field work in Russia. Language versions of organization's publications, newsletters, Publications of MiraMed Institute's newsletters are in English and/or Russian. Summary of activities for 1998 In 1998, after receiving Special Consultative Status in ECOSOC, MiraMed hired a UN representative who raised funds for her salary and also for a New York office. MiraMed successfully delivered three tons of humanitarian aid to four orphanages in 1998 and expanded its orphanage Summer Volunteer Program to include Uglich Orphanage. Uglich is a small rural town about 300 km from Moscow. Becoming aware of the growing and widespread practice of trafficking orphanage girls into sexual slavery overseas, MiraMed developed its first program to begin an anti-sexual trafficking education campaign for highest risk girls. Summary of activities for 1999 In 1999, MiraMed Institute began a pilot self-enterprise program at Uglich Orphanage and coordinated the development of a larger program model of orphanage self-enterprise that now employs both orphans and orphan graduates. Anti-sex trafficking work continued with a UNIFEM funded national research project; formation of the first national anti- trafficking coalition in Russia (The Angel Coalition) and development of the first regional multi-media anti-trafficking advertising campaign in Russia. Humanitarian aid increased to orphanages with over 7 tons delivered in 1999, all with 100% success. Extending its efforts for the social protection of children, MiraMed pioneered the development of Moscow's first centre for social adaptation and independent living. The program began with 9 children. Summary of activities for 2000 In 2000, MiraMed was awarded a U.S. Department of State contract to expand and train the coalition of anti-trafficking Russian NGO's and by the end of the year, 43 different Russian NGO's had become part of The Angel Coalition. Throughout the year, MiraMed also provided a series of workshops on organizational development, media, community coalition building and campaign development training to Angel NGO's in six different regions as a precursor to an anti- trafficking campaign. In recognition of its outstanding anti-trafficking work, MiraMed received the President's Award from Soroptimists International, which it shared with UNIFEM. Summary of activities for 2001 In 2001, MiraMed continued its anti-trafficking work with the Angel Coalition, now registered as an independent Russian international NGO, to coordinate and help produce Russia's first multi- media, multi-regional anti-trafficking public education campaign (May - August). New MILSACs were opened in Smolensk, Uglich and St. Petersburg with renewed funding from Starr Foundation and the Family Foundation. At the end of the year, there were more than 600 children involved with the MILSAC program. Twelve more people joined the staff and the budget grew by 1/3. 7. World Organization against Torture* 1. The Geneva-based World Organization against Torture (OMCT) today constitutes the main international coalition of non-governmental organizations dedicated to fighting torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances, arbitrary detention, psychiatric confinement for political purposes and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. When the SOS-Torture network was set up in 1986, the majority of its 48 member organizations were based in industrialized countries and tended to promote and defend human rights in third world countries, rather than concerning themselves with respect for these rights in their own countries. An awareness of this imbalance led the Executive Council and the International Secretariat of OMCT to set priorities and decide on two steps: to expand the SOS-Torture network in areas where its action was most needed and to set up two delegations, one in Europe, the other in the United States. Sixteen years later, the network comprises 259 member organizations in 87 countries, most of these organizations being located in Africa, Latin America and Asia. 2. OMCT always participates very actively in the annual sessions of the Commission on Human Rights. Between 1998 and 2001, OMCT presented statements on the following agenda items: 1998: item 3 (Organization of the work of the session); item 9 (Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the programme and methods of work of the Commission; (a) Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms); item 10 (Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in any part of the world); item 19 (Drafting of a declaration on the right and responsibility of individuals, groups and organs of society to promote and protect universally recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms) and item 20 (Rights of the child); 1999: item 3 (Organization of the work of the session); item 8 (Question of the violation of human rights in the occupied Arab territories, including Palestine); item 9 (Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in any part of the world); item 11 (Civil and political rights, including the questions of: (a) Torture and detention); item 12 (Integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective: (a) Violence against women); item 13 (Rights of the child) and item 17 (Promotion and protection of human rights: (b) Human rights defenders); 2000: item 8 (Question of the violation of human rights in the occupied Arab territories, including Palestine); item 9 (Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in any part of the world); item 11 (Civil and political rights, including the questions of: (a) Torture and detention); item 12 (Integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective: (a) Violence against women); item 13 (Rights of the child) and item 17 (Promotion and protection of human rights: (b) Human rights defenders); 2001: item 8 (Question of the violation of human rights in the occupied Arab territories, including Palestine); item 9 (Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in any part of the world); item 10 (Economic, social and cultural rights); item 11 (Civil and political rights, including the questions of: (a) Torture and detention); item 12 (Integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective: (a) Violence against women); item 13 (Rights of the child) and item 17 (Promotion and protection of human rights: (b) Human rights defenders). At the sessions of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (formerly the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities) held between 1998 and 2001, OMCT likewise presented statements under the following agenda items: 1998: item 4 (The realization of economic, social and cultural rights); item 5 (The implementation of the human rights of women) and item 11 (Situation regarding the promotion, full realization and protection of the rights of children and youth); 1999: item 5 (The implementation of human rights with regard to women) and item 9 (The administration of justice and human rights); 2000: item 9 (The administration of justice and human rights); 2001: item 2 (Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms); item 6 (Other human rights issues: (a) Women and human rights). The organization also made a statement to the working group on the working methods and activities of transnational corporations. 3. In its daily struggle against torture and other serious violations of human rights, OMCT collaborates closely with United Nations conventional and extra-conventional mechanisms. As far as conventional mechanisms are concerned, OMCT participates actively in the sessions of the various treaty-monitoring bodies. Accordingly, between 1998 and 2001, OMCT presented more than 50 reports to various United Nations committees (Human Rights Committee, Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Committee against Torture, Committee on the Rights of the Child, Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination). Representatives of the organization have regularly taken part in meetings of the pre-sessional working group of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, at which they have presented the conclusions and recommendations contained in the organization's reports. In addition, working documents were submitted to the Committee during the days of general discussion devoted to State violence against children (September 2000) and violence against children within the family and in school (September 2001). Similarly, representatives of the organization took part in sessions of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, at which the conclusions and recommendations of OMCT reports were presented to the experts. Furthermore OMCT (by itself or together with other organizations) has arranged briefings for the experts of the Committee against Torture. The purpose of submitting reports and participating in committee meetings is to assist the experts when they consider reports by States. Moreover, OMCT has produced several documents containing analyses of the definition of torture (article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment) in relation to violence against children, the integration of a gender perspective and infringements of economic, social and cultural rights. OMCT, by virtue of its mandate, works very closely with the Special Procedures of the Commission on Human Rights. The urgent statements circulated by OMCT are therefore sent as a matter of course to the thematic mechanisms concerned, namely the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights defenders, the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture and the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its cause and consequences. These statements are also forwarded to the country mechanisms as appropriate. 4. (i) OMCT, through its dealings with the member organizations of the SOS-Torture network, not only promotes the conveying of information from these organizations to the international system, but also ensures that all the pertinent resolutions adopted by the various bodies are circulated to the organizations concerned. This is done either by means of publications, or through training sessions in various continents. (ii) The International Secretariat of OMCT is in daily contact with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Every day, it sends urgent requests for intervention to the mechanisms and receives from them requests for further information or replies from Governments. In addition to holding numerous meetings with United Nations representatives in the field, the International Secretariat in Geneva collaborates extremely closely with all the officials of the Office of the High Commissioner. This fruitful collaboration is reflected in initiatives such as the International Conference on Children, Torture and Other Forms of Violence, which OMCT organized in Tampere from 27 to 30 November 2001. This conference was attended by Mrs. Mary Robinson, the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Peter Burns, the Chairman of the Committee against Torture, Mr. Jacob Doek, Chairperson of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and many representatives of international institutions within the United Nations system. (iii) In addition to the documents prepared for the Commission on Human Rights and the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the alternative reports prepared for the treaty-monitoring committees (from 15 to 30, depending on the year), the Secretariat regularly draws up substantive documents on specific topics. For example, in the run-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban (28 August-7 September 2001) and during the follow-up to this summit, OMCT published several documents concerning in particular criminal justice and racism. By way of a contribution to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Children (8-10 May 2002), OMCT also drafted several substantive documents, which were widely circulated. (iv) Since 1986, OMCT's Urgent Assistance Programme to Victims of Torture has been given financial support from the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture (UNVFVT). In 1999 and 2000, OMCT received backing from the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in connection with the conducting of a worldwide survey on violence against women. 