%%%STATISTICS|

Statistical Commission Thirty-fifth session 2-5 March 2004 * E/CN.3/2004/1. Item 7 of the provisional agenda* Provisional agenda and dates for the thirty-sixth session of the Commission Draft multi-year programme of work for the Statistical Commission for 2004-2007 Note by the Secretary-General In accordance with a request contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/51, the proposed multi-year programme of work for the Statistical Commission for 2004-2007 is set out below. It consists of a revision of the programme of work for 2003-2006 considered by the Commission at its thirty-fourth session (see E/CN.3/2003/31), reflecting comments from members and observers of the Commission and a review by the United Nations Statistics Division of its work plans. Agenda item CSSA code1 1. Demographic and social statistics (a) Population and housing censuses 031.2.i & 031.3.i X (b) Human settlements statistics (c) Paris Group on Labour and Compensation (city group) (d) Health statistics (e) Social statistics (f) Poverty statistics (g) Rio Group on Poverty Statistics (city group) (h) Siena Group for Social Statistics (city group) (i) Statistics of drugs and drug use (j) Washington Group on Disability Measurement (city group) 2. Economic statistics (a) National accounts (b) Agricultural statistics (c) Industrial statistics (d) Round Table on Business Survey Frames (city group) (e) Energy statistics (f) International merchandise trade statistics 032.7.i (g) Statistics of international trade in services 032.7.ii (h) Statistics of services 032.6, 032.7.ii, 032.11 (i) Information and communications technology statistics (j) Tourism statistics (k) Finance statistics (l) International Comparison Programme (m) Ottawa Group on Price Indexes (city group) (n) Intersecretariat Working Group on Price Statistics (o) Statistics of science and technology (p) Delhi Group on Informal Sector Statistics (city group) (q) Voorburg Group on Service Statistics (city group) 3. Natural resources and environment statistics (a) Environment statistics and environmental accounting (b) London Group on Environmental Accounting 4. Activities not classified by field (a) Coordination and integration of statistical programmes (b) Programme questions (United Nations Statistics Division) (2-year work programme, 4-year medium-term plan) (c) Management issues in national statistical offices (d) Statistics of human development (e) Implementation of the fundamental principles of official statistics (f) International economic and social classifications (g) Common open standards for the exchange and sharing of data and metadata (h) Presentation of statistical data and metadata (i) Coordination of ongoing methodological work (j) Definition and measurement of the so called information society (k) Statistical capacity-building (l) Dissemination of statistics by the United Nations Statistics Division (m) Indicators (n) Follow-up to Economic and Social Council policy decisions Total number of items 1 The "CSSA code" column contains cross-references to the codes of the Classification of Statistics and Statistical Activities of the former ACC Subcommittee on Statistical Activities; the cross-references are subject to further discussion. Programme reviews 2003: Statistics of services 2004: Social statistics 2005: Energy statistics 2006: Industrial statistics Classification of statistics and statistical activitiesa 030 General statistics 031 Demographic and social statistics 1. Demographic statistics 2. Population statistics i. Population censuses ii. Statistics on population groups of special interest 3. Housing statistics i. Housing censuses ii. Other housing statistics 4. Labour statistics 5. Education and training statistics 6. Culture statistics, including mass communication 7. Statistics of household income and expenditure and their distribution 8. Social security statistics 9. Health statistics 10. Gender statistics 11. Other social, demographic and related statistics 032 Economic statistics 1. National accounts 2. Agriculture statistics 3. Forestry and fishery statistics 4. Industrial statistics 5. Energy statistics 6. Distributive trade statistics 7. International trade statistics i. Trade in goods ii. Trade in services 8. Transport statistics 9. Communication statistics 10. Tourism statistics 11. Statistics of services not included elsewhere 12. Money, finance and insurance statistics 13. Fiscal statistics 14. Balance of payments statistics 15. Prices statistics 16. Statistics of science, technology and patents 17. Other economic statistics 033 Natural resources and environment statistics 1. Natural resources and environment statistics 2. Natural resources and environment accounting 3. Meteorology statistics 034 Activities not classified by field 1. Organization and operation of statistical services 2. Technical infrastructure and other cross-cutting issues 3. Dissemination and support for secretariat activities 4. Other activities not classified by field Notes a The present classification has been made to correspond to the greatest extent possible with the classification used in the integrated presentation of statistical programmes of the Economic Commission for Europe, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Statistical Office of the European Communities. 