%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|ORGANIZATIONAL REFORM|RULE OF LAW|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Fifty-ninth session Item 4 of the provisional agenda REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD CONFERENCE ON HUMAN RIGHTS* * In accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/208B, paragraph 8, this document is submitted late so as to include the most up-to-date information possible. GE.03-11217 (E) 030303 Executive summary This is the first annual report of the present United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello, to the Commission on Human Rights. In it, the High Commissioner sets out some of the urgent protection challenges facing the Commission and the international community and calls for strengthened action to prevent gross violations of human rights, stop violations from taking place, enhance protection and integrate human rights in the peacemaking, peacekeeping, peace-building, developmental and humanitarian activities of the United Nations. The High Commissioner also advances ideas to take forward the reforms called for by the Secretary-General in the field of human rights, including the further development of national protection systems, better implementation of treaties and better functioning of special procedures so as to contribute to enhanced protection of human rights. Paragraphs Page Introduction 1 - 6 4 I. THE NEED FOR STRONGER PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 7 - 20 5 II. UPHOLDING HUMAN DIGNITY, EQUALITY, SECURITY AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING WORLD 21 - 37 8 III. REFORM AND MODERNIZATION OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS PROGRAMME 38 - 45 11 IV. ACTIVITIES OF THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS UNDER THE RULE OF LAW 46 - 48 13 V. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS 49 - 55 13 1. In submitting this, my first report, to the Commission on Human Rights, I call the Commission and, through it, the international community at large to conscience: the peoples of the world need stronger protection of their inalienable human rights, and it is the role of the Commission on Human Rights to spearhead the quest for more effective protection. The Commission's mission is to protect human rights rather than to engage in diplomatic wrangling. People must come first, not politics. 2. People are hurting - from conflicts, crimes against humanity, war crimes, shocking violations of human rights, terrorism, poverty, disease, indignity, inequality, insecurity, lack of protection under the rule of law, and the uncertainties of a globalizing society struggling to maintain the international rule of law and a rules-based world; they are struggling - to uphold international standards for the protection of human rights, for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, for the protection of refugees and displaced persons, for the victims of trafficking in human beings, for the dignified and equitable treatment of migrants in search of decent opportunities. Upholding the international standards of human rights and humanitarian and refugee law, and defending dignity, freedom, democracy and the rule of law must remain the guiding star of the human rights movement. 3. A rapidly changing world is throwing up new problems and phenomena that require urgent analysis from the point of view of their human rights implications. Human cloning is one such issue. Other developments in bioethics, and in science and technology, also call for serious human rights analysis. The Security Council has taken the lead in directing the spotlight on AIDS as an international security and human rights issue, and on the need to protect civilians, especially women and children, in armed conflict. What, one might ask, should be the role of the Commission on Human Rights in these cutting-edge issues now and in the future? How can one act to stop the wrenching trafficking in human beings, which entails the basest degradation of the human person? I appeal to the Commission on Human Rights: please act meaningfully on this shocking problem. 4. If we are to go forward to implement the vision of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of a world of peace and justice grounded in equality and respect for human rights and in economic and social justice, we must gather our strengths to tackle racism and racial discrimination through positive and constructive action. There is a simple yardstick that we can apply: how is every Government doing in terms of implementing the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, in letter and in spirit? The same question can be asked in respect of the principal human rights conventions, such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Action, not words, is what matters. Protection, not rhetoric, is needed. We cannot shield gross violations of human rights - wherever they occur - behind the veneer of sovereignty or the chicanery of diplomatic procedures. After all, what we are talking about is the lives, the welfare, and the rights of our fellow human beings. We should never forget this. 5. This is an issue that touches the members of the Commission on Human Rights directly. Membership of the Commission on Human Rights must carry responsibilities. I therefore wonder whether the time has not come for the Commission itself to develop a code of guidelines for access to membership of the Commission and a code of conduct for members while they serve on the Commission. After all, the Commission on Human Rights has a duty to humanity and the members of the Commission must themselves set the example of adherence to the international human rights norms - in practice as well as in law. 6. In this report, I set out some of the urgent protection challenges that I consider that we need to address, refer to some issues calling for an urgent human rights response, touch on efforts under way to reform and modernize the human rights programme, and refer to some areas where I have been active since I assumed the position of High Commissioner on 12 September 2002. I. THE NEED FOR STRONGER PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 7. In the 55 years since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted, the international community has developed a solid body of international norms of human rights and humanitarian law aimed at the tangible protection of human rights. A global consensus has been strengthened around the universality and the irreducibility of human rights. People at the grass roots plead for respect for their human rights and young people are determined that their world shall be one built on the foundations of respect for human rights. 8. Alas, it is in the concrete protection of human rights that there is widespread failure. Arbitrary and summary executions, torture, rape, violence against women, racism and racial discrimination, enforced and involuntary disappearance, arbitrary arrest and detention, suppression of freedom of opinion and expression are all rampant. These are precisely the topics on which the Commission on Human Rights has established special procedures. And what is more, there are numerous conflicts in which civilians are deliberately targeted and basic rules of humanity flouted without compunction, and which have led to the displacement within their own countries of nearly 50 million people. 9. The Security Council tackles the dimensions of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding while humanitarian agencies do their best to bring relief to the innocent victims of conflict. The special procedures of the Commission on Human Rights document the gross violations, report to the Commission and to the General Assembly, and have even been called upon to do so to the Council itself. The establishment of the International Tribunals on the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, ad hoc tribunals and the newly established International Criminal Court are intended to address the issues of impunity and accountability. This is a powerful aggregate of universal norms and tools to further the cause of peace, security and human rights. 10. The commencement of operations of the International Criminal Court should serve to send notice to perpetrators of gross violations of human rights and humanitarian law everywhere that they can no longer act with impunity. The arms of justice will reach out to them and call them to account. I welcome the election of judges of the Court and call for strong international support for the Court. My Office will do its utmost to support the Court. 11. But the key to the future protection of human rights must surely lie in prevention of gross violations at home - through the operation of national protection systems anchored in the rule of law and protection by the judiciary and partner institutions. An adequate national protection system is one in which international human rights norms are reflected in the national constitution and in national legislation; in which the courts can apply international human rights norms and jurisprudence; in which there is human rights education in the schools; in which there are specialized institutions such as human rights commissions or ombudspersons; and in which vulnerable parts of the population are watched over in order to detect and head off problems before they occur. 12. If the courts are not doing their job of protecting the human rights of people within their jurisdiction, then the whole edifice breaks down. This means that the Commission, my Office, and the human rights movement must place increasing importance on the role of the courts in the protection of human rights. At the present time the Commission has a Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers. This is a key dimension. But the strategic centrality of legal and judicial protection requires that we go far beyond this. 13. We must, in the future, generate programmes of international cooperation and support for the role of the judiciary and the legal profession in the protection of human rights. In practical terms, this would mean, for a start, providing the judiciary and the legal profession with the international human rights norms in local languages, making the core international human rights jurisprudence similarly available to them, and organizing more opportunities for judges, especially, to get together regularly, subregionally, regionally and internationally, to exchange experiences and share information and jurisprudence. This is an area to which I have assigned a central place in the future programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner, and I shall count on the support of the Commission and the human rights movement. 14. But the prevention of gross violations of human rights through national action will require much more than this. We must focus directly on the adequacy and effectiveness of the national protection system in each country - in cooperation with the Government, to be sure. How can we introduce such a focus? 15. The human rights treaty bodies address this issue, each in its domain, but go beyond it to deal with the substantive details of international human rights law. They do not, however, cumulatively pull their efforts together to apply concentrated attention to the national protection system. This is something we must deal with without adding to the burdens of reporting systems. 16. To address this gap, I intend to take the initiative to have prepared a short guideline on the concept of a national protection system and to invite every Government to make a brief submission of no more than three pages on the elements of its national protection system. Participation will be entirely voluntary and will reflect each Member State's willingness to engage in a simple, holistic, transparent self-evaluation exercise. The focus of the national submissions will be on the structural dimensions of national protection. All the national presentations will be compiled and submitted to an expert group consisting of one representative of each of the six main human rights treaty bodies which I will ask to study the presentations and to present a general analysis and recommendations to me. The ultimate aim of the exercise will be to identify areas in which, at the request of the Government concerned, the international community can be of assistance in the strengthening of the national protection system, in whole or in part. The programme of advisory services and technical cooperation in the field of human rights, drawing upon inter-agency contributions, will then be deployed to be of practical assistance. 17. I shall publish the presentations and the analysis of the experts in a consolidated volume, and propose to repeat the exercise every three years. In this way, we shall have the first global presentation of efforts for the protection of human rights at the national level, focusing on constructive cooperation and thereby contributing to confidence-building in the human rights area. The intention is not to be intrusive but, rather, to be positive and forward-looking with the common objective of refocusing attention on the protection of human rights at the grass-roots level. 18. There is another area in which I would seek the support of the Commission on Human Rights. This concerns efforts to prevent gross violations of human rights. The Commission on Human Rights is the body which insisted in the 1960s that human rights violations must be tackled wherever they occur. At its twenty-third session, the Commission adopted a resolution, resolution 8 (XXIII) of 16 March 1967, which still governs its annual consideration of situations of such violations. This builds on resolution 1235 (XLII) of the Economic and Social Council which, in turn, is complemented by the confidential procedure provided for in resolution 1503 (XLVIII) of the Council. 19. So far, the Commission's approach to gross violations has been mainly reactive. The Commission engages in a dialogue with the Governments concerned, adopts resolutions or establishes special procedures. But except in an incidental way, the Commission's approach has so far not been preventive. I would invite the Commission to consider carefully how it can contribute to national and international efforts for the prevention of gross violations of human rights. Now that the Commission is embarking on a high-level segment at the outset of its annual session, it would be fitting if participants in the high-level segment would focus on their national protection systems and on domestic efforts for the prevention of gross violations of human rights. Based on the elements gathered from the high-level contributions, the Commission, during its consideration of the item on violations of human rights, could devote some part of its deliberations to a discussion of international cooperation for the prevention of gross violations of human rights, which could culminate in an annual resolution on the global prevention of such violations. 20. I strongly urge the Commission to embark on new and effective courses of action for the prevention of gross violations of human rights. There surely must be an international consensus around the idea that such violations must not be allowed to occur and must be forestalled through adequate and effective preventive action. This applies with particular poignancy to international terrorism and the attendant dangers of the use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists. A more dangerous world calls for bolder measures of prevention. HUMAN RIGHTS IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING WORLD 21. Coming from a developing country whose population, both indigenous peoples and people drawn from different parts of the world, is wrestling with the challenges of development and nation-building, I am acutely aware that the prevention of gross violations of human rights requires urgent attention to the problems of indigence, inequality, indignity and insecurity. The United Nations Declaration on the Right to Development was meant to rivet the attention of the international community to the need, in the words of article 28 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, for a social and international order in which the rights contained in the Declaration can be realized. 22. The pursuit of development requires democracy, good governance, accountability and the rule of law domestically, and rules of the road internationally that enable all countries to thrive and to meet the aspirations of their people. These are two sides of the same coin. In an evolving, globalizing world, there must be renewed commitment to the international minimum standards contained in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the other conventions for the protection of human rights, humanitarian law, labour rights, the rights of refugees. Let me say it emphatically: we cannot weaken these international minimum standards, and all must be held accountable to the international community, the strong as well as the weak. 23. I call on the peoples of the world, and on all parts of the human rights movement, to rally in support of these international minimum standards. I call upon international trading, financial and development organizations to make these standards the basis of everything they do. There is a simple rationale for this: they represent the international synthesis of what humanity aspires to for itself. Without respect for these international minimum standards for the protection of human rights, humanity will return to the Dark Ages. This cannot be allowed to happen. 24. If we mean to live by this approach of abiding by the international minimum standards, we must address the affront to human dignity posed by widespread poverty. The Commission on Human Rights has nominated an independent expert on this topic. But while the Commission debates this item, the focus, here again, must be on national action: How is the quest for equity being pursued within each country? This should be a leading task for the Economic and Social Council and for the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. We must always be attentive to two of the pillars on which the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights rests: the resources of a State must be used for the benefit of all parts of its population, and there must be no unjustifiable discrimination in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. 25. The Economic and Social Council was given an explicit role in the implementation scheme of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. I intend, in a report to the Economic and Social Council later this year, to raise with the Council the issues of domestic equity and non-discrimination in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. 27. Moving from the issue of dignity to that of equality, we have a lot to build on: the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other foundation documents. The challenge for the future must surely be to act concretely to implement these instruments at home so that our efforts can bring practical protection and relief to the individual human being where she or he lives. 28. In the area of racism and racial discrimination, I am determined to play my part in the generation of a consensus on practical forms of action that can bring relief and protection to victims of these pernicious practices. The Group of Eminent Persons called for in the resolutions of the Commission and the General Assembly is in the process of being established, and I shall request them to help me on precisely this issue: the generation of consensus-based practical forms of action that can bring tangible protection and relief to the victims of racism and racial discrimination. In this area, even though I know there are many issues still to be addressed, my country, Brazil, provides an inspiring model of interracial coexistence and harmony, and I shall draw upon that experience in fortifying me for the challenges that lie ahead. 29. I believe that faithful implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination is the flag-bearer for our efforts in this field. If all countries applied the Convention rigorously, the situation would surely improve. I therefore intend, in the coming months, to invite a group of scholars and practitioners from different parts of the world to join me in a process of reflection on what more we could do to implement the Convention better. This will be based on consideration of the experiences of countries in different regions of the world in the implementation of the Convention: what has worked well, what are good practices, where particular attention is called for, how civil society can contribute. The insights and contributions of members of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination will be drawn upon fully in the process. 30. In the areas of gender justice and the rights of women, I will work closely with other parts of the United Nations system with a view to advancing implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. We shall integrate the lessons learned from the implementation of that Convention into our own work. To this end, I have decided to establish a Senior Adviser on gender issues within my immediate office. Those issues will inform and orient all policies and activities of my office, for experience has shown that they are a key to success. 32. On a more practical plane, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is coming up with important initiatives, which I strongly support, for the enhanced protection of refugees, while the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), as it approaches its periodic Conference later this year, is doing likewise, in particular for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights also makes a modest contribution through its field offices and through the submission of reports to the Security Council at its request. In recent months we have submitted such reports on the situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Côte d'Ivoire. 33. An issue of human security, or rather insecurity, that increasingly troubles me concerns the protection of internally displaced persons. The Representative of the Secretary-General for this issue reports to the Commission as well as to the General Assembly. There has also been an imaginative development of norms in this area and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement are becoming a universal benchmark. The fact nevertheless remains that the protection of internally displaced persons requires more vigorous action. I intend to consult with the Representative of the Secretary-General to discuss options for the enhancement of protection in this area. If it would be considered useful, I am ready to consider commissioning a high-level study on the enhancement of international protection of internally displaced persons and to make it available for wider reflection and action. 34. Another highly disturbing problem of human insecurity is the issue of trafficking in human beings. My Office is placing emphasis on a rights-based approach. We co-sponsored a study on trafficking in South-Eastern Europe and will cooperate on similar studies for other areas. The Office of the High Commissioner has also given strong leadership in the generation of a rights-based approach to combating AIDS. I intend to build on this and to work closely with the World Health Organization and UNAIDS in the furtherance of the rights-based approach. 35. The problem of international terrorism will require our priority attention. People going about their lives peaceably must not become victims of the depravities of criminals. We must resist international terrorism with every determination. At the same time, as the SecretaryGeneral has repeatedly cautioned, we must pay particular attention to ensuring respect for the fundamental standards of human rights in the struggle against terrorism. The international community has consistently affirmed that there are norms from which there may never be any derogation, whatever the circumstances. This includes the prohibition of torture, which itself is a crime against humanity. In acting against terrorism, we must ensure that we maintain the high moral ground. We must not victimize or humiliate innocent civilians because of the actions of some in their midst. Terrorism must be resisted within the law, with respect for the principle of transparency and proportionality, and with respect for fundamental human rights. 36. In flagging these issues of human security, I am aware that there are many others that I shall address on other occasions with the Commission, including the protection of minorities and indigenous populations. The protection of minorities has been receiving the attention of a dedicated working group of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and I am submitting to the current session of the Commission a report on the efforts of the various United Nations and treaty bodies for the better protection of the rights of minorities. I shall follow the deliberations of the Commission closely with a view to supporting further efforts in this central area. On the protection of indigenous populations, we are cooperating closely with the newly established Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and have seconded OHCHR staff to the Department of Economic and Social Affairs for the start-up of the secretariat of the Forum. In both these questions, we must remain keenly aware of their importance in promoting stability, confidence and peace in virtually all nations of our contemporary universal conglomerate of States. We shall continue to do our utmost for the protection of this vulnerable but much admired and respected group of our fellow human beings. 37. I also want to invite the Commission to deeper reflection on the human rights issues posed by developments in biology, science and technology, and changes in the global landscape. Human cloning calls for special study. Intrusive technologies threaten privacy. Population movements in a shrinking world pose questions of decency in the treatment of fellow human beings and respect for basic human rights in all circumstances. The entry into force of the International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families should help on this last issue. HUMAN RIGHTS PROGRAMME 38. Thus far, I have sought to present in summary form some of the contemporary challenges to protection of human rights, and to raise some issues touching on respect for human dignity, the promotion of equality and human security. This leads me to the associated matter of the reform and modernization of the human rights programme. 39. It is my strong hope that the Commission on Human Rights, for its part, will consider and act on the need to reform and modernize its approaches in response to contemporary challenges. The Secretary-General has called for reforms and modernization within the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in four vital areas: cross-cutting United Nations family support for the strengthening of national protection systems; the better implementation of treaties through improved methods of work and coordination of the treaty bodies; the strengthening of the special procedures system; and the improved management of the Office. 40. I am submitting some separate reports on these issues to the Commission and will describe here the broad lines of our efforts towards reform and modernization. On inter-agency support for the strengthening of national protection systems, the point of departure is that we act at the request of, and in cooperation with, individual Governments. The global report referred to above on the national protection system of each country will underpin future United Nations system activities in support of national protection systems. 42. In the area of treaty body reform, we in OHCHR have prepared a background paper on the leading ideas advanced by Governments, experts, academics, NGOs and others. We have initiated a process of consultation with treaty bodies, States parties, Governments and NGOs. A workshop on treaty body reform will be held towards the end of the first half of this year and the second inter-Committee meeting in June will be the culmination of the process. We hope that out of this will emerge practical ideas of reform and consolidation. 43. In the area of the strengthening of the special procedures system, the Secretary-General has called for better ways of appointing mandate-holders, for the development of transparent standards of conduct for mandate-holders, and for increased staff support. The first issue, quality in appointments, falls within the province of the Commission and I am at the disposal of the Commission for appropriate consultations. The second issue, performance standards, is one that we plan to address in consultation with mandate-holders. On the third issue, staff support, I am in the process of creating a dedicated Special Procedures Branch with the hope of generating human resources from the regular budget and building further on the experience and talents of existing staff so as to contribute to a solid cadre of human rights professionals supporting special procedures. 44. On management improvements inside the Office of the High Commissioner, we have substantially implemented the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) in its recent report prepared at the request of the General Assembly. I have decided on the appointment of an Office Manager to tighten overall management, integration reform and programme delivery at the national level. I have established an External Relations Branch to spread the human rights message significantly better. I have decided on the establishment of a Special Procedures Branch. I am also establishing a Unit dedicated to support for national human rights institutions and the role of the judiciary and lawyers in the protection of human rights. Policy is thus driving management reforms. 45. As we proceed with these reforms we shall pay particular attention to the importance of working with civil society and to strengthening our partnership with non-governmental organizations active in the field of human rights. We are conscious of the vital contribution of these organizations, which provide information, insights, ideas and courage in the defence of human rights. The External Relations Branch that I have established has a dedicated Unit on relations with civil society and partnership with NGOs, and I have asked my colleagues working in this area to intensify their consultations with our civil society and NGO partners so as to contribute to a more dynamic relationship and strengthened cooperation. IV. ACTIVITIES OF THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS UNDER THE RULE OF LAW 46. From what I have said in this report about the strategic importance of national protection systems and the lead role of the judiciary in the protection of human rights, it will be evident that there is need to foster further international cooperation in these vital areas. It is my intention, within the framework of activities to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Vienna World Conference on Human Rights and the fifty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to engage in broad-based consultations and exchanges of views with Governments and interested organizations on the enhancement of international cooperation in these areas. 47. In the first part of this year we shall organize a consultation involving international bar associations and leading organizations of lawyers and judges intended to chart courses of cooperation with the judiciary, the legal profession and national human rights institutions. In the second part of this year an expert conference is planned, with the support of a host Government, to help us take the process forward. Our aim should be to combine the efforts of different organizations and Governments in support of national capacitybuilding for the rule of law. 48. We are also initiating, through our regional outreaches, a process of dissemination of basic human rights norms and jurisprudence to judges in local languages. V. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS 49. By the time the Commission meets, it will have been just six months since I took up the post of High Commissioner. In this report I have sought to present what I consider the pressing challenges of protection; of advancing human dignity, equality and security; and of encouraging the protection of human rights through the rule of law at home. 50. I believe with all the force at my command that we must act in a principled manner, with respect and attentiveness to confidence-building, but with conviction and perseverance, to implement the minimum standards of human rights and humanitarian law. We must mean what we say. Implementation of the standards is the acid test. 51. We must act energetically to prevent gross violations of human rights. This requires domestic action and international cooperation. We must sharpen our insights and our strategies of prevention. 52. We must integrate human rights in efforts for conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, development and humanitarian operations. We must work assiduously for a culture of human rights to pervade the globe. 53. The rights-based approach must be the starting point for all our endeavours, whatever our spheres of operation: trade, finance, development, security, in both the public and private sectors. In a sense, this is an approach that involves human rights strategies of governance, namely, that we take the basic human rights as the starting point for governmental programmes and the programmes of national, regional and international institutions. What is at issue is a question of conscience: people matter, and the way we demonstrate this is by upholding the international minimum standards of protection of their human rights. 54. When the International Covenants on Human Rights were adopted by the General Assembly in 1966, the President of the General Assembly on that occasion, Abdul Rahman Pazhwak, presented the matter neatly: if the United Nations could be said to have any ideology, he said, it must be that of human rights. 55. Without universal respect for human rights, the vision of the Charter of a world of peace grounded in respect for human rights and economic and social justice will remain an illusion. Let us vindicate the Charter's vision by being faithful to the universal implementation of human rights. In doing so we shall continue in the direction of history, rather than allowing ourselves to be diverted from the course we know to be just. 