%%%NATURAL DISASTERS|AVALANCHES|FLOODS|LANDSLIDES|SOIL EROSION|ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE|DISASTER RELIEF|TAJIKISTAN|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/53/116 4 May 1998 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Fifty-third session Item 20 (b) of the preliminary listA/53/50. STRENGTHENING OF THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AND DISASTER RELIEF ASSISTANCE OF THE UNITED NATIONS, INCLUDING SPECIAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE: SPECIAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES OR REGIONS Letter dated 1 May 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Tajikistan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On the instructions of my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of a statement by the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan (see annex). I should be very grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly under item 20 (b) of the preliminary list. (Signed) Rashid ALIMOV Ambassador Permanent Representative of the Republic of Tajikistan to the United Nations English Page Annex [Original: Russian] Statement dated 30 April 1998 from the Government of Tajikistan During the period from February through April of this year, abundant snowfall, avalanches, heavy downpours, spring floods, mud streams, landslides and the erosion of support embankments destroyed or inflicted severe damage on hundreds of houses situated mostly in the Republic's rural mountainous and foothill regions, more than 50 educational and health care institutions, hundreds of kilometres of motorways, dozens of bridges, more than 300 kilometres of irrigation networks and canals, power transmission lines and many other national economic facilities. The agricultural system, where crops were lost and hundreds of head of cattle perished, has suffered enormous damage. According to preliminary data, the immediate damage inflicted by the natural elements is estimated at more than $12 million. Districts in the Khatlon and Leninabad regions, the Gorny Badakhshan Autonomous Region and districts subordinate to the Republic are in a critical situation. The Republic's population has suffered greatly as a result of the natural disasters; more than 1,500 persons are homeless, 47 were killed and 37 hospitalized. At this difficult time, the Government of the Republic is taking all possible measures to eliminate the consequences of the natural disasters. Through the efforts made, it has been possible to minimize loss of life. Nevertheless, the natural elements are continuing to rage, and further reports about their effects appear daily. At the present time, in order to provide assistance to the population, the Republic is in urgent need of food, medicine, supplies and equipment, mobile homes and tents, but most of all funds. Approximately $40 million are necessary in order to provide one-time material assistance to the population in distress, build and renovate houses and reinforce support embankments. The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan appeals to the Governments of friendly foreign countries and public and international organizations to respond to the misfortunes that have befallen our Republic and provide all possible assistance in eliminating the consequences of the natural disasters. I express the hope and belief that the assistance provided by you will enable us to cope with the national catastrophe and that a feeling of immeasurable gratitude will long remain in the heart of every citizen of the Republic of Tajikistan who today is in distress. (Signed) Yakhyo AZIMOV Government of the Republic of Tajikistan 