%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|PERMANENT SOVEREIGNTY|NATURAL RESOURCES|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|BIBLIOGRAPHIES|INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS|STANDARDS|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. 21 July 2003 Original: ENGLISH COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights Fifty-fifth session Item 5(b) of the provisional agenda PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION AND PROTECTION OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES Indigenous peoples' permanent sovereignty over natural resources Preliminary report of the Special Rapporteur, Erica-Irene A. Daes, submitted in accordance with Sub-Commission resolution 2002/15* In its resolution 2001/10, the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights requested Ms. Erica-Irene A. Daes to prepare a working paper on indigenous peoples' permanent sovereignty over natural resources, which is relevant to her study on indigenous peoples and their relationship to land (E/CN.4/Sub.2/2001/21). Mrs. Daes submitted her working paper (E/CN.4/Sub.2/2002/23) to the Sub-Commission at its fifty-fourth session. At its fifty-fourth session, the Sub-Commission decided to appoint Ms. Daes as Special Rapporteur to undertake a study on the subject based on her working paper (resolution 2002/15), requesting her to submit a preliminary report to the Sub-Commission at its fifty-fifth session and a final report at its fifty-sixth session. The Commission on Human Rights endorsed Mrs. Daes's appointment in its decision 2003/110. *The annex is being circulated in the language of submission only. GE.03-15176 The present preliminary report, which should be read in conjunction with the working paper, contains a preliminary discussion of the term "sovereignty" as applied to indigenous peoples and natural resources, taking into consideration, among other things, the comments made by certain members of the Sub-Commission, as well as an annex containing a preliminary selected bibliography, a list of relevant cases, and a compilation of relevant international law standards. The importance and usefulness of a study on indigenous peoples' permanent sovereignty over natural resources has been further emphasized by the ongoing debates about indigenous peoples' right to self-determination and the adverse impacts of natural resource exploitation in indigenous territories. Consequently, the reconciliation of the legitimate interests of States with the prior and paramount rights of indigenous peoples to their natural resources has been recognized by many as a critical and necessary step for the advancement of the rights of indigenous peoples. Discussions relating to indigenous peoples' permanent sovereignty over natural resources have continued in the context of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, the Working Group on the draft declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples and, most recently, at the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. In the past two decades, in the halls and meeting rooms of the United Nations, Member States, representatives of specialized agencies and departments of the Secretariat, independent experts, indigenous peoples and their representatives have been engaging regularly in an attempt to resolve long-standing land and resource disputes, to reach understandings regarding self-determination under international law, and to establish new mechanisms and methods for cooperating on matters relating to the sustainable development of indigenous lands and resources. As a result of these important discussions, it has become clear that meaningful political and economic self-determination of indigenous peoples will never be possible without indigenous peoples' having the legal authority to exercise control over their lands and territories and thereby enjoy the full economic and other benefits deriving from their natural resources. Moreover, these exchanges have led to a growing recognition that an appropriate balance can be reached between the interests of States and the interests of indigenous peoples in the promotion and protection of their rights to self-determination and to their lands and resources. By authorizing this study, the Commission and the Sub-Commission have acknowledged once again that by condemning and seeking to remedy the destructive effects of colonialism and discrimination throughout the world, it is possible to work towards constructive solutions that will strengthen universal peace and ensure the full equality and human rights of all peoples. Pursuant to the work plan contained in paragraph 10 of the working paper, it may be useful to examine whether the term "sovereignty" can appropriately be used in reference to indigenous peoples and their natural resources within independent States. The meaning of the term in relation to the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources can be generally stated as legal, governmental control or management authority over natural resources, in particular as an aspect of the exercise of the right of self-determination. The principle arose because of the political claim of newly emerging States to be free from unfair exploitation of their natural resources. Such unfair exploitation could make self-determination meaningless in many situations. As one modern writer has stated: "After the Second World War, this situation compelled the developing countries and the newly de-colonized states into promoting the development of a new international principle which recognized and protected their rights over their natural resources and wealth in their own countries." In this context, it is apparent that the term "sovereignty" refers not to the abstract and absolute sense of the term, but rather to governmental control and authority over the resources in the exercise of self-determination. In the sixteenth century, the term sovereignty referred to the supreme power within a State without any restriction whatever. However by the time of influential French jurist Emmerich de Vattel's The Law of Nations in the early nineteenth century, the term no longer had this absolute sense, and it was recognized in international law that a "sovereign" could be under the protection of another, greater sovereign without losing its "sovereignty". In modern times it is commonplace to observe that no State enjoys unfettered sovereignty, and all States are limited in their sovereignty by treaties and by customary international law. This subject is discussed at length by A. Cassese. Thus, in legal principle there is no objection to using the term sovereignty in reference to indigenous peoples acting in their governmental capacity, although that governmental capacity might be limited in various ways. In fact, indigenous peoples have long been recognized as being sovereign by many countries in various parts of the world. In the United States, Indian tribes have been recognized as sovereign political entities since the formative years of the Federal Government. These principles were first completely expressed in Worcester v. Georgia. That case arose when the State of Georgia imprisoned several missionaries who were living on Cherokee territory in violation of a state law requiring non-Indians to obtain a licence from the governor. Justice John Marshall set forth what is still the law today in the United States when he found that Indian nations have always been recognized as "distinct, independent, political communities" and are, as such, qualified to exercise powers of self-government, not by virtue of any delegation of powers from the Federal Government, but by reason of their original tribal sovereignty. Justice Marshall declared in Worcester that: "[T]he settled doctrine of the law of nations is that a weaker power does not surrender its independence - its right to self-government - by associating with a stronger, and taking its protections. A weak state ... may place itself under the protection of one more powerful, without stripping itself of the right of government, and ceasing to be a state." Justice Marshall supports his position by calling attention to European examples, and indeed he cites Vattel in his opinion: "`Tributary and feudatory states,' says Vattel, `do not thereby cease to be sovereign and independent states, so long as self-government, and sovereign and independent authority, are left in the administration of the state.'" Justice Marshall's decision in Worcester is consistent with the views he expressed initially in Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, which arose when Georgia enacted a series of laws which would have abolished the Cherokee government. In that case Justice Marshall wrote: "So much of the argument as was intended to prove the character of the Cherokees as a state, as a distinct political society, separated from others, capable of managing its own affairs and governing itself, has, in the opinion of a majority of the judges, been completely successful." The court went on to find that tribes that reside within the boundaries of the United States are not "foreign nations" with a constitutional grant to sue in the Supreme Court. But Justice Marshall did in Cherokee lay down the principles of the doctrine of tribal sovereignty. In the United States, the law today recognizes many attributes of sovereignty on the part of Indian and Alaskan Native governments, including the right of sovereign immunity from suit. This right of sovereign immunity has been consistently upheld by the United States Supreme Court. The term "sovereignty" is entirely accepted in United States law today in regard to Indian and Alaskan Native governments. In the recent Case of the Mayagna (Sumo) Community of Awas Tingni v. Nicaragua, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, in interpreting the right to property as found in article 21 of the American Convention on Human Rights, made clear in its judgement that indigenous peoples' rights to their lands include rights to the resources there (para. 153) and that these rights of ownership are held by the community in their collective capacity and according to their own customary law, values, customs and mores. Though the Court did not use the term "sovereignty", there is no question that the decision found that international law protects the governmental or collective right of the community to the land and resources. The following portion of the judgement will help to make this clear: "Given the characteristics of the instant case, some specifications are required on the concept of property in indigenous communities. Among indigenous peoples there is a communitarian tradition regarding a communal form of collective property of the land, in the sense that ownership of the land is not centered on an individual but rather on the group and its community. Indigenous groups, by the fact of their very existence, have the right to live freely in their own territory; the close ties of indigenous people with the land must be recognized and understood as the fundamental basis of their cultures, their spiritual life, their integrity, and their economic survival. For indigenous communities, relations to the land are not merely a matter of possession and production but a material and spiritual element which they must fully enjoy, even to preserve their cultural legacy and transmit it to future generations" (para. 149). . The law of Nicaragua has long provided for autonomy in the Indian regions of the country. The Constitution of Nicaragua has also clearly recognize indigenous forms of social organization as well as the right of indigenous peoples to manage their local affairs, maintain their communal forms of ownership, and use and enjoyment of their lands, e.g. in articles 5, 89 and 180. Recently passed legislation regarding the demarcation and titling of indigenous lands has given recognition to the governance authority of local Indian communities. These are specific examples of one form of "sovereignty" as that term is used in modern legal discourse. In New Zealand, the concept of sovereignty as applied to the indigenous Maori peoples is a part of the accepted legal framework of the State. The Treaty of Waitangi between the British Crown and Maori is regarded as the foundational document of New Zealand, and this treaty explicitly and implicitly testifies to the sovereignty of Maori. The concept of Maori sovereignty is known by a Maori term, tino rangatiratanga. Though the term and its application are often debated there, the meaning can be roughly given as "chiefly authority". This is another example of a form of sovereignty on the part of indigenous peoples that is recognized and operative within a State. In Canada and in many other countries, indigenous self-government is provided for, in the case of Canada by the Indian Act, including various degrees of control over natural resources. Such regimes of control over resources by indigenous governance institutions provide many more examples of various forms of indigenous sovereignty over natural resources within sovereign States. Finally, the International Labour Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169), now ratified by 17 countries, contains important provisions for control over natural resources by indigenous peoples in their collective capacity as peoples. In particular, article 15 provides for the rights of "peoples" to their natural resources. Paragraph 1 is as follows: "1. The rights of the peoples concerned to the natural resources pertaining to their lands shall be specifically safeguarded. These rights include the right of these peoples to participate in the use, management and conservation of these resources." This limited guarantee of control and management authority on the part of indigenous and tribal peoples within States is another form of sovereignty as that term is now understood. This authority is further recognized in article 7, which guarantees, among other things: "1. The peoples concerned shall have the right to decide their own priorities for the process of development as it affects their lives, beliefs, institutions and spiritual well-being and the lands they occupy or otherwise use, and to exercise control, to the extent possible, over their own economic, social and cultural development...." Articles 2, 4, 5 and 6 also refer to the "institutions" and "representative institutions" of indigenous and tribal peoples. This further reinforces the understanding that indigenous and tribal peoples within States ratifying Convention No. 169 enjoy at least limited forms of sovereignty or management authority. Finally, it is useful to bear in mind that the study approved by the Commission and Sub-Commission is to examine the application or relevance of the established principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources to indigenous peoples. It does not presuppose any conclusion in this respect. It would, however, create conceptual problems to remove the word "sovereignty" from the long-established principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources. Notes 