%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|HUMAN RIGHTS|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|RECOMMENDATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights Working Group on Indigenous Populations Twenty-first session 21-25 July 2003 Item 6 (a) of the provisional agenda OTHER MATTERS: COOPERATION WITH OTHER UNITED NATIONS BODIES IN THE SPHERE OF INDIGENOUS ISSUES Working paper on ways and means of developing cooperation between the Working Group and the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues submitted by Mr. Miguel Alfonso Martinez Introduction 1. At its fifty-fourth session, the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights adopted resolution 2002/21, in which it requested Miguel Alfonso Martinez, the current Chairman-Rapporteur of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations (WGIP) to prepare a working paper on ways and means of developing cooperation between the Working Group and the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, to be submitted to the WGIP at its twenty-first session. 2. In view of the importance of the review of all existing mechanisms, procedures and programmes concerning indigenous issues within the United Nations that the Economic and Social Council is to undertake during its substantive session of 2003, in accordance with its resolution 2000/22 and its decision 2002/286, Mr. Alfonso Martinez provides the following information which may also be considered by the ECOSOC during its July 2003 session. 3. The purpose of the present working paper is to outline possible ways and means of developing cooperation between the two bodies, on the basis of their respective mandates. Its aim is to contribute to the strengthening of their respective roles, so as to move towards a GE.03-14654 (E) 080703 comprehensive, cost-efficient and interrelated international system for the widest possible promotion, actual implementation and effective protection of indigenous peoples' rights - including, of course, their human rights - based on the strict observance of the respective mandates, an action-oriented approach to relevant issues, active cooperation, and permanent coordination aimed at avoiding any eventual duplication of work. 4. In this connection, it should be noted that the Sub-Commission, in its resolutions 2002/17 and 2002/21, both adopted without a vote, and the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/55, adopted by a recorded vote of 34 to 15, with 4 abstentions, have unequivocally stated that the respective mandates of WGIP and the Permanent Forum (as well as that of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people) are distinct, complementary, and do not give rise to duplication. This conclusion seems to be quite obvious, since all three mechanisms have been established by the Council acting on the recommendation of the very same body, i.e. the Commission on Human Rights. None of those recommendations gives grounds to construe that the establishment of the new mechanism was intended to be the basis for the elimination of either of the previously established ones. 5. Therefore, close cooperation among the Working Group, the Permanent Forum and the Special Rapporteur is desirable, as recommended by the Working Group as well as by the Permanent Forum. In this connection, it should be stressed that not only is this cooperation convenient, but also actually possible. In resolution 2002/17 the Sub-Commission expressly welcomed the incipient cooperation already existing among the three mechanisms, exemplified by the statements made by the Special Rapporteur and the Chairperson of the Permanent Forum, at the invitation of the Working Group, during the latter's twentieth session in July 2002. In their respective statements, both Mr. Stavenhagen and Mr. Magga mentioned that they envisaged the relationship of their respective mechanisms with the Working Group as one based on mutual cooperation and support. Origins and mandate of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations 6. The Working Group was established pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/34. It is a subsidiary body of the Sub-Commission. 7. The Working Group has a twofold mandate: (a) To review developments pertaining to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous populations; and (b) To give attention to the evolution of standards concerning the rights of indigenous populations. It was originally created by the Council as an ad hoc body with no date of termination, this to be determined by the exhaustion of its mandate. 8. From the above, it seems logical to conclude that the mandate of WGIP is now as relevant as ever, given that it is generally recognized that indigenous peoples continue to face discrimination with respect to the implementation of their human rights and suffer from social and economic exclusion, as expressed by the fact that they constitute, in most cases, a 9 Under the annual agenda item "Review of developments", a large number of indigenous representatives inform the expert members of the Working Group about their human rights situation by presenting concrete local and national examples of their present-day living conditions. Likewise, Governments have the opportunity to explain what they are doing to promote, implement and protect indigenous peoples' rights at both the national and international level. 10. The Working Group is also mandated to discuss and develop new standards for the promotion and protection of indigenous peoples' rights, a unique role that needs to be further promoted and strengthened. On many occasions indigenous peoples have suggested that in this particular aspect of its mandate, WGIP should focus on developing standards in specific human rights areas such as the right to their ancestral lands and the protection of their invaluable cultural heritage. In recent years, Governments, experts and indigenous representatives have suggested a large number of studies and draft international standards to be undertaken by the Working Group within its mandate. As requested by the Sub-Commission, a working paper on possible future standard-setting activities has been submitted to the Working Group by its Chairperson-Rapporteur (E/CN.4/Sub.2/AC.4/2003/3), along with a list of possible new studies (E/CN.4/Sub.2/AC.4/2003/4). 11. At present, efforts are being undertaken - in close consultation with experts, Governments and indigenous peoples' organizations - to enhance the effectiveness of the Working Group's methods of work. The aim of these new working methods is to further develop a constructive dialogue among all partners with regard to the human rights situation of indigenous peoples, inter alia on how to create a more dynamic and practical way to discuss what new international standards could be drafted by the Working Group and what new studies could be undertaken by its own members or by other members of the Sub-Commission. Origins and mandate of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 12. At its fifty-sixth session, the Commission recommended to the Economic and Social Council that it establish a permanent forum on indigenous issues. On 28 July 2000, the Council adopted resolution 2000/22 establishing the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. The purpose of the Permanent Forum is to serve as an advisory body to the Council, with a mandate to discuss indigenous issues relating to economic and social development, culture, the environment, education, health and human rights. To fulfil its mandate, the Permanent Forum shall: (a) Provide expert advice and recommendations on indigenous issues to the Council, as well as to programmes, funds and agencies of the United Nations, through the Council; (b) Raise awareness and promote the integration and coordination of activities relating to indigenous issues within the United Nations system; and (c) Prepare and disseminate information on indigenous issues. 13. It is to be noted that notwithstanding the name chosen by the Commission and the Council for this new body, pursuant to resolution 2000/22 (para. 7) an evaluation of the functioning of the Permanent Forum - including the method of selection of its members - shall be carried out by the Council not later than three years from its establishment (i.e. in 2006) in the light of the experience gained. At the time the Forum was established, no details were offered as to the possible practical results of such an evaluation. Consequently, an eventual early termination of this new body as a result of such an evaluation unfortunately cannot be ruled out a priori. 14. The Working Group focuses on the reception and initial evaluation of information on the human rights situations of indigenous peoples in all areas of the world in order to detect general trends in that particular field, as well as on standard-setting, as outlined above. It submits its conclusions and recommendations directly to the Sub-Commission which, in turn, reports annually to the Commission on Human Rights. As a general rule, the only recommendations of WGIP which reach the Council (via the annual report of the Sub-Commission to the Commission and the latter's specific recommendations to the Council) are those with administrative and budgetary implications, such as the proposals to undertake studies by special rapporteurs, the organization of seminars and symposiums, etc. 15. The Permanent Forum concentrates on the coordination and promotion of activities within the United Nations system, as well as on the dissemination of information on indigenous issues. It submits directly to the Council (for decision and eventual implementation) its recommendations on its mandated areas of work. 16. Consequently, there is no direct organizational/institutional relationship between WGIP and the Forum. They communicate with each other through their respective immediate superior bodies; i.e. the Sub-Commission and the Commission (in the case of the Working Group), the Council and the Commission/Sub-Commission linkage (in the case of the Permanent Forum). Shared concerns and areas of potential cooperation 17. The following chart summarizes the output of both the Working Group on Indigenous Populations and the Permanent Forum: Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Observations on the overall human rights situation of indigenous peoples Studies on issues relevant to the present-day situation of indigenous peoples' rights Drafting of new standards to protect and promote indigenous peoples' rights Recommendations to the Sub-Commission on all the above (for decision and eventual action by the Commission and the Council) Technical advice to United Nations bodies and agencies Advice on policy-making on indigenous issues by the various components of the United Nations system Worldwide awareness-raising and dissemination of information on indigenous peoples' issues Recommendations to the Council on all the above. 18. The outputs of the Working Group can be useful for the Permanent Forum when the latter prepares its technical advice to the United Nations system through the Council. Since the Permanent Forum is intended to deal with a broad range of issues relating to indigenous peoples, these issues can often just be briefly flagged. In the framework of the Working Group, however, a large number of indigenous peoples and concerned Governments provide concrete information on specific issues, and detailed studies and background analysis. 19. Indigenous peoples have stressed that the Working Group has established a true partnership with indigenous peoples as it has allowed for the participation of a large number of indigenous representatives regardless of their consultative status, which has served as a model for other United Nations bodies, including the Permanent Forum itself. The Working Group has also provided an opportunity for indigenous peoples to learn more about human rights instruments, the role of the United Nations system in international relations, and about the international community as a whole. This function should be further developed, in close cooperation, by both the Working Group and the Permanent Forum. 20. Studies carried out in the framework of the Working Group have raised the awareness of other agencies, such as the World International Property Organization, the World Health Organization, and the United Nations Development Programme, about indigenous issues and have promoted a human rights-based approach in the agencies with respect to indigenous peoples. Its direct link with the Sub-Commission and the Commission on Human Rights, and its secretariat based in OHCHR allows the Working Group to further develop and strengthen that human rights-based approach to indigenous peoples' issues. 21. It is therefore suggested that the collaboration between the Working Group and the Permanent Forum be established and further strengthened in the following areas: (a) Sharing of information on the overall situation of indigenous peoples; (b) Cooperation on cross-cutting thematic issues (e.g. globalization and its impact on the promotion, implementation and protection of indigenous peoples' rights; the rights of indigenous children and women; environmental rights; participation and conflict resolution, etc.); (c) Networking and training; (d) Fostering dialogue among Governments, indigenous peoples, members of the Permanent Forum and the Working Group; (e) Promoting standard-setting for the promotion, implementation and protection of indigenous peoples' rights; (f) Identifying resources and fostering inter-agency cooperation for the implementation and strengthening of standards for the promotion, implementation and protection of indigenous peoples' rights. Recommendations for specific action to strengthen collaboration 22. Collaboration between the Working Group and the Permanent Forum can help both mandates to achieve their respective goals. The members of the Working Group may want to consider at its upcoming sessions the following specific recommendations for strengthening ways of collaborating with the Permanent Forum: (a) To provide the Chairperson of the Permanent Forum with an opportunity to participate in the discussion of the principal theme under the item "Review of developments" so that he/she can link the recommendations and priorities relating to the principal theme with the work undertaken by the Permanent Forum; (b) To provide an opportunity for the Chairperson of the Permanent Forum to inform the Working Group about the results of the discussion at the Forum under the item "Human rights"; (c) To include under the item "Standard-setting" a space for discussion, as appropriate, of possible follow-ups to any suggestions from the Forum for new standard-setting activities and studies that could be carried out by the Working Group. At the same time, United Nations resources and inter-agency cooperation for the implementation and strengthening of standards for the promotion and protection of indigenous peoples' rights could be discussed; (d) To include under the item "Cooperation with the United Nations system" an interactive dialogue with the participation of the Special Rapporteur and the Chairperson of the Permanent Forum or his/her representative to ensure, inter alia, the flow of information among the three mechanisms and the strengthening of collaboration; (e) To provide an opportunity for the Chairperson-Rapporteur of the Working Group to present to the annual sessions of the Permanent Forum the report of the Working Group on its most recent session. These could include suggestions to the Permanent Forum on inter-agency cooperation and resource mobilization for the implementation of international standards on indigenous issues and the overall promotion, implementation and protection of indigenous peoples' rights, as well as other conclusions and recommendations addressed to the SubCommission that may be of interest for the debates on issues within the Permanent Forum's mandated areas of work; (f) In addition, due note should be taken that the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues proposed, in its report on its first session (E/2002/43/Rev.1, para. 17), the organization of a technical seminar with members of the Forum, members of the Working Group and the Special Rapporteur on the collaboration among the three United Nations mechanisms. The members of the Working Group may wish to consider this proposal and study the possibility of recommending to its superior bodies to convene such a seminar, to be held immediately prior to its twentieth-second session in July 2004. 