%%%FAMILY|INTERNATIONAL YEARS|ANNIVERSARIES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|REGIONAL COMMISSIONS|

Commission for Social Development Forty-second session 4-13 February 2004 * E/CN.5/2004/1. Item 3 (b) (i) of the provisional agenda* Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly: review of relevant United Nations plans and programmes of action pertaining to the situation of social groups: tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family Preparation for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family (2004) Report of the Secretary-General Summary By its resolution 2003/10 of 21 July 2003, the Economic and Social Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution entitled "Preparation for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004". The draft resolution, inter alia, requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Council, on the final preparations for the observance of the tenth anniversary of the Year at all levels. On the basis of that draft resolution, the Secretariat prepared a note verbale, dated 8 May 2003, which was sent to all Member States. The General Assembly, at its fifty-eighth session, amended the draft proposed by the Economic and Social Council and adopted resolution 58/15 which, inter alia, requests the Secretary-General to present an interim report to the Commission for Social Development on the preparations for and the celebration of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family at all levels. The present report was prepared in compliance with the Assembly's request.* As an interim report, it provides a brief overview of significant aspects of the preparations for the anniversary, on the basis of the responses received to the note verbale.* It also suggests recommendations for follow-up actions. The scope of the report does not permit description of the broad array of activities undertaken, particularly at the national level. Supplementary information will be made available to the Commission for Social Development in the form of a background document and to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. The preparations for the tenth anniversary have encouraged broad participation and partnerships of administrators and planners working for Governments, as well as members of family organizations, community groups and other actors, to improve family policies through efforts to raise awareness on conditions of families, identify problems, set priorities, determine resources, establish policies, implement programmes and evaluate outcomes. Achievements have been recorded. Many Governments have formulated "family-sensitive" policies and improved national capacity for their implementation. The family has been increasingly recognized as an object and agent of social policy in many countries and mechanisms devoted to family policy and research have been developed or strengthened. Overriding priority issues have been identified. National plans and programmes for the observance of the tenth anniversary usually entailed: (i) a research component, involving activities such as specific studies, surveys, national reports, special publications, expert meetings, funding for research and refinement of data in official statistics; (ii) a legislative component, involving review, reform and enactment of legislation, publicizing provisions related to families and special parliamentary and other debates; (iii) a policy component, involving policy reviews, improving existing policies and programmes, establishing mechanisms for greater cross-sectoral collaboration, identification of policy "gaps" and adoption of new policies; (iv) support for local initiatives for families through facilitative services; (v) specific measures for special subgroups of families; (vi) a private-sector component, involving resource mobilization and publicity; and (vii) promotional and awareness-raising components and observance of the International Day of Families (posters, publications and information material, media events and observances of family days or weeks). * As of 20 November 2003, the following Governments have provided information in response to the note verbale of the Secretary-General: Antigua and Barbuda; Austria; Belarus; Benin; Cameroon; Chile; Côte d'Ivoire; Colombia; Croatia; Cuba; Czech Republic; Egypt; Ecuador; Finland; Guinea; Honduras; Iceland; Ireland; Jordan; Kazakhstan; Luxembourg; Malaysia; Mauritius; Mexico; Philippines; Portugal; Singapore; Slovakia; Switzerland, Romania; Russian Federation; Spain; Syria; Thailand; Turkey; and Ukraine. Paragraphs Page Deliberations of intergovernmental bodies to prepare and observe the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family National level Regional level International level Department of Economic and Social Affairs United Nations system Intergovernmental organizations Non-governmental organizations Conclusion and recommendations Annex Status of preparation for the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family as of November 2003 1. The topic of the family has been central to intergovernmental deliberations, as is evident in the ongoing process of dialogue on development issues undertaken through the major United Nations conferences and summits of the 1990s. Guidance has been provided to Governments for strengthening family-centred components of policies and programmes by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission for Social Development. The deliberations of those bodies provided greater focus on the topic of families in the context of development, provided legislative mandates, reviewed and appraised the current work programme on the family and underlined the need for further international cooperation on family issues. Throughout those deliberations, numerous Governments have expressed full support for the observance of the tenth anniversary and for the work programme on the family. A. National level 2. The focus of activities for the observance of the tenth anniversary remains at the national and local levels. The General Assembly suggested that Governments take two specific organizational measures in order to promote effective national action: establishment of a national coordination mechanism and formulation of a national programme of action to observe the tenth anniversary. Thus, the salient features of national action for the observance of the tenth anniversary centre around those two measures, the national priorities identified and the corresponding programme and policy initiatives to address them. 3. In many cases, national coordination mechanisms for the tenth anniversary were established by the head of State or Government. Generally, they were created at the senior governmental level, often involving several national ministries under the leading role of the authority concerned with family matters. Many involve the active participation of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), research institutions, the academic community, the private sector and the media. By and large, national coordinating bodies established working groups and task forces. In several countries, coordination structures were also set up at subnational levels. The functions of national mechanisms routinely involved elaborating and implementing a national plan, raising public awareness of family issues, promoting appreciation of the role of families and identifying priority issues for concrete actions. A list of countries that have established national coordinating mechanisms is contained in the annex to the present report. 4. Long-standing national priorities for family policies have been given new impetus through the preparation and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family. Those priorities encompass, inter alia, employment; social security; gender equality; reconciliation of work and family responsibilities; family leave; domestic violence; migration; poverty; childcare; street children; children's rights in the family and in society; family life education; responsible parenthood; role of fathers; the girl child; marriage and divorce issues; changing family forms, notably single-parent female-headed households; intergenerational relations and issues; transmission of values, culture and traditions; drug abuse; and HIV/AIDS prevention and care. 5. Initiatives to address those priority issues at the national level include introduction of income support, such as parenting allowance and leave schemes; home childcare allowances; tax and credit relief; elaboration of training courses for families or family members on a range of issues; initiatives to aid family members to balance work and family responsibilities; counselling centres and employment agencies; support for children; early-intervention programmes for victims and perpetrators of domestic violence, child abuse and neglect; programmes for displaced persons, refugees and migrants; early childhood and family education programmes; family court systems; parenting skills projects and services; and numerous tax-system provisions or reforms. 6. In many countries, the tenth anniversary is seen as an opportunity to update, refine or develop legislation concerning families as well as to address that broad spectrum of family-related priority issues. In particular, the anniversary encourages the adoption of legislative and other measures required to implement international conventions, notably the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 7. Numerous Governments have mainstreamed a family dimension in the decision-making and administrative processes of agencies responsible for economic, environmental and social policies and programmes. They have established infrastructure and policy instruments to strengthen and support families and to promote an enabling environment for them. Elements of that infrastructure include family law, family policy, family-specific institutions and family associations. 8. The most common form of family policy is family law, which is in turn based on provisions in national constitutions. Family law most often takes the form of statutory law, which is used to regulate marriage, cohabitation, common-law marriage, sexual relations, separation, divorce, the disciplining of children, access to contraception and abortion, inheritance, control and ownership of property held prior to marriage and acquired during marriage, the rights of spouses, the rights of mothers and the rights of children, especially those born out of wedlock. 9. Family-related research is encouraged and conducted in many countries. Research topics range from studies on the relationships among social, cultural, economic and demographic changes, to how changes in social welfare, taxation or the status of women affect the status of families. Other themes include the situation of older persons and children within families as well as questions on teenage pregnancy and young mothers. 10. In some countries, NGOs are involved in the implementation of family policy, either by participating in joint ventures with Governments, or by participating in advisory bodies. Many organizations also conduct independent activities in support of families. 11. The United Nations International Day of Families has inspired a series of awareness-raising events, including national family days. In many countries, that day provides an opportunity to highlight different areas of interest and importance to families. Activities include workshops and conferences, radio and television programmes, newspaper articles and cultural programmes highlighting relevant themes. B. Regional level 12. The United Nations regional commissions have interacted regularly with various national authorities and organizations of civil society on family issues. The commissions are uniquely placed to assess the situation of families and respond to emerging needs at both the regional and subregional levels. The commissions serve as catalysts and facilitators for regional cooperation on family policies and activities and as forums for articulating regional perspectives on global and regional issues, particularly by organizing family-oriented meetings. 13. In 2003 the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) organized an observance of the International Day of Families in Bangkok in conjunction with the Women's Federation for World Peace, the Family Federation for World Peace and Unification, the Thai Association of the Professors' World Peace Academy, the Foundation for Development and Peace and the Youth Federation for World Peace. The major demographic and social changes that have had an impact on family structure and function in the region were reviewed at the event. Emphasis was given to the sharp decline in family size that has occurred in Asia and the Pacific, to population ageing and to the care and support of older persons. It called for improved social development to support families, especially in the fields of education, employment, health care and income security. ESCAP will observe the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family by organizing a major public event in cooperation with concerned NGOs. 14. Activities of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) focus on integrating Latin American families into the planning and decision-making process in three main areas: technical assistance to governmental and non-governmental organizations; social diagnosis and policy proposals; and diffusion of information through meetings, academic activities and web pages. 15. The most recent edition of the Commission's Social Panorama of Latin America concerns the evolution of poverty trends of households and families. A chapter on adolescents who drop out of school addresses the problems faced by their families, including poverty, child labour, adolescent pregnancy and housework. A set of social indicators related to households is included. The ECLAC Review No. 77, published in August 2002, includes a paper on family changes in the region. That material will be disseminated throughout the region by means of presentations in governmental and non-governmental forums (see family work programme in www.eclac.cl/dds). 16. ECLAC has elaborated gender indicators, including intrafamilial violence, and information and data on the economic support provided by women to their families. That information is available on the ECLAC web page: http://www.eclac.cl/mujer/proyectos/perfiles/default.htm. ECLAC has also prepared a document entitled Social Support Networks for Old People: The Role of the State, Family and Community, which includes a chapter dedicated to family support. Moreover, the Commission participated in the International Seminar on Gender, Families and Work, which took place at Montevideo in April 2003, and in the World Family + 10 launching of the preparatory phase "For a Global Family Policy", held in Curitiba, Brazil, in May 2003. 17. ESCWA, in cooperation with the League of Arab States and the Arab Family Organization, organized the Arab regional meeting for the 10-year review of the International Year of the Family, held in Beirut from 7 to 9 October 2003. Recommendations emanating from the meeting encouraged Governments and organizations of civil society to revise national family legislation, establish national coordinating mechanisms and prepare an Arab strategy for the empowerment of the family. 18. The Population Activities Unit of the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) promotes dialogues among the Governments of States members of the Commission on numerous aspects of demographic change in Europe and North America. It coordinates region-wide activities and research pertaining to family-related topics. ECE has initiated several projects: the Generations and Gender Programme and the Fertility and Family Surveys. Recent topics of interest to ECE are parental job insecurity, voluntary childlessness and children's emancipation. C. International level 1. Department of Economic and Social Affairs 19. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs has produced reports and communications, and organized meetings to promote awareness of the positive role families play in their respective societies. It has monitored developments in policies, socio-economic transformations and political changes that affect families. It has also stimulated action-oriented research on family issues. Those initiatives have provided an opportunity for constituencies that view family issues from different perspectives to develop common ground and common understandings. 20. Since 1996, the substantive work of the Department has focused on five strategic areas for the preparation and observance of the tenth anniversary: technology and its impact on the family; approaches to the development of family policies; indicators and statistics for family well-being; parental roles and intrafamilial support systems; and HIV/AIDS and its impact on families. 21. One goal of the International Year of the Family is to promote the development of sound knowledge, data and research on the situation and needs of families worldwide. That would in turn assist Governments in setting priorities, identifying needs and bottlenecks and developing innovative approaches to emerging and vital concerns. The Department prepared action-oriented research for publication, including Families and the World of Work: Four Country Profiles of Family-sensitive Policies (Argentina, Egypt, India and the Netherlands); Technology and its Impact on Families; Approaches to Family Policies: A Profile of Eight Countries (Ireland, Malaysia, Mauritius, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, South Africa and Trinidad and Tobago); Family Indicators; The Most Affected HIV/AIDS Families in Selected Countries; and Global Trends Affecting Families. Those studies assist interested Governments to enhance their policy formulation and programmes in those areas. The Department has also cooperated on research with the Bratislava International Centre for Family Studies. 22. The Department has facilitated international cooperation within the framework of the tenth anniversary by organizing the Consultative Meeting on Regional and Global Coordination in the Promotion of Social Integration (New York, 1-5 October 2001) and the Consultative Meeting on Mainstreaming the Family Issue (New York, 10-12 December 2003). Both meetings focused on creating a framework for the development of family policy at all levels. 23. The United Nations Family web site has provided useful and up-to-date promotional information on preparations for the tenth anniversary (www.un.org/esa/socdev/family/index.html). The site contains Family Matters, a bimonthly newsletter that informs readers about current developments and activities. 24. The Department has strengthened consultations with NGOs and provided them with relevant information and analyses. It has encouraged those organizations to set up mechanisms to stimulate, plan and coordinate their own activities and to conduct extensive discussions within their networks about the preparations for the tenth anniversary. Activities include a comprehensive review of policies concerning families and services for families, seminars on International Year of the Family topics to increase in-depth knowledge and information about family policy development and global trends, and efforts to obtain broad support for the observance of the tenth anniversary. 25. The resources of the United Nations Trust Fund on Family Activities have supported national projects, especially in developing countries, that directly promote the objectives of the tenth anniversary. Priority has been given to support national capacity-building for long-term family-oriented policies and for research. For example, one project focused on training rural families to become economically self-sufficient. Another project supported a study entitled "How poverty separates parents and children". The Trust Fund also supported a web-based Interactive Internet Forum on the achievements of civil society organizations from 1994 to 2004, supervised by the Vienna NGO Committee on the Family. The Arab regional meeting for the 10-year review of the International Year of the Family, organized by ESCWA in October 2003, was assisted by a grant from the Trust Fund. 26. The launching of the tenth anniversary took place at United Nations Headquarters on 4 December 2003. A message of the Secretary-General was distributed worldwide. The Department disseminated the publication entitled Global Trends Affecting Families, with chapters covering the situation of families and the issues and transformations that affect families in all world regions: demographic changes; changes in family structure; issues related to migration; the HIV/AIDS pandemic; and globalization. 27. As part of the observance of the anniversary, a policy workshop on HIV/AIDS and family well-being will be organized in January 2004. The workshop will explore the effects of HIV/AIDS on the family unit and family network, including changing generational roles and related social integration issues; identify coping mechanisms at different societal levels to mitigate the impact of HIV/AIDS on the family; review existing policies and programmes to determine how they respond to the needs of families affected by HIV/AIDS at different stages of impact; develop a policy framework and recommendations for addressing family issues and changing intergenerational roles in HIV/AIDS policies and strategies; and identify further capacity-building needs and knowledge gaps for follow-up activities. 28. The Consultative Meeting on Mainstreaming the Family Issue discussed how mainstreaming should put the concerns of families at the heart of the policy-making process. The meeting provided an opportunity to exchange knowledge on approaches and problems related to the mainstreaming process with respect to family issues and developed recommendations on strengthening capacities for effective planning and coordination of family-related activities. It also explored how to incorporate a "mainstreaming strategy" into the work programme of the Division for Social Policy and Development. 2. United Nations system 29. Coordination between the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and United Nations information centres was strengthened to enhance the dissemination and exchange of information on issues relating to the family. Given their proximity and access to local events and happenings, United Nations information centres have been instrumental in publicizing the tenth anniversary. 30. The mission of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) is to ensure that every child survives and thrives through adolescence to go on to become a productive member of society. Success in that mission is tied to the strength and independence of the family as a whole. UNICEF recognizes that the best environment for raising children is within a strong, loving, supportive family. Fulfilling the rights of children and women is essential to having strong families. UNICEF continues its commitment to incorporate family strengthening into the mainstream of the Fund's actions for the realization of child rights. During the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family, UNICEF will highlight the importance of strengthening families in its global advocacy, technical assistance and programming both within UNICEF and with bilateral and multilateral partners; cultivate wider partnerships to improve the scope and quality of those efforts; stress the importance of strengthening family in all forums that promote the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals; support national and regional initiatives for data collection, policy formulation, information exchange and advocacy; underscore the importance of family strengthening in the common country assessments and United Nations Development Assistance Framework through the United Nations Resident Coordinator system and United Nations country teams; devise innovative ways of assisting children without families, especially children orphaned by HIV/AIDS and child victims of armed conflict and family disintegration; and provide encouragement and support to UNICEF staff associations related to family strengthening. 31. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) will devote the April 2004 issue of the rural youth development newsletter, YouthWorks, to the role youth programmes play in strengthening families. In promoting rural youth development worldwide, FAO also emphasizes strong family ties and maintenance of critically important family values in its programmes, projects and activities. The Gender and Population Division of FAO will link the tenth anniversary with events planned for the observance of the International Year of Rice 2004 and the celebration of International Women's Day in 2004. 32. The International Labour Organization (ILO) has focused its family-related activities on standard-setting, research and studies, the organization of meetings and technical cooperation. It has launched an advocacy programme to encourage Governments to develop responsive policies and programmes to assist workers in reconciling the competing demands of professional and family life. During the preparations for the anniversary, ILO is emphasizing the 1981 Convention concerning Equal Opportunities and Equal Treatment for Men and Women Workers: Workers with Family Responsibilities (No. 156). 33. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has organized a series of regional consultation meetings on family support policy in different regions. The UNESCO Early Childhood and Family Education Section is cooperating with the World Family Organization on the preparation of the World Summit Family + 10, planned for November 2004. 3. Intergovernmental organizations 34. Intergovernmental organizations continue to contribute to the tenth anniversary by disseminating information, organizing meetings and seminars, promoting research, assistance and guidance for policy development, and integrating a family focus in their existing activities. The governing bodies of the Caribbean Community, the Council of Europe, the African Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States have played important supportive roles for national actions and have adopted statements and decisions expressing support for the anniversary by calling for action by their respective member States. 35. The Directorate of Social Affairs of the African Union has apprised member States of the preparations for the tenth anniversary. Its communications encouraged member States to establish national committees and to elaborate a regional plan of action on the family. The plan of action is expected to be endorsed by the Executive Council and the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union in July 2004. 36. The Council of Europe has contributed by organizing meetings and seminars, providing assistance and guidance in policy development, disseminating information and promoting research through its activities in the field of childhood policies, family affairs, children's rights and social support for children and families. Family issues feature regularly on the agenda of the Council of Europe, especially in the context of its Strategy for Social Cohesion and the work undertaken by its Forum for Children and Families. In 2005 the Council of Europe will organize the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the European Ministers Responsible for Family Affairs. 37. The Inter-American Children's Institute, created by the Fourth Pan-American Child Congress in 1924 and founded in 1927, aims to further the study of problems relating to children and the family and to help solve them. It coordinates the promotion of child-oriented public policies, updating of legislation and dissemination of information for the States members of the Organization of American States. The Institute uses a children's rights approach, which includes the family perspective as one of the key points for building effective policies, plans and programmes. The role of parents is a priority concern. 4. Non-governmental organizations 38. NGOs have contributed substantially to the growing body of knowledge on the global situation of families and have played an equally important role in the dissemination of information. A variety of studies on such diverse subjects as poverty, the social situation of families, family welfare, reform of legislation and family counselling have been published. Those studies have frequently resulted in action programmes. Various regional meetings and seminars have been organized. 39. NGOs have initiated public information campaigns to encourage participation of their affiliates at all levels. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the World Movement of Mothers, the Institute for Traffic Care, the Baha'i International Community, the World's Young Women's Christian Association, Family Support America, the European Parents' Association, the International Federation for Family Development, the New York NGO Committee on the Family, the Vienna NGO Committee on the Family and the Union of Latvian Large Family Associations have contributed to the identification of priority concerns and the deliberations of intergovernmental bodies. II. Conclusion and recommendations 40. Among the family-related problems that confront planners and administrators in designing or redesigning policies are: inadequate data on the situation of families; uncertainty whether trends that have been identified are relevant to national circumstances; lack of information about which policies are functional and which are dysfunctional; uncertainty regarding the best combination of interventions to support and strengthen families; paucity of human and financial resources; and unintended consequences of policies and programmes. Consequently, there is a need to develop and strengthen a family-focused perspective in national development planning. 41. In this regard, it is recommended to: (a) Strengthen cooperation and mechanisms for consultation and advocacy at the national and local levels in order to promote greater consensus on policy content, concepts and an integrated perspective on the family; (b) Enhance international cooperation in the area of family research to assist in policy formulation and evaluation; (c) Promote training and advisory services for the analysis, formulation and evaluation of integrated strategies, policies and programmes; (d) Continue to support the United Nations Trust Fund on Family Activities to assist in national capacity-building and development cooperation. Albaniaa,b Algeriaa,b Antigua and Barbudaa,b Argentinab Australiaa,b Austriaa,b Barbadosa,b Belarusa,b Benina,b Boliviaa,b Brunei Darussalama,b Burkina Fasoa,b Cameroona,b Chilea,b Colombiaa,b Congoa Côte d'Ivoirea,b Croatiaa,b Cubaa,b Cyprusa,b Czech Republica,b Democratic Republic of the Congoa,b Dominican Republicb Ecuadora,b Egypta,b El Salvadora,b Equatorial Guineaa Estoniaa,b Ethiopiaa,b Gambiaa,b Germanya,b Ghanaa,b Finlanda,b Greecea,b Guatemalaa,b Guineaa,b Guyanaa,b Holy Seea,b Hondurasa,b Hungarya,b Icelanda,b Italya,b Indonesiaa,b Iran (Islamic Republic of)b Irelanda,b Israela,b Jamaicaa,b Japanb Jordana,b Kazakhstana,b Kuwaitb,c Latviaa,b Libyan Arab Jamahiriyaa,b Lithuaniaa,b Luxembourgb Madagascara,b Malawia,b Malaysiaa,b Maldivesa,b Malia,b Maltaa,b Mauritiusa,b Mexicoa,b Moroccoa,b Myanmara Namibiaa,b Nepalb New Zealanda,b Nicaraguab Nigeriaa,b Norway Pakistanb Panamaa,b Papua New Guineaa,b Philippinesa,b Polanda,b Portugala,b Qatara,b Republic of Koreaa,b Romaniaa,b Russian Federationa,b Rwandaa,b Saint Luciaa,b San Marinob Saudi Arabiaa,b Senegala,b Singaporea,b Slovakiaa,b Sloveniaa South Africaa,b Spaina,b Sudana,b Surinamea,b Switzerlandb Syrian Arab Republica,b Thailanda,b Trinidad and Tobagoa,b Tunisiaa,b Turkeya,b Ugandaa,b Ukrainea,b United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Irelanda,b United Republic of Tanzaniaa,b Uruguaya,b Venezuelaa,b Viet Nama,b Zambiaa,b Zimbabwea,b a Formulation of a national programme of action for the tenth anniversary. b Establishment of a national coordinating committee for the tenth anniversary. 