%%%PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES|DRUG SCHEDULES|DRUG CONTROL|

Commission on Narcotic Drugs Forty-sixth session Vienna, 8-17 April 2003 Item 6 (a) of the provisional agenda E/CN.7/2003/1. Implementation of the international drug control treaties: changes in the scope of control of substances Changes in the scope of control of substances Note by the Secretariat Addendum* I. Consideration of a notification from the World Health Organization concerning scheduling under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 Since 3 March 2003, seven additional replies have been received to the note dated 20 December 2002 from the Secretary-General. Those replies have been from the following Governments: Azerbaijan, Egypt, Madagascar, Maldives, Portugal, Thailand and Uganda. The Government of Azerbaijan reported that it had no objection to the inclusion of amineptine in Schedule II of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971. The Government of Egypt reported that amineptine was registered as an atypical antidepressant under the brand name "Survector 100" and that, in 2000, the Ministry of Health had banned it from the market. Amineptine had been added to paragraph (D) of schedule III, under law No. 182 of 1960. There was no evidence of the manufacture, seizure or abuse of amineptine in Egypt. The Government of Madagascar reported that the Ministry of Health had indicated that there had been no seizures or illicit manufacture of amineptine in Madagascar. The Government of Maldives reported that it had no objection to the inclusion of amineptine in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention. The Government of Portugal reported that there had been no register of seizures of amineptine or of the existence of clandestine laboratories manufacturing the substance on its territory. The Government of Thailand reported that there had been no seizures of amineptine in that country and that it had no objection to including amineptine in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention. The Government of Uganda reported that it had no objection to including amineptine in Schedule II of the 1971 Convention, since the substance was capable of producing dependence. 