%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY|SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|GREENHOUSE GASES|EMISSION INVENTORIES|LAND USE|FORESTRY|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBSTA/2003/10 31 July 2003 Original: ENGLISH SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE ON ITS EIGHTEENTH SESSION, HELD AT BONN, FROM 4 TO 13 JUNE 2003 Contents Paragraphs Page Annex List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its eighteenth session . 21 OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) The eighteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the Maritim Hotel, Bonn, Germany, from 4 to 13 June 2003. The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He welcomed Mr. Arthur Rolle (Bahamas) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Ms. Tatyana Ososkova (Uzbekistan) as Rapporteur of the SBSTA. Mr. Thorgeirsson then gave the floor to Ms. Joke Waller-Hunter, Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC. During her opening statement, Ms. Waller-Hunter mentioned that the Convention is at a turning point at which the SBSTA must set the course for its future work programme. She stressed the need to complete unfinished business on the Kyoto Protocol at the ninth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP). She invited the SBSTA to take note of the budget discussion in the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and to ensure consistency in requests for future work and availability of resources. Following this, the Chair of the SBSTA suggested that the SBSTA takes a strategic look at where it stands and where it needs to go to stay responsive to the needs of the Convention. He thanked the secretariat for its competent work and assistance. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 4 June, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2003/1). At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted the agenda without amendment: 1. Opening of the session. 2. Organizational matters: (a) Adoption of the agenda; (b) Organization of the work of the session. 3. Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: (a) Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change; (b) Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. 4. Methodological issues: (a) Review of methodological work under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol; (b) Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol; (c) Issues relating to reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention; (d) Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol; (e) Good practice guidance and other information on land use, land-use change and forestry; (f) Emissions resulting from fuel used in international aviation and maritime transportation. 5. Development and transfer of technologies. 6. "Good practices" in policies and measures among Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. 7. Research and systematic observation. 8. Cooperation with relevant international organizations. 9. Other matters: (a) Issues relating to cleaner or less-greenhouse-gas-emitting energy; (b) Issues relating to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol; (c) Any other matters. 10. Report on the session. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 4 June. At the same meeting, Parties were informed of the status of documentation, the suggested schedule of work and the application for provisional accreditation to the sessions of subsidiary bodies by 17 non-governmental organizations. The SBSTA agreed to admit these organizations, on the basis of the provisions of Article 7, paragraph 6, of the Convention, without prejudice to subsequent action by the COP. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties. Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Agenda item 3) Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change (Agenda item 3 (a)) Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation (Agenda item 3 (b)) 1. Proceedings The SBSTA considered this item, including sub-items (a) and (b), at its 2nd and 6th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/2 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.2 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of AOSIS. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider both sub-items in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Walid Al-Malik (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. David Warrilow (United Kingdom). At the 6th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. 2. Conclusions At its 6th meeting, on 13 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA took note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.2 and Add.1, containing views by Parties on issues covered in the conclusions of the sixteenth session of the SBSTA and on the aspects of the Third Assessment Report (TAR) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that could facilitate further consideration of the agenda items of the COP and its subsidiary bodies, and of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/2 which contains a synthesis of the views submitted by Parties; The SBSTA recalled the conclusions of its sixteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6, para. 15 (c)), that in general the TAR should be used routinely as a useful reference for providing information for deliberations on agenda items of the COP and its subsidiary bodies, and noted that other appropriate information will also be relevant to specific agenda items; The SBSTA further recalled the conclusions from its sixteenth session relating to the TAR (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6, para. 15 (d) (ii - iii)). The SBSTA decided to complete its work under the TAR agenda item at its nineteenth session, and to initiate the following two new agenda items at its twentieth session, for regular consideration by the SBSTA, taking into account existing work of the SBSTA and the SBI and the need to avoid duplication: Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change; Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 30 October 2003, their views on the elements, scope and priorities of the work to be undertaken under these two new agenda items, including possible timing. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile the submissions in order to facilitate discussion on these items at its nineteenth session; The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize a pre-sessional consultation immediately before the nineteenth session of the SBSTA with participation of the IPCC and practitioners, such as representatives of industry, local government, and non-governmental organizations, to provide information and share experiences relating to the agenda items in paragraph above to facilitate the development of these two new agenda items. The consultations should also provide an opportunity to consider the scope of the work under these two agenda items; The SBSTA noted that scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of both adaptation and mitigation can contribute, inter alia, to the objectives of the Convention and sustainable development. The SBSTA agreed to take note of these possible links when considering these two new agenda items in paragraph above; The SBSTA decided to consider a draft decision at its nineteenth session, with the aim of forwarding it for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Methodological issues (Agenda item 4) Review of methodological work under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 4 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings, on 4 and 12 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.3 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. A statement was also made by the representative of the IPCC. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item by way of informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Harald Dovland (Norway). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Dovland reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, on 12 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA took note of the initial views by Parties on needs for specific methodological activities and on a strategic approach to future methodological work, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.3, and of the information provided in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.1 containing a synthesis of the views submitted by Parties and provisional elements of a possible work programme; The SBSTA noted that, consistent with a strategic approach, methodological work should be relevant and beneficial to all Parties, and should aim, inter alia, at better serving the subsidiary bodies, the COP and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, assisting Parties in implementing the commitments under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, supporting the needs of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol for future decision-making, and elaborating the future climate change process. It further noted the need to organize the methodological work in an effective and efficient manner, including in such a way as to maximize synergies and minimize duplication. In this regard the SBSTA noted the need to prioritize its methodological work, taking into account discussions under various agenda items; The SBSTA noted the importance of reliable information. In this respect, it considered the proposal, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.3/Add.1, for the development of a data interface to improve access to data by individual Parties, and requested the secretariat to prepare, for consideration at its nineteenth session, a paper taking stock of availability, accessibility and comparability of existing sources of emissions data and relevant socio-economic data. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to develop options for the development, hosting and management of a data interface, including cost implications, for consideration by the SBSTA at its nineteenth session. The SBSTA decided to further consider the proposal contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.3/Add.1 at its nineteenth session; The SBSTA decided to continue consideration, at its nineteenth session, of proposals by Parties on provisional elements of a possible future work programme. The SBSTA invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 15 August 2003, their further views on elements of a possible future work programme, taking into account the considerations referred to in paragraph above. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to update the annex to these conclusions, taking into account submissions by Parties, to facilitate the further discussion of this issue by the SBSTA at its nineteenth session; The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information provided by the IPCC on the planned work to revise the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The SBSTA invited the IPCC: To take note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.1 and views submitted by Parties contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.3 and Add.1; To report to the SBSTA, at its nineteenth and possibly future sessions, on the progress of its work on the revision of the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 4 (b)) It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/3, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.2, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.5 and Add.1, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.6 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.4. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Issues relating to guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Newton Paciornik (Brazil) and Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand). At the 5th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. Issues relating to registries under Article 7.4 At the 1st meeting, Mr. Murray Ward (New Zealand), who had been requested by the Chair of the SBSTA to chair the intersessional consultations on registries, reported on the consultations held on 2 June 2003 in Bonn. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of issues relating to registries under Article 7.4 during the session in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Ward. At the 5th meeting, Mr. Ward reported on these consultations. The SBSTA took note of the information contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/3 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.2 and in annex I to document FCCC/SBSTA/2002/13. The SBSTA also considered additional means to improve the professionalism and performance of expert review teams. The SBSTA decided to recommend for adoption by the COP at its ninth session, a draft decision on issues relating to the implementation of Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol, namely: A training programme for members of expert review teams participating in the initial review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol; A code of practice for the treatment of confidential information in the review of greenhouse gas inventories under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol; An agreement for expert review services for members of expert review teams participating in the reviews under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol; Criteria for selection of lead reviewers who will participate in expert review teams under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol; The SBSTA welcomed the results of the second workshop on adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, held in Lisbon, Portugal, from 7 to 9 April 2003, and took note of the report of the workshop contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.5 and Add.1. The SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision on technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol for adoption by the COP at its ninth session; The SBSTA took note of the report on the intersessional consultations on registries, held in Bonn on 2 June 2003, as contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.6, and of the progress made by the secretariat in elaborating the functional specifications of the transaction log and the technical standards for data exchange between registry systems; The SBSTA expressed its appreciation for the contributions made by several Parties to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities, and for the pledges of contributions made at this session, for the development of the transaction log and the technical standards for data exchange. It called on Parties included in Annex II to the Convention (Annex II Parties) to make further contributions to allow the secretariat to complete work called for in decision 24/CP.8 during 2003, which is necessary for the timely development of national registries and the clean development mechanism registry; The SBSTA further noted that the resource requirements necessary to complete the development and implementation of the transaction log in 2004, and to operate and maintain the transaction log thereafter, are expected to be considerable. It requested the secretariat to consider means to reduce these resource requirements, through, inter alia, collaboration on technical issues with Parties, and to provide information on this issue to the intersessional consultations on registries and the nineteenth session of the SBSTA. The SBSTA also noted the views of some Parties that the funding of these resource requirements by Annex II Parties, in accordance with decision 24/CP.8, should be appropriately shared and should take account of prior contributions to this work; The SBSTA, recalling the request contained in decision 24/CP.8 that the secretariat should closely collaborate with technical experts in undertaking work on the technical standards for data exchange between registry systems, noted in particular the need for each Party included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Party) concerned to designate the registry administrator to maintain its national registry, where it has not already done so. It further noted the need for Parties to identify technical experts who may contribute to the work of the secretariat and the coordination of management practices among registry systems. Issues relating to reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 4 (c)) It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/3 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.2, both issued under sub-item 4 (b). At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider the issues under this agenda item in the contact group established on sub-item 4 (b), and to prepare separate conclusions on these matters. The SBSTA welcomed the results of the pilot training course for the review of greenhouse gas inventories of Annex I Parties, held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 2 to 6 December 2002, organized with the support of the Government of Switzerland; The SBSTA took note of the information on experience on pilot training activities for members of expert review teams contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/3, and the information on treatment of confidential data in the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.2. The SBSTA also considered additional means to improve the professionalism and performance of expert review teams conducting the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Annex I Parties. The SBSTA decided to recommend for adoption by the COP at its ninth session, a draft decision on issues relating to the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Annex I Parties, namely: A training programme for members of expert review teams; A code of practice for the treatment of confidential information; An agreement for expert review services for members of expert review teams; The SBSTA requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources, to complete the preparation of the basic course on the review of Annex I Party greenhouse gas inventories, as described in annex I of the draft decision mentioned in paragraph above, for the training of new inventory experts participating in reviews of Annex I Party greenhouse gas inventories under the Convention, with a view to implementing this course in 2004. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 4 (d)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 6th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/4, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/5, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/6, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/7, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/8, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.5, and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.22 and Add. 1 - 4 and Add.5 and Corr.1. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Ms. Thelma Krug (Brazil) and Mr. Karsten Sach (Germany). At the same meeting, the Chair expressed appreciation to the Government of Brazil for hosting the workshop on definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol in the first commitment period, in Foz do Iguaçu, Brazil, from 12 to 14 February 2003, as well as to the Governments of Canada, Germany, Finland and Japan for their financial support of this workshop. At the 6th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBSTA welcomed the information provided in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.22 and Add.1 - 4, and Add.5 and Corr.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.5. It took note of documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/4, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/5, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/6, FCCC/SBSTA/2003/7 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/8 which the secretariat had prepared in accordance with the draft terms of reference and agenda for work agreed by the SBSTA at its sixteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6, annex I); The SBSTA made progress in its consideration of definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism (CDM) in the first commitment period. It considered the consolidated text contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/4 and prepared a negotiating text; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, subject to the availability of supplementary funding, pre-sessional consultations to give further consideration to issues contained in the negotiating text; The SBSTA agreed to continue its work, on the basis of the negotiating text, at its nineteenth session, in accordance with the agenda for work agreed at its sixteenth session. Good practice guidance and other information on land use, land-use change and forestry (Agenda item 4 (e)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, on 4 and 12 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.1 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of nine Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Statements were also made by representatives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the IPCC. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Ms. Margaret Mukahanana-Sangarwe (Zimbabwe) and Mr. Audun Rosland (Norway). At the 5th meeting, the convenors reported on these consultations. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the progress made by the IPCC on developing good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). The SBSTA recalled decision 11/CP.7, paragraph 4, and noted the possible inclusion of methods to estimate the change in carbon stored in harvested wood products as an annex or appendix to the IPCC report on good practice guidance for LULUCF. The SBSTA invited the IPCC: To submit the report for consideration by the SBSTA at its nineteenth session for possible adoption by the COP at its ninth session; To organize a side-event on good practice guidance for LULUCF during the nineteenth session of the SBSTA; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, in consultation with the IPCC, draft common reporting formats for LULUCF for consideration at its nineteenth session. The proposal should be based, inter alia, on the work of the IPCC on good practice guidance for LULUCF and experience gained by Parties through using the common reporting format for the land-use change and forestry (LUCF) sector; The SBSTA noted with appreciation the progress made by the IPCC on developing definitions for direct human-induced "degradation" of forest and "devegetation" of other vegetation types, and methodological options to inventory and report on emissions resulting from these activities; The SBSTA also took note of the information provided by the IPCC on development of practicable methodologies to factor out direct human-induced changes in carbon stocks and greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks from those due to indirect human-induced and natural effects, and effects due to past practices in forests. The SBSTA invited the IPCC to report progress on this task at the nineteenth session of the SBSTA, including plans by the IPCC for a review process. The SBSTA recalled decision 11/CP.7 and invited the IPCC to submit a report on this matter for consideration at its twenty-first session; The SBSTA took note of views submitted by Parties on the implications of accounting of harvested wood products, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.1 and Add.1. The SBSTA decided to continue consideration of issues relating to harvested wood products at its nineteenth and subsequent sessions; The SBSTA took note of information provided by the secretariat and the FAO on the Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF), and encouraged the secretariat to cooperate further with the CPF on issues relating to LULUCF. Emissions resulting from fuel used in international aviation and maritime transportation (Agenda item 4 (f)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, on 4 and 12 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.3. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of AOSIS. The representative of one Party noted with concern that the greenhouse gas emissions emanating from international aviation had increased by about 50 per cent over the past decade (FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.3, para. 11). Statements were also made by representatives of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization (IMO). At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Greg Terrill (Australia). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Terrill reported on these consultations. The SBSTA welcomed the information provided by ICAO and IMO on methodological work relating to emissions from international aviation and maritime transportation and on their continuing work. The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to both organizations for their cooperation with the secretariat and, in particular, for organizing two expert meetings on methodological matters; The SBSTA took note of the information in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.3 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.1 and endorsed the elements for future methodological work outlined in paragraph 64 of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.3; The SBSTA invited ICAO and IMO, in consultation with the secretariat, to organize two expert meetings before the twentieth session of the SBSTA. The objective of these meetings will be to address options to improve the methodologies for estimating and reporting emissions from international aviation and maritime transportation as an input to the work under way by the IPCC on the revision of the guidelines for preparing national greenhouse gas inventories under the relevant provisions of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Development and transfer of technologies (Agenda item 5) The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 5 and 12 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.4 and FCCC/TP/2003/2. Statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At the 3rd meeting, Mr. William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana), Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT), reported on the results of the third meeting of the EGTT, held on 30 and 31 May 2003 in Bonn, Germany. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Terry Carrington (United Kingdom) and Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At the 5th meeting, the convenors reported on these consultations. Also at the 5th meeting, the Chair informed the SBSTA that during COP 8 one member of the EGTT resigned and was replaced by Mr. Leonidas Osvaldo Girardin (Argentina). He also informed the SBSTA that, in response to a request contained in decision 10/CP.8, paragraph 2 (a), he held initial consultations with the Chairs of the EGTT and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG). As some of the expert groups were established under the SBI, the Chair of the SBI, Ms. Daniela Stoycheva, joined these consultations. The Chair reported that the initial consultations proved to be very useful, that the participants agreed to meet regularly in conjunction with the subsidiary body sessions, and that he will inform the Parties on the progress made at subsequent sessions of the SBSTA. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the report by the secretariat on the workshop on enabling environments for technology transfer, held on 9 and 10 April 2003 in Ghent, Belgium (FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.4). It expressed its appreciation for the excellent support provided by the Government of Belgium and Ghent University in hosting this workshop, and for the financial support provided by the Governments of Belgium, Canada, Finland, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America; The SBSTA welcomed the technical paper on enabling environments for technology transfer (FCCC/TP/2003/2) prepared by the secretariat under the guidance of the EGTT, and acknowledged the richness and wealth of information it contains on domestic and international enabling environments for technology transfer in relevant sectors, including case studies, lessons learnt, and a synthesis of key success factors; The SBSTA welcomed the oral report of the Chair of the EGTT on the outcome of its third meeting, held on 30 and 31 May 2003 in Bonn, and noted its recommendations on future activities relating to enabling environments, capacity-building for technology transfer, technology information and technology needs assessments; The SBSTA welcomed the offer of the Climate Technology Initiative (CTI), in collaboration with the EGTT, the secretariat and relevant international organizations, to organize up to three regional workshops on technology needs assessments and technology information in 2003 and 2004; The SBSTA noted that the Chair of the EGTT in his oral report to the SBSTA at its eighteenth session concluded, inter alia, that the success of technology transfer is highly dependent on the involvement of a wide variety of stakeholders, and that governments have a crucial role to play in creating favourable conditions. International cooperation and partnerships were identified as ways to help enhance the transfer of technology between countries; The SBSTA also noted that whereas the focus of enabling environments and international technology transfer has been on mitigation technologies, fostering enabling environments that also encourage the development and transfer of adaptation technologies is also very important; The SBSTA also took note of the intention of the EGTT and the secretariat to continue their work on a technical paper on capacity-building for development and transfer of technologies, and to make it available for consideration by the SBSTA at its nineteenth session. It recognized that this document could provide important and useful information relating to the implementation of the frameworks annexed to decisions 2/CP.7 and 3/CP.7 and to the comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework by the COP at its ninth session; The SBSTA noted progress made on the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) handbook on methodologies for technology needs assessments, as reported by the Chair of the EGTT, and encouraged UNDP to expedite its work with the EGTT and the secretariat to finalize this handbook; The SBSTA invited Parties to make available to the secretariat their technology needs assessments, once completed, for dissemination via TT:CLEAR; The SBSTA encouraged business and industry NGOs, and relevant international organizations, to organize, in consultation with the EGTT and the secretariat, sector-specific workshops and other activities relevant to enabling environments for the development and transfer of technologies, for the purpose of exchanging experiences and lessons learned, and to make available to the secretariat information on the outcome of those activities; The SBSTA requested the EGTT: To consider including in its future programme of work, activities to enhance the development of environmentally sound technologies, in particular adaptation technologies; To consider the outcome of the workshop on synergies and cooperation with other Conventions to be held from 2 to 4 July 2003 in Finland, and to recommend further actions, as appropriate, to the SBSTA at its nineteenth session; The SBSTA requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources: To organize, in consultation with the EGTT and in cooperation with other relevant organizations, a senior level round-table discussion between governments, business and industry at COP 9, to discuss enabling environments for technology transfer under Article 4.5 of the Convention; To organize a special meeting of the EGTT in conjunction with the technology events planned for November 2003 by the Government of India in New Delhi, India; To continue its work on the development of links between TT:CLEAR, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Sustainable Alternative Network (SANet), CTI and other relevant technology information systems and clearing houses and existing national/regional technology centres, for the primary purpose of providing an efficient means of showcasing to potential financial and/or technical partners those opportunities for technology transfer identified by Parties during the conduct of their technology needs assessments; To report on the outcomes of the activities referred to in paragraph above for consideration by the SBSTA at its future sessions. "Good practices" in policies and measures among parties (Agenda item 6) The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 5 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/7/Add.2. Statements were made by seven Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Richard Muyungi (Tanzania) and Mr. Greg Terrill (Australia). At the 6th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. Conclusions At its 6th meeting, on 13 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA welcomed the progress made in implementing decision 13/CP.7. All Parties agreed on the continuing importance of implementing decision 13/CP.7. The SBSTA agreed to consider this agenda item further at its nineteenth session. research and systematic observation (Agenda item 7) The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 5 and 12 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/9. Statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Statements were also made by representatives of the secretariat of the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) and the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP). At the 3rd meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA, who had chaired the pre-sessional consultations on the global observing systems for climate, in particular the Second Report on the Adequacy of the Global Observing Systems for Climate in Support of the UNFCCC, (second adequacy report), held on 2 June 2003 in Bonn, reported on the consultations. At the same meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Stefan Rösner (Germany) and Mr. S.N. Sok Appadu (Mauritius). At the 5th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBSTA welcomed the second adequacy report prepared under the guidance of the GCOS steering committee, and acknowledged the work of those involved in its preparation; The SBSTA took note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/9 and welcomed the oral report of the Chair of the SBSTA on the exchange of views and the presentations given at the pre-sessional consultations organized by the secretariat; The SBSTA noted that the second adequacy report provides an opportunity to build momentum among governments to improve the global observing systems for climate, but that work remains to be done to identify priorities for actions, to remedy deficiencies within the domain-based networks, and to estimate the cost implications. It noted that approaches to establishing these priorities should involve a wide range of user communities, and that the GCOS provides the global-scale context for regional and national activities; The SBSTA noted that the GCOS steering committee report to the SBSTA at its eighteenth session identified four overarching and equally high-priority recommendations relating to observing standards and data exchange, integrated global climate-quality products, capacity-building and systems improvements, and the issue of reporting by Parties, and agreed to consider these recommendations in its further work; The SBSTA noted that there have been improvements and progress in implementing global observing systems for climate, especially in the use of satellite information and in the provision of some ocean observations. Many components of the global terrestrial networks are, however, still not fully implemented, the global ocean networks lack full coverage and commitment to sustained operation, and the global atmospheric networks are not operating with the required global coverage and quality; The SBSTA noted that the generation and exchange of high-quality data and products are essential to meeting the needs of the Convention. It urged Parties to address, as a high priority, the following two types of problem that affect the availability of data, as identified in the second adequacy report: Many data are not being collected or, if collected at the national level, are not being received by global data centres; Valuable historical data sets exist, but have not been digitized and quality-controlled; To better understand the barriers to improving the receipt, at global data centres, of data from atmospheric and hydrological networks, the SBSTA invited the GCOS secretariat to prepare, in consultation with the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), an analysis of specific problems and of options to remedy them, for consideration by the SBSTA at its twentieth session. The SBSTA further invited the GCOS secretariat to comment, in its report, on the accessibility of data from global data centres; The SBSTA also noted that the global observing systems for climate are not designed to meet all of the needs of the community concerned with climate change impacts. To address this and related issues, future planning activities by Parties and intergovernmental organizations should examine the potential to enhance links with, or establish, specialized networks in regions vulnerable to climate change; The SBSTA requested Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 15 September 2003, views on the priorities for actions arising from the second adequacy report, with particular reference to the above-mentioned GCOS steering committee report to the SBSTA at its eighteenth session, as a further step towards the development by the GCOS secretariat of an implementation plan for integrated global observations for climate, and requested the secretariat to compile these submissions. The SBSTA also requested the GCOS secretariat to prepare a synthesis of these submissions and to forward this synthesis to the secretariat for consideration by the SBSTA at its nineteenth session; The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its nineteenth session, a draft decision, with the aim of forwarding it for adoption by the COP at its ninth session; The SBSTA recalled its conclusions at its seventeenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/13, para. 45 (g) (iii)) to invite views from the scientific community on activities relating to the research priorities identified in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.17 and FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.15 and Add.1. It requested the secretariat to contact relevant organizations and invite them to provide the requested information to the SBSTA at its nineteenth session. Cooperation with relevant internationAl organizations (Agenda item 8) The SBSTA considered this item at its 4th and 5th meetings, on 6 and 12 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.7 and FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.6. Statements were made by representatives of 12 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of AOSIS and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Statements were also made by representatives of FAO, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar, Iran, 1971) hereinafter called the Ramsar Convention, the IPCC and the IUCN - World Conservation Union (IUCN). At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. The SBSTA welcomed the information provided by the secretariat in an oral report on activities relevant to cooperation with other international organizations, including information on the fourth meeting of the Joint Liaison Group of the UNFCCC, the UNCCD and the CBD. The SBSTA acknowledged the importance of such cooperation and expressed support for efforts to further improve coordination; Cooperation with other conventions The SBSTA noted with appreciation statements made by the representatives of the UNCCD and the Ramsar Convention on their activities relevant to cooperation with the UNFCCC. The SBSTA took also note of a written statement by the CBD; The SBSTA agreed to continue its discussion on cooperation with other conventions at its nineteenth session, taking into consideration the outcome of the workshop to be held in Espoo, Finland, from 2 to 4 July 2003, in order to provide additional guidance to the secretariat and to Parties, with the aim of recommending a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its ninth session; Cooperation with scientific organizations and United Nations bodies The SBSTA noted with appreciation statements made by the representatives of the IPCC, FAO and IUCN. The SBSTA welcomed the efforts made by these organizations to contribute to the objective of the Convention; The SBSTA welcomed the IPCC decision to prepare its Fourth Assessment Report. The SBSTA took note of the information provided on preparatory work on the scope, structure and contents of the report and welcomed the invitation by the IPCC to Parties to provide comments directly to the IPCC on this work prior to the next plenary meeting of the IPCC in November 2003; The SBSTA also took note of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.7, containing information on the participation of the secretariat in meetings held by the World Trade Organization (WTO). It encouraged Parties to coordinate issues relevant to the Convention and the WTO at the national level. other matters (Agenda item 9) Issues relating to cleaner or less-greenhouse-gas-emitting energy (Agenda item 9 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 4th and 6th meetings, on 6 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.7. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the 6th meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on these consultations. At its 6th meeting, on 13 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA took note of a submission by a Party contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.7. The SBSTA did not complete its consideration of issues under sub-item 9 (a). It agreed to continue its consideration of those issues at its nineteenth session. Issues relating to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 9 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 4th and 6th meetings, on 6 and 13 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.8. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the 6th meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA reported on these consultations. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 6th meeting, on 13 June, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA noted that it did not complete its consideration of issues under this agenda sub-item. It agreed to continue its consideration of these issues at its nineteenth session. Any other matters (Agenda item 9 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 4th and 6th meetings, on 6 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. A statement was also made by a representative of the UNEP. The SBSTA noted the importance of the initiative of H.E. Mr. V.V. Putin, President of the Russian Federation, to convene a World Climate Change Conference in Moscow from 29 September to 3 October 2003, which was welcomed by the United Nations General Assembly in its resolution 57/258. The SBSTA invited Parties and the secretariat to cooperate closely to achieve a successful outcome of the conference; The SBSTA was informed that information provided by the World Climate Research Programme and the International Geosphere - Biosphere Programme on the Brazilian proposal, in response to the invitation of the SBSTA at its seventeenth session, can be viewed on the UNFCCC web site. The SBSTA took note of information provided by the Government of Brazil, also provided on behalf of the Governments of the United Kingdom and Germany, on a workshop relating to this proposal, tentative dates for which are 8 to 9 September 2003, in Berlin; The SBSTA welcomed the announcement by the representative of the Government of India that the Confederation of Indian Industries, with the support of the Government of India, will hold a technology bazaar at New Delhi from 10 to 13 November 2003. It also noted that the Government of India will host a high-level round-table discussion, in collaboration with the UNFCCC secretariat and the Executive Board of the CDM, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, and the Energy Resources Institute on "The CDM: opportunities for international cooperation" on 10 November 2003, also in New Delhi; The SBSTA also noted that, subject to the availability of financial resources, a series of other meetings relevant to the Convention, organized by the secretariat, will take place at the same time and in the same venue, including a special meeting of the EGTT, and a workshop on adaptation. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to develop the agenda for the workshop on adaptation, taking into account the Delhi Ministerial Declaration on Climate Change and Sustainable Development (decision 1/CP.8). REPORT ON THE SESSION (Agenda item 10) At its 6th meeting, on 13 June, the SBSTA considered the draft report on its eighteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.1). At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report on the session, under the guidance of the Chair. A statement was made by one Party. LIST OF DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE AT ITS EIGHTEENTH SESSION FCCC/SBSTA/2002/13 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its seventeenth session, held at New Delhi, from 23 to 29 October 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2003/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBSTA/2003/2 Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. Synthesis of views submitted by Parties on the aspects of the Third Assessment Report that could facilitate the work of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies FCCC/SBSTA/2003/3 Methodological issues. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Experience on pilot training activities for members of expert review teams FCCC/SBSTA/2003/4 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft consolidated text. FCCC/SBSTA/2003/5 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol in the first commitment period. Options paper on modalities for addressing non-permanence FCCC/SBSTA/2003/6 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol in the first commitment period. Options paper on modalities for addressing baselines, additionality and leakage FCCC/SBSTA/2003/7 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol for the first commitment period. Options paper on modalities for addressing socio-economic and environmental impacts, including impacts on biodiversity and natural ecosystems FCCC/SBSTA/2003/8 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Workshop on definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation project activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol in the first commitment period. Note by the Chair of the SBSTA FCCC/SBSTA/2003/9 Research and systematic observation. Issues relating to the second report on the adequacy of the global observing system for climate in support of the UNFCCC FCCC/SBI/2003/7/Add.2 National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Compilation and synthesis of third national communications. Compilation and synthesis report on third national communications. Addendum. Policies and measures FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.1 Methodological issues. Review of methodological work under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Synthesis and elements of a possible work programme FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.2 Methodological issues. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Treatment of confidential data in the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.3 Methodological issues. Emissions resulting from fuel used in international aviation and maritime transportation FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.4 Development and transfer of technologies. Report of the UNFCCC workshop on enabling environments for technology transfer, Ghent, Belgium, 9 - 10 April 2003 FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.5 Methodological issues. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the and Add.1 Kyoto Protocol. Report of the second workshop on adjustments FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.6 Methodological issues. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Report on the intersessional consultations on registries FCCC/SBSTA/2003/INF.7 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. World Trade Organization FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.22 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: and Add.1 - 4, and Add.5 definitions and modalities for including afforestation and and Corr. 1 reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Views from Parties on issues related to modalities for the inclusion of afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism in the first commitment period. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.1 Methodological issues. Good practice guidance and other and Add. 1 information on land use, land-use change and forestry. Implications of harvested wood products accounting. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.2 Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on and Add. 1 Climate Change. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. Aspects of the Third Assessment Report that could facilitate the work of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.3 Methodological issues. Review of methodological work under the and Add.1 Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Initial views on needs for specific methodological activities and on a strategic approach to future methodological work. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.4 Methodological issues. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, taking into account the results of the case studies for simulating the calculation of adjustments. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.5 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft text for modalities. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.6 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons. Submissions from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel of the Montreal Protocol. FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.7 Other matters. Issues relating to cleaner or less-greenhouse-gas-emitting energy. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.8 Other matters. Issues relating to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.1 Report on the session. Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its eighteenth session. FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.2 Methodological issues. Emissions resulting from fuel used in international aviation and maritime transportation. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.3 Methodological issues. Good practice guidance and other information on land use, land-use change and forestry. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.4 Research and systematic observation. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.5 Development and transfer of technologies. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.6 Methodological issues. Issues relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the and Add.1 - 3 Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.7 Methodological issues. Issues relating to reporting and review of and Add.1 greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.8 Methodological issues. Review of methodological work under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.9 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.10 Other matters. Issues relating to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.11 Other matters. Issues relating to cleaner or less-greenhouse-gas-emitting energy. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.12 "Good practices" in policies and measures among Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.13 Methodological issues. Land use, land-use change and forestry: definitions and modalities for including afforestation and reforestation activities under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSSTA/2003/L.14 Other matters. Any other matters. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.15 Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/TP/2003/2 Enabling environments for technology transfer. Technical paper Other documents before the session FCCC/CP/1998/7 Review of the implementation of commitments and of other provisions of the Convention. Research and systematic observation. Report on the development of the observational networks of the climate system FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.2 Review of the implementation of commitments and of other observation. Comprehensive report on the development of the observational networks of the climate system FCCC/CP/2002/7 Report of the Conference of the Parties on its eighth session, held and Add.1 - 3 in New Delhi from 23 October to 1 November 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its sixteenth session, held at Bonn, from 5 to 14 June 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.2 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Report on intersessional consultations on registries. Note by the Chair of the consultations FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.13 "Good practices" in policies and measures among Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Policies and measures of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention reported in third national communications FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.15 Research and systematic observation. First compilation and synthesis of national reports on global climate observing systems FCCC/SBSTA/2002/INF.19 Methodological issues. Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Proposal for case studies to simulate the calculation of adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3 Proposal on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy. and Add 1 - 2 Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.19 "Good practices" in policies and measures among Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Submissions from Parties 