%%%ELECTION OF MEMBERS|BIOGRAPHY|

First session (first and second resumptions) New York 3-7 February 2003 21-23 April 2003 Election of members of the Committee on Budget and Finance Note by the Secretariat 1. At its 3rd meeting, held on 9 September 2002, the Assembly of States Parties decided that the elections of the members of the Committee on Budget and Finance would take place at the second resumption of the first session of the Assembly, to be held from 21 to 23 April 2003. 2. The Committee on Budget and Finance was established by the Assembly of States Parties in its resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.4 of 3 September 2002. The terms of reference of the Committee are set out in the annex to the resolution. 3. The procedure for the nomination and election of the members of the Committee was set out by the Assembly of States Parties in its resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5 of 3 September 2002. In accordance with paragraph 6 of that resolution, each nomination shall specify how the candidate fulfils the requirements laid down in paragraph 2 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.4, i.e., to be an expert of recognized standing and experience in financial matters at the international level from a State Party. 4. The distribution of seats among the regional groups for the purpose of the first election is established in paragraph 8 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5 as follows: - Two seats for the Group of African States; - Two seats for the Group of Asian States; - Two seats for the Group of Eastern European States; - Two seats for the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States; - Four seats for the Group of Western European and other States. 5. As required by paragraph 9 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5, every effort shall be made to elect the members of the Committee by consensus, on the basis of a recommendation by the Bureau. Under paragraph 10, in the absence of a consensus, the election shall be a matter of substance, and subject to the requirements of article 112, paragraph 7 (a) of the Rome Statute, which provides as follows: "7. Each State Party shall have one vote. Every effort shall be made to reach decisions by consensus in the Assembly and in the Bureau. If consensus cannot be reached, except as otherwise provided in the Statute: (a) Decisions on matters of substance must be approved by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting provided that an absolute majority of States Parties constitutes the quorum for voting". 6. In accordance with paragraph 11 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5, the election shall be by secret ballot. However, this requirement may be dispensed with if the number of candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be filled or in respect of candidates endorsed by the respective regional groups, unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a given election. 7. Under paragraph 12 of the resolution, the persons elected shall be those candidates from each regional group who obtained the highest number of votes and a two-thirds majority of States Parties present and voting, provided that an absolute majority of the States Parties constitutes the quorum for voting. As to the cadence of term of office for the members elected, the President of the Assembly shall draw lots for this purpose, as required in paragraph 13 of the resolution. 8. In accordance with the decision of the Assembly of States Parties taken at its 3rd meeting, on 9 September 2002, the period for the nomination of candidates was established to run from 1 December 2002 to 15 February 2003. Since only six nominations had been received at the closing date, the Assembly, at its 8th meeting, on 7 February 2003, decided to extend the nomination period until 7 March 2003 and authorized the President of the Assembly of States Parties to further extend the nomination period should an insufficient number of candidates be received by the close of the extended deadline. By 7 March 2003, four additional nominations had been received and one State Party had withdrawn its nomination. In line with the authority vested in him by the Assembly, the President further extended the nomination period until 21 March 2003. By the closing date, two additional nominations had been received, thus bringing the total number of nominations to 11. 9. Of the 11 nominations, three were made by the Group of African States; two by the Group of Asian States; two by the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States; and four by the Group of Western European and other States. No nominations were received from the Group of Eastern European States. 10. In accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5, a list in English alphabetical order of all persons nominated, with accompanying documents, is contained in the annex to the present note. [Original: English/French/Spanish] Alphabetical list of candidates (with statements of qualifications) Contents Name and nationality* Page 1. Dah Kindji, Lambert (Benin) 2. Dutton, David (Australia) 3. Gallardo Aparicio, Eduardo E. (Bolivia) 4. Gharaibeh, Fawzi (Jordan) 5. Hahn, Myung-jae (Republic of Korea) 6. Lovell, Peter (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) 7. Muwanga, John F. S. (Uganda) 8. Mwango, Chitundu Norman (Zambia) 9. Paschke, Karl (Germany) 10. Tilemans, Michel-Etienne (Belgium) 11. Wins Arnábal, Santiago (Uruguay) * Also the nominating State unless otherwise indicated. [Original: English/French] Note verbale The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Benin to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Secretariat of the United Nations (Codification Division) and has the honour to inform it of the following: The Government of the Republic of Benin has decided to submit the candidature of Mr. Lambert Dah Kindji to the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Statute of the International Criminal Court. Statement of qualifications Date and place of birth: 17 September 1956, Ahouanzonme Adjohoun, Ouémé, Benin. Current position: Director for banks and financial institutions. Higher education Master's degree in Economics (specialism: planning), Benin National University. Postgraduate degree in Banking and Finance, 19th graduating class, Centre Ouest-Africain de Formation et d'Etudes Bancaires (West African Training Centre for Banking Studies) Central Bank of West African States, Dakar. Military service 1980-1981 Military service (2nd graduating class, Jeunes Bacheliers Révolutionnaires). Professional activities 29 April 1982 Entered the Department of Public Contracts and Equipment, Ministry of Finance, as Controller of Financial Services. 28 July 1994 Entered the Directorate-General of Budget and Equipment. Employment history 1982-1989 Deputy Chief, Housing and Equipment Service (Department of Public Contracts and Equipment). 1989-1990 Deputy Chief, Accountancy Service (Department of Public Contracts and Equipment). 1990-1994 Deputy Chief, Public Contracts Service (Department of Public Contracts and Equipment). 1994 Chief, Socio-administrative Equipment Budget Division, Department of Budget Implementation (Directorate-General of Budget and Equipment). 1995 Chief, Transfer Expenditure Division, Department of Budget Implementation, Directorate-General of Budget and Equipment. 1996 Chief, Non-shared Staff Expenditure Division, Department of Budget Implementation, Directorate-General of Budget and Equipment. 1998-2000 Chief, Central Administration Investment Budget Division, Directorate-General of Budget. 2000-2002 Chief, Capital Expenditure Service (Central Administration Investment Budget Division and Socio-administrative Equipment Budget Division), Public Investment Budget Department (Directorate-General of Budget). 2002 Director, Public Investment Budget. Training Training course on accounting standards of the Afro-Malagasy Common Organization (1984). Seminar on new United Nations Development Programme procedures for national execution (October 1999). Seminar on the follow-up and evaluation of the programme budget (Public Expenditure Reform Credit (PERC)) (May 2000). Seminar on training in the area of financial policy and planning (July 2000). Seminar on the award of contracts (World Bank) at the Centre Africain d'Etudes Supérieures en Gestion (African Centre for Higher Studies in Management) (November 2000). Training course on the computerized public expenditure management mechanism (SIGFIP) (March 2001). Miscellaneous Instructor at the Centre de Perfectionnement et d'Assistance en Gestion (Centre for Improvement and Assistance in Management) on procedures for awarding public contracts in Benin. Responsible for delivering a training module for loan managers from the Water Authority on the financial management of projects (August 2000). Consultant at the Office of Financial Analysis and Management Services responsible for delivering training modules on techniques for awarding contracts. Director of the Revolving Fund for the project to air-condition the Technical Directorates unit of the Ministry of Finance. Member of the Board of Directors of the Beninese Office for Mining and Geological Research. Member of the steering committee for the human resources and population development project. Member of the pilot committee for the ADB Santé II project. Controller for public accountancy firms, intermediary tax collectors and directors of revolving funds and minor expenditure since 1982. Languages read, spoken and written French, English [Original: English] The Permanent Mission of Australia to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and has the honour to refer to the note titled "Nomination of candidates for membership of the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" dated 7 November 2002. The Permanent Mission of Australia to the United Nations has the further honour to advise that Australia has decided to present the candidature of Dr. David Dutton for membership of the Budget and Finance Committee. The Permanent Mission of Australia to the United Nations has the further honour to advise that Dr. Dutton's candidature has been endorsed by the Government of Canada and the Government of New Zealand. Dr. Dutton is an expert of recognized standing and experience in financial matters at the international level. Dr. Dutton is presently serving as Australia's delegate to the Fifth (Administrative and Budgetary) Committee of the General Assembly and has demonstrated expertise in the financial affairs of the United Nations, including the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and for the Former Yugoslavia. In this role, Dr. Dutton has reviewed and made recommendations concerning proposed programme budgets for the United Nations and reviewed reports concerning its financial operations. A curriculum vitae presenting Dr. Dutton's qualifications for election as a member of the Budget and Finance Committee is attached to this note. Australia has been a strong supporter of the establishment of an effective, independent International Criminal Court and would be pleased to play a role in the Budget and Finance Committee during the establishment phase of the Court. Australia is well placed to do so, having long been an active participant in the work of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, and having a strong record of ongoing contributions to the management of the United Nations and other international organizations. Date and place of birth: 9 June 1972, Sydney, Australia. Education Ph.D., University of Melbourne, 1998. B.A. Honours, First Class, Macquarie University, Sydney, 1994. Background and experience First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Australia to the United Nations, New York, 2002-present. Representative of Australia on the Fifth (Administrative and Budgetary) Committee of the General Assembly. Executive Officer, International Security Division, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Canberra, 1998-2002. Assistant Lecturer, Departments of Political Science and History, University of Melbourne, 1995-1998. Member, Finance Committee, Faculty of Arts Board, Faculty of Arts Budget Committee, University of Melbourne, 1997-1998. General Secretary, University of Melbourne Postgraduate Association, 1997. Multilateral delegations First session of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. Fifth Review Conference of the States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention. Board of Governors, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001. Publications Dr. Dutton has published a monograph, numerous book chapters and scholarly articles, and several book reviews on the subjects of citizenship, human rights, migration and Australia's foreign relations. [Original: Spanish] The Permanent Mission of Bolivia to the United Nations presents its compliments to the United Nations Secretariat/Office of Legal Affairs and has the honour to inform it that the Government of Bolivia has decided to submit the candidature of Mr. Eduardo E. Gallardo Aparicio for a post on the Budgetary and Finance Committee. The election will take place during the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute, to be held from 21 to 23 April 2003. Mr. Gallardo Aparicio is a professional with knowledge and experience in United Nations financial and administrative matters. From 1999 to 2001 he was a delegate to the Fifth Committee; during that period he was entrusted with negotiating the scale of assessments for our country. Mention should also be made of his participation in the Second Committee and in the Economic and Social Council, which strengthened his knowledge of international organizations. This letter constitutes formal submission of Mr. Gallardo Aparicio's candidature for a post on the Budgetary and Finance Committee. Place and date of birth: La Paz, 9 September 1971 Academic background 1994-1996 Diplomatic Academy of Bolivia. Graduated with a degree in international relations and diplomacy 1989-1993 Universidad Mayor de San Andrés, Bolivia. Bachelor's degree in economics Work experience 1999-2001 Delegate to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly 1999-2002 Delegate to the Second Committee of the General Assembly 2000-2001 Delegate to the Economic and Social Council Other activities 1998-1999 Officer-in-charge of economic and statistical data and agreements on investment promotion and double taxation, Department of Sectoral Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 1996-1998 Officer-in-charge of export promotion, Office of Export Promotion, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Languages Spanish, English The Permanent Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations presents his compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and, with reference to the latter's note verbale dated 7 November 2002, has the honour to inform that the Jordanian Government has decided to nominate Dr. Fawzi A. Gharaibeh, a Jordanian national, as a candidate for membership of the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The nomination is for one of the two seats allocated for the Asian States in accordance with resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5 adopted by the Assembly of States Parties. The Permanent Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations will highly appreciate it if the Secretary-General of the United Nations circulates, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5, the nomination of Dr. Gharaibeh to the States parties to the Rome Statute. Pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5, the Jordanian Government asserts that Dr. Gharaibeh is an expert of recognized standing and experience in financial matters at the international level. In this regard, a copy of the curriculum vitae of Dr. Gharaibeh is attached, which reflects his experience in financial and economic matters as well as the various academic, governmental and international positions he has held. Personal data Place and date of birth: Jordan, November 1943. Languages: Arabic (mother tongue), English, very little French. 1972 Ph.D., University of Wisconsin, United States of America. 1968 M.B.A., Texas Tech University, United States of America. 1965 B. Com. (Honours), Cairo University. Areas of specialization Accounting, finance and economics. Positions held 2002- Professor Emeritus. 2001- Member of the Executive Board, UNESCO, Paris. 1999-2000 Chairman of the Board, Jordan Phosphate Mines Co. Ltd. 1998-1999 Minister of Education, Government of Jordan. 1991-1998 President, University of Jordan. 1986-1990 Vice-President for Administrative Affairs, University of Jordan. 1983-1986 Dean, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, University of Jordan. 1981-1998 Professor, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, University of Jordan. 1976-1981 Associate Professor, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, University of Jordan. 1972-1976 Assistant Professor, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, University of Jordan. 1980-1981 Chairman, Accounting Department, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, University of Jordan. 1978-1979 Visiting Scholar, LBJ School of Public Affairs, University of Texas at Austin, United States. Summer, 1978 Visiting Professor, Portland State University, United States. 1975-1978 Assistant Dean, Faculty of Economics and Commerce, University of Jordan. 1974-1975 Chairman, Faculty of Economics and Commerce, University of Jordan. Books (English) The Badia of Jordan: A Process of Change. Amman: University of Jordan Press, 1987 (with others). The Economies of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1987. The Bedouin of Jordan: A People in Transition. Amman: Royal Scientific Society Press, 1987 (with others). The Small and Handicraft Industries in Jordan. Amman: Industrial Development Bank, n.d., 1976 (with others). Books (Arabic) Contemporary Issues in Jordan. Amman and Beirut: Abdel Hamid Shoman Foundation and Arab Institute for Studies and Publications, 2001. Accounting Principles. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1983 (with others). Accounting for Executives. Amman: El-Dustour Press, 1982 (with others). Research Methodology in Social Sciences and Humanities. Amman: Royal Scientific Society Press, 1977 (with others); second edition, 2002. Cost Accounting: Principles, Procedures and Control. Amman: Philadelphia Publishing House, 1975. Articles (English) "Bedouin Settlement: Organizational, Legal and Administrative Structure: The Experience of Jordan", in Galaty, John G., Aronson, Dan and Salzman, Philip Carl, eds. The Future of Pastoral Peoples. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, 1981 (with another). "West Asia and Southeast Asia: A Commentary", in Economic Relations between West Asia and Southeast Asia. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 1978. "Foreign Companies in Jordan: Problems and Prospects", Arab Journal of Administration (October 1979) (with another). "Doing Business in the Arab World: Problems and Prospects", in The Arab World: Business Opportunities. Singapore: Compa Publications, 1977 (with another). "Amman Region and its Weight in Jordan's Economy", Orient, 1976 (with others). Articles (Arabic) "Education in Jordan and the Requirements of the Twenty-first Century", in Contemporary Issues in Jordan, 2001. "The Relationship between Accounting Variables Beta and Market Beta as a Measure of Systematic Risk in Public Shareholding Companies in Jordan", Dirasat, 1996 (with another). "The Use of Financial Ratios to Predict Highly Successful Industrial Corporations in Jordan", Dirasat, 1990 (with another). "Annual Financial Reports of Jordanian Industrial Corporations and their Relevance for Investment Decisions", Dirasat, 1990 (with another). "Information Content of Annual Financial Reports in Jordanian Corporations -- Trading Volume", Dirasat, 1989 (with another). "Timeliness of Financial Reports in Jordanian Industrial Corporations", Dirasat, 1988 (with another). "Information Content of Accounting Income Numbers in Jordanian Industrial Corporations", Abkath Al-Yarmouk, 1988 (with another). "Financial Ratios as Predictors of Failure in Jordanian Industrial Corporations", Dirasat, 1987 (with another). "Disclosures in Financial Annual Reports in Jordanian Industrial Corporations", Dirasat, 1986 (with another). "The Extent of Utilization of Cost Accounting Systems in Jordanian Industrial Corporations", Dirasat, 1986 (with another). "Inflation Accounting in Jordanian Corporations: A Case Study", Economics and Administrative Research, 1981. "The Accounting Function and the Chief Accountant in Jordanian Corporations", Dirasat, 1981. "The Use of Simultaneous Equations in Service Department's Cost Allocation: A Case Study", Journal of Business Research, 1980. "The Investment Climate in Jordan", Businessmen, 1978. "Internal Control in Corporations: A Quantitative Evaluation", Dirasat, 1976 (with another). "Modern Construction Industries: A Case Study", Dirasat, 1975 (with another). "The Use of Linear Programming in Fixed Cost Allocation: The Case of Paper and Cardboard Manufacturing Company", Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference on Operations Research. Cairo: Egyptian Society of Operations Research, 1975. Membership (select) Outside the University of Jordan Deputy Chairman, Higher Education Council, Jordan, 1998-. Member, Higher Education Council, Jordan, 1991-. President, Jordan Alumni Society for Graduates of United States Universities and Institutes, Amman, 1991-. Member, Board of Trustees, King Hussein Foundation, 1999-. Member, Board of Trustees, Wasfi Tall Annual Prize, International and Islamic Centre for Information and Studies, Amman, 1996-2000. Member of the Direction Commission of the University of the Mediterranean, Italy, 1996-1998. Member, Board of Directors, Institute of Diplomacy, Amman, 1995-1998. Member, World Affairs Council, Amman, 1984-1998. Deputy Board Member, Executive Council, International Association of Universities, Paris, 1995-1998. Member and Treasurer, Jordanian-American Commission for Educational Exchange (Fulbright), 1994-1997. Member, American Accounting Association, 1991-1996. Member, Board of Economic Advisers, Government of Jordan, 1991-1993. Member and Chairman, Advisory Committee to Evaluate Higher Education Policies in Jordan, 1988-1991 and 1991-1994. Member, Advisory Committee to the Faculty of Administrative Sciences and Economics, Qatar University, 1985-1992. Chairman, Committee to Evaluate Degrees Granted by Foreign Universities, 1986-1991. Member, Auditing Council, Jordan, 1985-1991. Member, Committee to Draw up the national Charter for Jordan, 1989-1990. Member, Board of Directors, Jordan Cigarette and Tobacco Company, 1984-1990. Chairman, Committee to Evaluate Business Programmes in Community Colleges, 1985-1986. Member, Committee to Re-evaluate Assets and Liabilities of the United Insurance Company and the Arab-Belgian Insurance Company, 1986. Within the University of Jordan Member of the Board, Centre for Strategic Studies, 2002-. Chairman, University Council, 1991-1998. Chairman, The Dean's Council, 1991-1998. Chairman, Appointment and Promotion Committee, 1991-1998. Chairman, Investment Fund, 1991-1998. Chairman, Provident Fund, 1991-1998. Chairman, Center for Strategic Studies, 1991-1998. Chairman, Housing Fund, 1986-1990. Chairman, Centre for Consultation, Technical Services and Studies, 1984-1990. Chairman, Finance Committee, 1986-1990. Membership in committees is so numerous over the span of my long university service that it would serve no useful purpose to cite them all here. Medals Independence Medal of the First Order. Letter The Government of the Republic of Korea has decided to nominate Counsellor Hahn Myung-jae as a candidate for membership of the Committee on Budget and Finance of the International Criminal Court. As the seventh-largest contributor to the Court and a strong supporter of the Committee, the Republic of Korea would highly appreciate your inscribing Mr. Hahn in the list of candidates. (Signed) Sun Joun-yung Permanent Representative Date of birth: 16 August 1956 B.A., Yonsei University, Republic of Korea, Department of Law, 1980. M.A., Graduate School of Communications, Republic of Korea, 1982. Certificate, International Law Expert Course, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, summer 1986. Professional career Passed the Higher Civil Exam (1982). Assistant Director, East European Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1982-1983). First Lieutenant, Military Police, Republic of Korea Army (1983-1986). Deputy Director, International Law Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1986-1988). Chief of the Chancellery and Second Secretary, Republic of Korea Mission to the European Communities (1988-1991). First Secretary, Republic of Korea Embassy to Brunei Darussalam (1991-1993). Deputy Director, North American Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1993-1995). Section Chief of Personnel, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1995-1996). First Secretary and Consul, Republic of Korea Embassy to Canada (1996-1999). Director, Consular Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1999-2002). Counsellor, Republic of Korea Mission to the United Nations (2002- ). Personal background Domestic activities Member, Anti-Terrorism Committee (1999-2002). Member, Committee on National Security (1999-2002). Member, Committee on the Security of the President (1999-2002). Member, Committee on the Human Rights of Foreign Workers (1999-2002). Lecturer, Police Academy. Lecturer, Korean International Educational Institute. Lecturer, Customs Department Educational Institute. International activities Chairman, Asian Group of Countries, International Seabed Authority (2002- ). Chairman, Asian Legal Experts Group at the United Nations (2002- ). The Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and has the honour, with reference to the Secretary-General's notes of 7 November 2002 and 14 February 2003, to communicate to the Legal Counsel of the United Nations the United Kingdom's nomination of Mr. Peter Lovell, Acting Director of Finance (English Court Service), for membership of the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court. With reference to the requirement that the candidates be experts of recognized standing and experience in financial matters at the international level, the Permanent Mission would draw attention to the fact that Mr. Lovell, as Director of Finance for the English Court Service, has oversight responsibility for a US$ 1.3 billion budget; that he has financial and management experience at all levels of the English judicial system and has been deeply involved in steering change management through improvements in resource management and budgetary processes; and that he has represented the English Court Service in a wide range of international gatherings, in particular with those Eastern European States seeking accession to the European Union. Mr. Lovell is a United Kingdom national. He is available, if elected, to carry out his duties for three calendar years. Career résumé A track record in financial management and planning at both the headquarters and the group level within the Court Service. Broad operational experience in Crown, County and High Court. Successful record of steering change management through improvements to resource management and budgeting processes, restructuring of financial functions at the creation of agency and of management structure review, and setting up major private finance initiative/outsourcing contracts delivering a range of financial and IT services. Has taken forward a number of key initiatives as part of the introduction of resource accounting and budgeting (RAB), including the restructuring of the Resources and Planning Division. Represented Court Service at a range of seminars and presentations with international jurisdictions (including the Commonwealth, South America and countries seeking European Union (EU) accession, e.g., Poland, Latvia, Czechoslovakia, Colombia, Hungary, the former Yugoslavia, Indonesia) covering financial management and organization. During 2002 this included a visit to Bulgaria preliminary to the EU Phare project, a lecture at the Royal Institute of Public Administration on financial management and managing change, with the participation of representatives from Rwanda, Cyprus and Oman, a twinning programme with the Russian Ministry of Justice and a number of presentations on court management to Eastern European States for the British Association for Central and Eastern Europe. Relevant career experience October 2002 to date. Acting Director of Finance, English Court Service. Reporting to the Chief Executive and Court Service Board on all financial matters (budget Pound850 million), including allocation of budgets to meet departmental Public Service Agreements (PSAs), accounts production, advice and investment appraisal on modernization programmes and fee-setting to recover costs of civil courts. October 2001-October 2002. Field Services Manager. Responsible for allocation of resources (Pound400 million) to operational areas to meet PSA and key performance indicator (KPI) targets. Ongoing monitoring of financial and operational performance, including consultation with the judiciary over aspects of court funding. November 1999-October 2001. Deputy Director of Finance, Court Service. Coordinated Court Service 2000 Spending Review bid. Allocations to budget holders, monitoring of financial and business performance. Transferred Court Funds Office financial functions from Public Trustee to Court Service. Management of euro preparation teams. Restructuring of resource planning and development (RPD) and RAB implementation. November 1997-November 1999. ARAMIS (Resource Accounting Management Information System) Programme Manager. Overall management of ARAMIS Private Finance Initiative (PFI)/outsourcing programme. Managed implementation stage of Oracle financials. Established structure for managing ongoing developments and implementation. Reviewed structure for overall management of ARAMIS and established Service Delivery Monitoring Unit. Setting and monitoring of annual budget (circa Pound14 million). Implemented centralization of vote and legal aid payments, including judicial fees and fee-paid staff. December 1992-November 1997. Resources and Planning Branch. Preparation of Court Service expenditure plans. Allocation of resources to budget holders. Developed allocation methodology linking funding to cost drivers and planned activity. Monitoring of performance. Produced first Court Service business plan when changed to agency status. Developed revised financial roles and responsibilities for management structure review, producing improved alignment in terms of financial responsibility and accountability. October 1989-December 1992. London Crown Court Group. Negotiating with court managers over sitting day plans, resources and distribution of work. Responsible for judicial itineraries of all London Crown and county courts. Project managed the transfer of the London Jury Summoning Office from the Under Sheriff of London to the Department. I have the honour to forward the curriculum vitae of Mr. John F. S. Muwanga, the Ugandan candidate for the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. (Signed) Professor Semakula Kiwanuka Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations Mr. Muwanga, the Auditor General of Uganda has extensive experience in matters of finance and budgets not only in Uganda, but in several African countries where he has worked. As a former employee and later a partner of Price Waterhouse, his breadth of expertise will make a valuable contribution to the work of the Committee on Budget and Finance. The nomination of Mr. Muwanga fulfils the requirements established in the annex to resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.4. Date of birth: 10 January 1956. Professional qualification Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants, United Kingdom; Fellow of the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants (FCCA), member of the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda. Key experience Graduated as a Certified Accountant in December 1979, in Great Britain, and joined the London office of Coopers & Lybrand (now known as PriceWaterhouseCoopers) in February 1980. Obtained extensive international and regional experience having worked with the firm (Coopers & Lybrand) in the London office for two and a half years, seven years in the Zambian office, then thereafter three years with the Lilongwe (Malawi) office. Was a partner with Coopers & Lybrand beginning in 1987 while with the Zambian and Malawi practice. The main tasks were to provide technical direction relating to the audit, company secretarial and taxation affairs of companies in both public and private sectors. The companies included financial institutions, farming estates, parastatal organizations, multinational corporations, local manufacturing and service industries. The responsibilities included ensuring the maintenance of professional, technical and management skills of senior staff and developing appropriate standards of professional work. After I returned to Uganda in 1994 and took up a consultancy assignment on the World Bank project and became attached to the Treasury, my experience broadened to encompass those accounting disciplines and skills pertaining to central and local government. As a consultant on the World Bank project since 1994, I have held line positions within government and headed the portfolio of the Directorate of Accounts, and represented Uganda as the Accountant General internationally. Career history January 2001 to date: Auditor General of Uganda As the Auditor General of the Republic of Uganda, my responsibilities have mainly been to effectively implement the Constitutional provision of article 163, which requires the audit and annual report on the public accounts of Uganda and all public offices including the courts, the central and local government administrations, universities, public corporations and such bodies as established by an Act of Parliament. The Auditor General is a constitutional office whose appointment is by the President of Uganda with the approval of Parliament and has a staff of 350 people of whom the larger proportion are technical staff spread out over the regional offices in Uganda. November 1994-31 December 2000 Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Positions: :: International Audit Adviser :: Acting Commissioner/Treasury Officer of Accounts :: Acting Director of Accounts Since October 1994 Engaged as the Government's Economic and Financial Management Project's International Audit Adviser to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under World Bank IDA Credit No. 2418-UG. Responsible for the establishment of the government internal audit department, which included drawing up its terms of reference, formulating the staff structure and job descriptions, then ultimately the interviewing and placement of staff. An outline for the international audit manual was also prepared. Effective from March 1996 (still under the World Bank project) Reassigned to the duties of the Commissioner/Treasury Office of Accounts, and reporting to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. The tasks have been to ensure the proper management and control of the finances of Uganda and their compliance with the Constitution and the Public Finance Act. Effective from September 1998 (still under the World Bank project) Reassigned the duties of the Director of Accounts, of the newly restructured Ministry, and represented Uganda as the Accountant General internally. The departments within the Directorate include Internal Audit, the Treasury Inspectorate and the Treasury Office of Accounts. November 1993-August 1994 Management Consultant (Audit) Partner, Coopers & Lybrand, Lusaka. Providing technical direction on audits, which have included, as the engagement partner, Zambia Railways, Zambia National Building Society, African Commercial Bank Limited, Zambia National Commercial Bank and Chibote Meat Corporation Limited. Zambia Railways had gross annual revenues in excess of US$ 25 million per their latest financial statements, and fixed assets in excess of $26 million (ZK 700 = US$ 1.00). Foreign/donor-assisted organizations audited included the Zambia Federation of Employers, the United Church of Zambia and various projects sponsored at the University of Zambia. June 1990-July 1993 Resident Partner, Coopers & Lybrand, Lilongwe, Malawi. Technical Direction: Providing technical direction on audits, company secretarial and taxation affairs of companies. Some significant clients included Investment Trade and Management Corporation (I.T.M.) with a turnover in excess of MK 54 million (MK 7 US$ 1.00 (June 1993)), Lilongwe Water Board (public utility company with assets in excess of MK 187 million), Maltraco Limited (a subsidiary of I.T.M. involved with dealership distribution of earth-moving equipment and heavy trucks), and WJ & RL Gulliver, involved in road and building construction. Taxation: Taxation work included the review of income tax computations and returns prepared on behalf of clients and corresponding with the Department of Taxes to obtain approved assessments; updating, advising and guiding both clients and staff on developments and changes in the taxation legislation. Receiver: Acting as the Receiver and Manager of eight tobacco estates in receivership. Administration: Attending to staff administration matters while managing the Lilongwe office. Obtaining the correct calibre of technical and professional staff in the right mix, by grade, in order to service the firm's client portfolio in the most effective manner and achieve and maintain the highest professional standards. The comparison of actual time spent on jobs against budgeted time was a key factor in monitoring costs and in the final analysis negotiating and agreeing fees with clients. Training: Staff training and development was a constant feature as technical input at the most appropriate time enhanced efficiency and quality of the final product. On-the-job training (field training) during the course of an audit, or assignment, and final review on completion ensured that staff were suitably and constantly monitored and trained at the same time. Participation and presentation of various topics during in-house training courses organized in conjunction with the firm's Blantyre office, assisted staff in the development of their audit, accounting and communication skills, particularly during case studies and role-playing exercises. Less structured and less formal arrangements were made with individual staff members in guiding them in examination questions and techniques. June 1989-June 1990 Partner (Audit), Coopers & Lybrand, Lusaka. A nine-partner office which was departmentalized into audit taxation, management consultancy, liquidation, accounting and company secretarial. As one of the audit partners my major tasks involved providing technical direction on audits and the maintenance of professional standards. As a member of the firm's national technical committee, extensive involvement was undertaken both in the issuance of auditing and accounting guidelines, and the organization and participation in in-house training courses. May 1987-June 1989 Partner, Coopers & Lybrand, Kitwe, Zambia. As a general practice partner, the work I performed encompassed that of auditing, taxation, company secretarial and developing the firm's accounting and secretarial department's role to that of a more broadly based financial services role and renaming the department as Business Services Group. August 1983-May 1987 Coopers & Lybrand, Lusaka: :: Audit Senior :: Audit Supervisor :: Manager and Special Assistant to the Senior Partner Duties performed: Audits: Auditing those companies in both the private sector and parastatal organizations. The activities of those companies were mainly manufacturing, retail and wholesale, construction, farming, transportation (haulage), ecclesiastical, hotel and financial services. Major clients included Intercontinental Hotel Corporation Limited, Zambia National Provident Fund & Zambia National Wholesale and Marketing Company Limited, Contract Haulage, Premium Oil Industries and Zambia National Commercial Bank. Special Assistant to the Senior Partner: The work centred mainly on new and prospective clients. It entailed the compilation and analysis of data and the preparation of various financial reports such as share valuations, cash flow forecasts, appraisal of projects/business ventures and liaison with financial institutions. February 1980- November 1982 Coopers & Lybrand, London: :: Semi Senior :: Senior As part of a team in the Business Services Group of the London office, varied tasks were performed, which included: :: Investigations :: Preparation of statutory and management accounts :: Attending to company secretarial matters :: Preparation of various financial reports Social/extra activities Non-executive Board member of Uganda Cooperative Bank, 1996-1998, and chaired the audit subcommittee of the Board. Ex officio Council member of the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda, 1996 to date. Member of the Rotary Club of Lilongwe, Malawi, 1992-1993. Honorary Treasurer of Lilongwe Golf Club, 1992-1993. Member of Lusaka Round Table XI, 1984-1987. Honorary Treasurer, Lusaka Club (Squash Section) 1986-1987. Honorary Treasurer of Kitwe (Zambia) and District Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 1987-1988. Executive Committee member of the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants, Zambia Branch, 1987. The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Zambia to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and has the honour to refer to the announced vacancies on the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The Permanent Mission of Zambia has further the honour to inform the Secretary-General that the Government of the Republic of Zambia has decided to present a candidate, Mr. Chitundu Norman Mwango, who is currently the Accountant General, for membership of the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Mr. C. N. Mwango is a qualified Chartered Accountant of Zambia, a Chartered Management Accountant of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and a Chartered Secretary and Administrator of the United Kingdom. Mr. Mwango is currently working as Accountant General of the Republic of Zambia, a position he has held since 1 December 2001. Prior to appointment as Accountant General, Mr. Mwango was Secretary and Chief Executive of the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants, an examination and regulatory body for accountants in Zambia. As Chief Executive he was responsible for running the Institute on behalf of Council Members. He strengthened the Institute management and repositioned it to enable it to command the respect and attention due to a professional regulatory institute. The Institute was created by the Accountants Act of 1982 to do all such acts and things as are necessary to foster the advancement of the profession of accountancy. The appointment was held from 1 April 1999 to 30 November 2001. Mr. Mwango had spent 15 years in the mining industry in Zambia- Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM), where he held senior financial and company secretariat positions. He was Head of Finance of operating divisions, including Nchanga Division, the flagship of ZCCM. He has been closely involved with the successful privatization of Mulungushi Investments Limited where he was Financial Controller and Company Secretary, and Scaw Limited where he was Finance Manager. Other experience includes appointments in the commercial sector where he rose to the position of General Manager. Mr. Mwango has also worked in local government where his career started and rose to the position of Town Treasurer. Mr. Mwango has represented Zambia in a number of capacities and has been a Council member of the East, Central and Southern African Federation of Accountants and is currently Chairman of the East and Southern African Association of Accountants General, a grouping of 13 countries. Mr. Mwango is a qualified manager whose interest is to link finance to operations as a real key to wealth creation and under this theme has been involved as a trainer. He believes that any business manager who does not understand finance works under an unnecessary handicap. Date of birth: 22 November 1946. Present occupation Accountant General, Government of the Republic of Zambia. Academic and pre-professional qualifications Completed "O" level studies in 1965. Between 1966 and 1973, did a number of certificate and upgrading courses while trying to identify a career to undertake. Finally, seriously embarked on studies in company secretaryship and accountancy in 1973. Professional qualifications Qualified for and admitted to associate membership of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators of the United Kingdom in 1978. Qualified for and admitted to membership of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants of the United Kingdom in 1983 as Associate and in 1993 as Fellow. Admitted to membership of the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants as Associate in 1984 and as Fellow in 1994. Work background Currently I am working as Accountant General of the Government of the Republic of Zambia. In this capacity I am responsible for providing an accounting and financial management service. My role is epitomized in the mission statement of the Department of the Accountant General's office as follows: "To ensure effective, efficient and economic utilisation of public funds for the enhancement of citizenry quality of life." Prior to taking up the appointment of Accountant General on 1 December 2001, I worked as Secretary and Chief Executive of the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants, a statutory body established by an Act of Parliament to regulate the accountancy profession in Zambia. The institute is run by elected members of Council. During my stay at the Institute as Chief Executive I strengthened management by designing job descriptions which gave needed direction to members of the staff. Conditions of service were codified, budget preparation and keeping of books of accounts improved tremendously, controls were enhanced and the Institute showed significant growth in both membership and cash holdings. The challenges I left to my successor were to increase the size of the Institute, localize all professional examinations for accountants and maintain ethics in the accountancy profession. From 1 August 1989 to 30 April 1998, I worked for Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd (ZCCM) as a financial controller in divisions and subsidiary companies. Due to the reorganization of ZCCM to reflect its new role as a post-privatization investment company my position was no longer relevant to the company's labour requirements at Operations Centre and I was laid off on 30 April 1998. I finished my secondment to Scaw Ltd as Head of Finance on 20 March 1998 after a very successful privatization. I was seconded by ZCCM on 20 May 1997 to strengthen the Senior Management Team tasked to transform the company and prepare it for a successful privatization. This particular privatization has been a high point in my career in that it demonstrated that there are still Zambian managers in the country who can work conscientiously while a company is earmarked for privatization. The company, which was nearing collapse in May 1997, was financially in a stronger position in March 1998 at the time of privatization. The Board of Directors of Scaw Limited showed their appreciation of my performance and directed the Chairman to write to me (as per the Scaw Board Minutes of 19 February 1998) as follows: "... The Directors noted with appreciation the exemplary manner with which you performed duties of Finance Manager of the Company ... On behalf of the Board I wish to extend my sincere gratitude to you for this exemplary effort and the manner in which you performed your duties while on secondment at Scaw Limited." From July 1995 to December 1996 I was seconded by ZCCM to Mulungushi Investments Limited (MIL) to work as Group Financial Controller and Company Secretary. During the period of my secondment the group comprised six engineering divisions and a farming division of 12 farms. The company had already been earmarked for privatization and I was involved with the privatization which entailed privatizing the engineering divisions and the farms individually and finally placing MIL under voluntary liquidation in September 1996. I remained with MIL until December 1996, after which I returned to ZCCM. Privatization of the Mulungushi divisions provided unique challenges and as Company Secretary I was involved in examining and signing the privatization paperwork on behalf of ZCCM and MIL. Prior to being seconded to MIL I was Head of Finance at Luanshya Division (1989-1992) and Nchanga Division (1992-1995). Nchanga, the biggest of the ZCCM operating divisions, consisted of about 10,000 employees, of which 130 were in the Finance Department, and had an annual operating budget of US$ 265 million, which I coordinated. I was the Chief Finance Officer (Finance Manager, Financial Controller) of a ZCCM operating division or subsidiary. I was responsible for the administration of the Finance Department, which provided accounting services to all departments in addition to providing management accounting reports to monitor divisional performance against budgets. I was also responsible for maintaining effective reporting systems of materials consumption (materials accounted for 60 per cent to 70 per cent of total operating costs). In addition to accounting functions, I supervised the Head of Information Technology and the Divisional Secretary. I was expected to put in place accounting systems which focused on management performance and at the same time provided internal controls. Other work background information Between 1983 and 1989, I worked for a private company as Chief Accountant (1983-1989) and as General Manager (1987-1989). The company was engaged in transportation, farming, manufacturing of packaging materials, wholesale and retail shops, maize milling and property development. The group enjoyed strong growth at the time I served it. My success in the company created its own problems. I was required to relocate, much to the disadvantage of my family. I decided to resign and rejoin the mining industry as this was going to give me an environment of stability for my family. Between 1978 and 1983, I worked for ZCCM as a Senior Accountant before resigning to join the private sector to experience the working environment of private owners-driven business. Between 1977 and 1978, I worked as Assistant Chief Accountant in a parastatal trading company. I resigned in order to join ZCCM, which was offering excellent training and good future job prospects with good remuneration at the time. Between 1968 and 1977, I worked in local government, where my career started. I joined as a trainee Accountancy Assistant and ascended to the position of Town Treasurer at the time of leaving. I resigned in order to join the commercial sector, which appeared to offer more exciting job prospects and remuneration at that time. With the above background, I can confidently state that I have a sound understanding of financial, human resources and general business management. It will be noted that my progression in the accountancy profession has been gradual. I have covered virtually every job, from that of an Accounts Clerk recording invoices to Financial Controller preparing Board level papers, and Chief Executive responsible for planning, organizing, directing and controlling organizations. Notable milestones 1992 Attended a four-week management course at Ashridge Management College, United Kingdom. 1987 Represented the Zambian business community at a two-week United Nations Economic Commission for Africa seminar in Moscow, having been nominated by the Chamber of Commerce. 1989-1995 Was a member of ZCCM Staff Development Panel and the Accountancy Training Advisory Committee. 1994-1997 Was a member of Council of the Zambia Institute of Certified Accountants and was Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee for Affiliates. 1998-1999 Member of the Zambia Branch of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants. 2000-2001 Member of Council of East, Central and Southern African Federation of Accountants. 2001 to date Member of the Executive Committee of the East and Southern African Association of Accountants General. I am the serving Chairman. Some specific areas of interest My pet obsession in my work is "linking finance to operations is real key to wealth creation". - Under this theme I try to link the operations of an organization to wealth creation no matter whether I am looking at a profit-making or non-profit-making organization. - Under the theme of "linking finance to operations is real key to wealth creation", I have been involved as a trainer of operations, accounting and management personnel. - I believe that accountants must understand operations. Business managers also must understand finance, otherwise they will be working under an unnecessary handicap. Employees who link their jobs to wealth creation at least understand why they are employed. I have a keen interest in staff development. I believe that young accountants must be given exposure beyond the organizations they work for. Local government and public-sector organizations are big spenders of funds, and also big revenue collectors; however, sadly they lack qualified accountants. This is an area where I feel I will make a significant contribution while serving the public service: I am totally committed to improving public expenditure management and financial accountability in government. My strengths I have a very stable family in whose education I have invested modestly. This is paying off. All my four children are adults with reasonable education. I have maintained a high level of personal and professional integrity. My ethical values are strong and I can stand with my head high anywhere, so far. I am technically qualified to handle any financial management, company secretarial and any general assignments, being a Chartered Accountant, Chartered Secretary and Administrator. My varied and long years of experience have exposed me to high-level management. I am able to work with and lead a multidisciplinary workforce to achieve the common goal of wealth creation. My stay at Mulungushi Investments Limited consolidated my knowledge of company secretarial practice and also gave me the confidence to work at the highest level possible as I had direct responsibility to the Board of Directors. The job at MIL was a total job in that as Financial Controller and Company Secretary, I advised the Board on matters of finance and company administration. As Chief Executive of ZICA I learned a lot about organizing and getting results, and I succeeded. Conclusion With the above varied experience and exposure, I believe that I have reached a level where I can handle managerial work (with appropriate technical support) independently without a need for any supervision. I recognize that learning is a never-ending process and I am prepared to learn and keep up to date; therefore, any of my weaknesses can be overcome. The Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations presents its compliments to the United Nations Secretariat, in its capacity as the secretariat of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and has the honour to communicate that the German Federal Government has decided to nominate, pursuant to resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.5, Mr. Karl Th. Paschke as a candidate for the elections of members of the Committee on Budget and Finance, to be held at the resumed first session of the Assembly of States Parties in New York in April 2003. Mr. Paschke is of German nationality. Germany is a State party to the Rome Statute and is a member of the Group of Western European and Other States. Mr. Paschke looks back on a distinguished career that focused for almost 20 years on financial and administrative issues, both within international organizations (United Nations, Council of Europe) and in his country's Foreign Service. As Director-General for Personnel and Management of the German Foreign Office (1990-1994), he was responsible for the entire staff of the Foreign Service and for the management of headquarters and more than 200 missions abroad. He was a key negotiator in the annual negotiations with the Finance Ministry and the Budget Committee of the Federal Parliament (Bundestag) about multimillion budgets. He also assumed responsibility for the installation of state-of-the-art communication and information technology at the Ministry. As Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services at the United Nations Secretariat in New York (1994-1999), he was the chief auditor, inspector general, programme evaluator and investigator of the world Organization. Together with his 120 associates, he supervised the substantial and the financial performance of the Secretariat, the regional commissions and the separately administered funds and programmes. Working hand in hand with the Department of Management, Mr. Paschke spearheaded efforts to rationalize and streamline the financial rules and regulations of the United Nations. His interaction with the Comptroller on budgetary matters was frequent and intense. After retiring from active duty in December 2000, Mr. Paschke became a part-time management adviser to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, France, giving advice on modernizing the financial and human resources management of the Organization. He has promoted the introduction of results-based budgeting, programme monitoring and evaluation, and an improved project management methodology. As of December 2002, Mr. Paschke was invited on various occasions to give advice on managerial, organizational and financial questions in preparing for the International Criminal Court, including the drafting of its Financial Rules. At present Management Adviser to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, France (after retiring from the German Foreign Service in December 2000). 1999-2000 Ambassador-at-large in charge of internal organization, German Foreign Office, Berlin. 1994-1999 Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services, United Nations, New York. 1990-1994 Director-General for Personnel and Management, Foreign Office, Bonn. 1987-1990 Minister Plenipotentiary and Deputy Head of Mission, German Embassy, Washington, D.C. 1984-1986 Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations and other International Organizations, Vienna. 1980-1984 Spokesperson of the Foreign Office, Bonn. 1977-1980 Press and Public Affairs Counsellor, German Embassy, Washington, D.C. 1972-1977 Director of Training for Junior Diplomats, Foreign Office, Bonn. 1968-1971 Political Counsellor and Deputy Head of Mission, German Embassy, Kinshasa. 1964-1968 German Consul in New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America. 1960 Admission to the German Foreign Service after studying law at the universities of Munich and Bonn. Karl Th. Paschke was born in Berlin in 1935. In addition to his professional activities, he is a jazz musician and composer. [Original: French/English] The Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations presents his compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and has the honour to inform him of Belgium's decision to nominate Mr. Michel-Etienne Tilemans as a candidate for membership on the Committee on Budget and Finance of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Mr. Tilemans is a Belgian national. Mr. Tilemans, who is currently Vice-Chairman of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, is an expert of recognized standing in budgetary and administrative matters relating to international organizations. Date and place of birth: 25 April 1962, La Paz. 1986-1987 Postgraduate degree in corporate law and tax law, Vrije Universiteit, Brussels. 1981-1986 Bachelor of Laws, Université catholique de Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. Professional training October 1990-March 1991 Training period at the Commission of the European Union -- Directorate-General XVI -- banking law and corporate law. Diplomatic career 2002-2003 Vice-Chairman of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations (Fifty-seventh session). 2002 Member of the Committee on Contributions of the United Nations. 2000-present First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United Nations (administrative and budgetary matters). 1997-2000 First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Belgium to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (committee on emergency civilian planning, committee on guidelines for SFOR and KFOR policies). 1996-1997 Seconded to the United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) -- unit for reconstruction and economic development, rapid-impact projects. 1994-1996 Second Secretary, Embassy of Belgium to Warsaw -- economic affairs. June 1993- Attaché, Permanent Mission of Belgium to NATO. December 1993 1991 Diplomatic service examination. Other professional experience 1988 Junior tax adviser, Société Lawtax S.A. (tax law advice and auditing firm, Brussels). [Original: English/Spanish] The Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Office of Legal Affairs -- secretariat of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and has the honour to inform it that the Government of Uruguay has nominated Lic. Santiago Wins Arnábal as a candidate for membership of the Committee on Budget and Finance, at the elections to be held during the second resumption of the first session of the Assembly of States Parties, from 21 to 23 April 2003. The Government of Uruguay believes that the nomination of Lic. Wins Arnábal, whose abbreviated resume is annexed to the present note, fulfils the requirements established in the annex to resolution ICC-ASP/1/Res.4. Date and place of birth: 14 December 1970, Montevideo, Uruguay. 1997-1999 Artigas Foreign Service Academy. 1989-1992 Bachelor's degree in international relations, University of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay. Professional experience 2000- Delegate to the Fifth Committee of the United Nations General Assembly. 2001-2002 Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee at the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly. 1999-2000 Administrative Officer in the Office of the Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 1997-1998 Administrative and Financial Affairs Officer in the Department of Multilateral Affairs. 1999 Delegate of Uruguay to the thirty-ninth session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination of the United Nations. 1998-1999 Member of the working group on instructions for the delegation of Uruguay to the fifty-second and fifty-third sessions of the General Assembly. Spanish, English, French and German. 