%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|

Preparatory Committee for the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons NPT/CONF.2005/PC.II/23 ENGLISH Original: session Geneva, 28 April - 9 May 2003 Implementation of article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and of paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 decision on the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" REPORT SUBMITTED BY SWITZERLAND In accordance with subparagraph 12 of paragraph 15 of the chapter on article VI of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference, the Government of Switzerland wishes to report on the measures it has taken to implement article VI of the NPT and paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament". 1. Switzerland supports all multilateral efforts in the field of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation which are designed to achieve practical and verifiable results. It is in favour of the complete elimination of all weapons of mass destruction. In the nuclear sphere, it fully observes the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and supports the strengthened review process for the Treaty. Support for resolutions on nuclear disarmament at the United Nations General Assembly 2. At the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly, Switzerland, which was participating in the proceedings for the first time as a Member State of the United Nations, voted for several resolutions on nuclear disarmament, including the following: Resolution 57/58 - "Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons" - submitted by Japan and referring to the 13 practical steps for disarmament agreed in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference. Resolution 57/100 on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). Resolution 57/57 entitled "Prevention of an arms race in outer space". GE.03-61231 (E) 050503 050503 3. Switzerland also supported resolution 57/83, aimed at preventing terrorist organizations from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. Diplomatic efforts to facilitate the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) 4. Switzerland signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in 1996 and ratified it in 1999. It is among the 44 States whose ratification is necessary for the treaty to enter into force. 5. Switzerland is convinced that it is important for the CTBT to enter into force as rapidly as possible, because this treaty is one of the pillars of the non-proliferation regime. Consequently, it has pursued various diplomatic efforts, including the following: The Foreign Minister participated in the first conference on facilitating the entry into force of the CTBT, which was held in Vienna in October 1999; The head of the federal Foreign Affairs Department participated in the second conference in November 2001 in New York; Switzerland has on many occasions urged countries which have not yet signed or ratified the CTBT to do so. 6. Lastly, Switzerland is making a substantial technical contribution to the task of CTBT verification, by making available data from an auxiliary seismic station in the International Monitoring System. Activities in preparation for the initiation of negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT) 7. Switzerland has pointed out on many occasions that, in keeping with the mandate given by the Conference on Disarmament (CD) on 23 March 1995 to its Ad Hoc Committee, the Conference should begin negotiations as soon as possible on a treaty to halt production of fissile material for the manufacture of arms and other nuclear explosive devices. In the view of Switzerland, an FMCT is an important element in making progress with nuclear disarmament and multilateral efforts to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 8. As a member of the CD, Switzerland will play an active role in the future negotiations on an FMCT. Switzerland has already taken part in the various workshops organized in Geneva on an FMCT, two of which were initiated by the Netherlands, Japan and Australia. The aim was to maintain the political momentum in order to draw the participants into substantive debates and to prompt the start of negotiations on such a treaty. The Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the CD made a statement on the FMCT on 27 March 2003. United Nations Disarmament Commission (UNDC) 10. This year Switzerland participated in the work of the Disarmament Commission for the first time as a Member of the United Nations and regrets that it was not possible to reach agreement on nuclear disarmament issues. 