%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|ASIA|MIDDLE EAST|CENTRAL EUROPE|EASTERN EUROPE|NON-NUCLEAR-WEAPON STATES|NUCLEAR WEAPON STATES|

Preparatory Committee for the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons NPT/CONF.2005/PC.II/WP.5 ENGLISH Original: Second session Geneva, 28 April-9 May 2003 Working paper on nuclear-weapon-free zones submitted by China 1. Nuclearweapon-free zones are of major significance in promoting nuclear disarmament, preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and enhancing peace and security at the regional and global levels. 2. All nuclearweapon States should give unconditional undertakings not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclearweapon States or nuclearweapon-free zones, and should conclude international legal instruments to that end. 3. The principles on the establishment of nuclearweaponfree zones adopted in 1999 by the United Nations Disarmament Commission should be rigorously upheld. 4. Nuclear-weapon States should support the efforts of nonnuclearweapon States to establish nuclearweaponfree zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned, should respect the legal status of such nuclearweaponfree zones and should enter into reciprocal and legally binding obligations. 5. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of the section of the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference dealing with article VII of the Treaty, nuclearweapon States should take steps to put into effect all the assurances provided by the treaties on nuclearweaponfree zones and their protocols. 6. China continues to support the Antarctic Treaty and the treaties of Tlateloco, Rarotonga and Pelindaba and is complying with its obligations under those treaties. GE.03-61118 (E) 010503 010503 7. China supports the efforts of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to establish a nuclearweaponfree zone. It has reached agreement in principle with ASEAN on issues arising from the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and is ready to sign the Protocol to the Treaty at the earliest possible juncture. China hopes that ASEAN and the four other nuclearweapon States will soon resolve the outstanding issues and thus enable the Protocol to be opened for signature in the very near future. 8. China supports the efforts of the five Central Asian States to establish a central Asian nuclearweapon-free zone. It has no substantive difficulties with the current text of the treaty and the protocol. Any amendments to the text should not run counter to the purposes and principles of the treaty and should be agreed to by the parties concerned. China is ready to sign the protocol as soon as all parties reach consensus on the text of the treaty and its protocol. 9. China supports the efforts to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the region of the Middle East. It hopes that this goal can be attained at an early date through consultations among all relevant parties. 10. China supports the establishment of a nuclearweaponfree zone in central and eastern Europe and a nuclearweaponfree southern hemisphere and adjacent areas. It also respects and welcomes the nuclearweaponfree status of Mongolia. 