%%%MAPS|PEACEBUILDING|INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|NEGOTIATION|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|KINSHASA (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO)|INTERNAL SECURITY|ARMED CONFLICTS|HUMAN RIGHTS IN ARMED CONFLICTS|HUMAN RIGHTS|DISARMAMENT|TROOP WITHDRAWAL|MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION|CHILDREN IN ARMED CONFLICTS|REPATRIATION|ARMS EMBARGO|INSTITUTION BUILDING|ELECTIONS|ELECTION VERIFICATION|RULE OF LAW|POLICE|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|RIGHTS OF THE CHILD|LANDMINES|GENDER MAINSTREAMING|AIDS PREVENTION|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|TRUST FUNDS|BUDGET CONTRIBUTIONS|

Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1493 (2003) of 28 July 2003, by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) until 30 July 2004; and Council resolution 1417 (2002) of 14 June 2002, by which the Council decided to review progress every four months on the basis of the reports of the Secretary-General. This report covers major developments since my report of 27 May 2003 (S/2003/566 and Corr.1), and is structured according to the Mission's five core programmes: advancing peace and security; facilitating the political transition and elections; contributing to the rule of law and respect for human rights; improving human conditions for sustainable peace; and effective support and management. II. Advancing peace and security 2. Despite the historic advances made in the formation of the Transitional Government in Kinshasa during the reporting period, fighting and conflict continued in Ituri and in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, necessitating the full deployment and active engagement of MONUC. Ituri 3. The situation in Ituri has been particularly serious. Approximately 420 civilians have been killed in Bunia in fighting between Lendu and Hema militias since the departure of Ugandan troops in May 2003. While most were targeted because of their ethnicity, others were caught in the crossfire. Widespread rape and looting also occurred. A significant number of the victims of the abuses have been minors. In border areas between Uganda and Ituri, 380 cases of human rights abuses were reported, including killing, forced disappearances, mutilations, rape, and systematic looting and destruction of property. Visits by MONUC to the Ntokoro area in Uganda, and to Aru, Aruwara and Mahagi in the Democratic Republic of the Congo confirmed attacks by Ngiti and Lendu militia on Tchomia (30 May and 15 July); Kasenyi (11 June and 23 July); Nioka (10 June); and Ambe and its surroundings (6 and 7 July). On 19 July, fighting in Fataki resulted in the loss of scores of civilian lives. There was a Lendu attack on that same locality on 31 July, with a significant number of civilian casualties. During a MONUC visit to Komanda on 11 September 2003, it came to light that at least 65 people had died from February to March as a result of clashes between Ngiti and Hema North forces. In the most recent spate of killings, on 6 October, Lendu militia from Petro and Laudju attacked Kachele and surrounding villages, killing 65 civilians in the process, 42 of whom were children. There was also systematic looting. 4. In this context, the overall efforts of the United Nations have focused on the military and political stabilization of Ituri, and addressing the dire human rights and humanitarian conditions in the region. On 15 May, as the situation in Ituri grew increasingly precarious following the withdrawal of the Uganda People's Defence Forces, I wrote to the Security Council (S/2003/574) requesting that the Council urgently consider the deployment of a highly trained and well-equipped multinational force to secure vital installations and protect the civilian population. Accordingly, on 30 May, the Security Council, by resolution 1484 (2003), authorized the establishment of an Interim Emergency Multinational Force (IEMF) for that purpose. 5. In view of the increasing threat levels, MONUC military observers, who had been deployed to five locations in Ituri, were evacuated to Bunia. During that process, two observers at Mongbwalu were reported missing on 13 May. Their bodies were recovered on 18 May, while all other military observer teams in Ituri were withdrawn to Bunia by 16 May. An investigation into the deaths of the military observers has been conducted, with a view to minimizing the risk of such incidents in the future. 6. The European Union-led Interim Emergency Multinational Force began deploying to Bunia early in June and restored a measure of security to the town. At its strongest, IEMF numbered just over 1,000 military personnel from France, which provided the bulk of the troops, and Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Cyprus, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, stationed in Bunia, with 500 supporting staff in Entebbe. While MONUC troops (Uruguay) continued to provide security for the personnel and premises of the United Nations and the Ituri Interim Administration, IEMF secured the airport and established a weapon-free zone inside the town. Close coordination between MONUC and IEMF allowed joint operations on the ground and effective use of the limited airport facilities at Bunia. 7. From mid-August, with the gradual deployment of the MONUC Ituri brigade, authorized by the Security Council under resolution 1493 (2003), the Mission started to take over operational tasks from IEMF, which fully withdrew from the area by 15 September. The MONUC Ituri brigade, composed of 4,800 authorized military personnel, consists of four battalions and support elements. By 1 September, the date of the official handover of duties from IEMF to MONUC, 2,400 MONUC soldiers (Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Uruguay) had taken up positions in Bunia. The deployment of the third and fourth battalions (Nepal and Pakistan) is now complete, while a Level-II hospital (Morocco) is to be redeployed from Kisangani to Bunia shortly. 8. After the complete departure of the Interim Emergency Multinational Force, there were still some hostile incidents, but there was no significant deterioration in the overall security situation in Bunia. Through support to the Ituri Interim Administration and liaison with the militias via the Comité de concertation des groupes armés, agreement among the parties to respect Bunia as a weapon-free zone as from 16 September was reached. Since then, MONUC has carried out cordon-and-search operations in Bunia and its environs in order to restore a sense of security in the town and dominate the armed factions. 9. Early in November, following MONUC deployment to Tchomia to break up an impending battle over the town between the militias of the Union des patriotes congolais (UPC) and the Parti pour l'unité, la solidarité et l'intégrité du Congo (PUSIC), UPC elements in Bunia struck back at MONUC, through inflammatory language, withdrawing cooperation with the Ituri Interim Administration and the Mission and, most significantly, firing on MONUC checkpoints. In several operations thereafter, MONUC seized weapons in Bunia and detained a number of persons suspected of harbouring weapons. The situation in the town is currently calm but tense. While maintaining a strong military posture, MONUC is also taking steps at the political level to bring UPC back into the peace process. 10. The first phase of the Mission's military expansion outside Bunia is under way; it is carrying out reconnaissance missions for future deployment, security assessments, humanitarian and human rights investigations, child protection activities, and liaison with local chiefs, political leaders and armed factions. By mid-October four company outposts, at Iga Barrière and Bulé, to the north of Bunia, and Bogoro and Marabo to the south of the town had been established. MONUC also deployed one company in Tchomia-Kasenyi on 30 and 31 October. In the next two months, it is planned that military deployments will extend to other sensitive areas in Ituri, including the north of the region. 11. It should be recalled that MONUC military deployments in Ituri are intended to stabilize the region to enable the Ituri Interim Administration to begin functioning and to facilitate its integration into the national transition process, including the restoration of State authority and institutions. To those ends, MONUC has supported the Interim Administration, which has continued to grow in influence and strength by engaging the armed groups and the local population through its established mechanisms. Members of the Interim Administration regularly participate in reconnaissance missions outside Bunia, where meetings are held with the local authorities and the population to inform them of the existing peace process. The Interim Administration also organized successful peace marches in the town and is resolving problems relating to illegally occupied houses in Bunia. MONUC deployments outside Bunia are intended to facilitate the future extension of the Interim Administration's authority to other parts of Ituri. MONUC is also facilitating the establishment of the local police in Ituri through training and assistance, as well as support for the institutions in the justice sector. The latter efforts have been undertaken in close collaboration with the European Union (see para. 46). 12. MONUC has also encouraged close contacts between the Transitional Government and figures in Ituri. On 1 August, three important Ministers of the Transitional Government visited Bunia to reinforce a message of peace and support for the Ituri Interim Administration. With the exception of UPC, the armed groups expressed their willingness to be incorporated into the new national armed forces. On 8 August, the Council of Ministers of the Transitional Government announced its intention to deploy integrated national police to support the Interim Administration in Bunia, send humanitarian assistance to Ituri, and hold the next meeting of the Comité de concertation des groupes armés jointly with MONUC in Kinshasa. That meeting was held on 16 and 17 August. On that occasion, the President, Joseph Kabila, Vice-President Azarias Ruberwa, and several Ministers of the Transitional Government met with various leaders of the armed groups, stressing that military activity would constitute a breach of the Transitional Constitution and that the armed groups were expected to garrison their troops. On 9 October, MONUC and the Transitional Government jointly organized another meeting of the Comité de concertation des groupes armés in Bunia, at which the armed groups promised to submit information on the numbers and locations of their troops within 10 days. The deadlines were not met and MONUC is making a concerted effort to obtain the necessary information. Local conflict resolution initiatives 13. Throughout the reporting period, MONUC sought to take advantage of the progress of the national transition and its greater deployment in the east by intensifying its local conflict resolution efforts in the Kivus, Maniema and northern Katanga. This work came to fruition during October. On 1 October in Shabunda and Walungu territories, a ceasefire agreement was signed between the Mayi-Mayi of General Padiri and the military wing of RCD-Goma, the Armée nationale congolaise (ANC). A follow-up mechanism to that agreement was established on 21 October. In cooperation with the newly appointed commander of the military region, another meeting was organized in the Uvira-Baraka area, attended by the entire Mayi-Mayi leadership and former ANC brigade commanders. As a result of those initiatives, there has been a reduction in conflict in the province and increased humanitarian access for United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations in South Kivu. 14. In North Kivu, MONUC facilitated negotiations between the military wing of RCD-K/ML, the Armée patriotique congolaise (APC) and the Mayi-Mayi of the Alliance des patriotes Mayi-Mayi du Nord Kivu in the Beni-Butembo area. The talks resulted in an accord wherein the parties stated their commitment to the unification of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the creation of a national integrated army, indicating their preparedness to enter into the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. Further, following a military offensive that culminated in ANC control of Lubero, on 19 June the Bujumbura Ceasefire Agreement was signed by the former Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, RCD-K/ML and RCD-Goma. Mechanisms for its implementation were discussed on 26 and 27 June in Beni, culminating in an agreement on the withdrawal of ANC and the Forces armées congolaises (FAC) deployed in the RCD-K/ML area. By 4 July, MONUC confirmed ANC withdrawal further south and, by 6 August, the complete departure of ANC from Lubero and Kanya-Bayonga. 15. On 29 October, my Special Representative participated in the first public meeting in Kanya-Bayonga of the two faction-appointed Governors of North Kivu under the patronage of the Transitional Government. The meeting, which was designed to promote confidence between the major ethnic groups in the area and to ease the reunification of the province of North Kivu, constituted a first concrete step in cooperation between local forces. Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of Congolese combatants 16. The implementation of a national programme aimed at the disarmament and demobilization of Congolese combatants depends vitally on the resolution of local conflicts, primarily in the east and the north. MONUC has been working closely with the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Programme, administered through the World Bank, and with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which is the lead agency for reintegration into the country. A meeting of the advisory board of the Multi-Country Programme is to be held in Kinshasa in November, at which the Transitional Government has been requested to present a draft national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. In the meantime, on 3 October, in order to comply with the request of the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Programme, the Government established an interministerial technical committee on planning and coordination for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, which held its first meeting on 23 October. 17. In the absence of a national programme, MONUC has had to make ad hoc responses to the increasing number of Mayi-Mayi fighters who have been approaching the Mission expressing an interest in disarming. To date, MONUC has disarmed some 450 Mayi-Mayi elements in Kindu, Kalima, Manono, Bukavu and Beni, and destroyed the weapons surrendered by them. According to the Mission's interlocutors, another large group of Mayi-Mayi are ready to disarm in the vicinity of Butembo. The keen interest of the Mayi-Mayi fighters in laying down their arms and joining the peace process is welcome, but no structured mechanism exists to assist their return to civilian life. MONUC has made frequent representations, urging the rapid establishment of the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, while at the same time discussing with its partners in the development community the urgent need to implement reintegration projects. Children associated with armed groups 18. During the reporting period, child soldiers were demobilized in several areas, including some 40 in Kananga and 19 in Kalemie. Elsewhere children left armed groups or were released on an ad hoc basis. In Bunia, MONUC, UNICEF and child protection non-governmental organizations put in place an interim process to disarm and receive child soldiers in the context of restoring security in the town. In the absence of a national plan, an interim operational plan is being finalized by the subgroup on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of children set up under the framework of the UNDP technical working group. Those developments were, however, offset by ongoing recruitment, training and use of children in armed conflict -- including girls abducted for sexual purposes -- particularly in Maniema, Katanga and Ituri. In the Kivus, there were repeated allegations of the recruitment of minors. Moreover, the lack of security, fear of re-recruitment, lack of local capacity to receive children and lack of viable alternative activities for young people in many places remain obstacles to effective reintegration. Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration of foreign combatants and their dependents 19. The disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration of foreign armed groups has continued to be one of the Mission's highest priorities. During the reporting period, MONUC repatriated some 1,100 Rwandans, including more than 400 combatants, bringing the total number of those repatriated to 2,727 by 24 October. Early in October, a second assembly area was established in the town of Nyabiondo, some 60 km north-west of Goma. 20. Infantry companies of MONUC Task Force I, led by the South African contingent, have been deployed to Lubero, Goma, Bukavu and Kindu, where they conduct robust patrols aimed at enhancing general security, and assist in local conflict resolution, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration/disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and tasks related to the monitoring of the arms embargo. Since late August, MONUC military helicopters have been operational at Goma and Bunia, increasing the reach, mobility and security of patrols in the Kivus and Maniema. This in turn has allowed the Mission to extend its outreach and sensitization campaign on disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration. A Radio Okapi studio has been installed in Uvira as part of ongoing MONUC efforts in this regard. As a result, MONUC has obtained better information on the locations of the armed groups, increased contact, and identified new sites for assembly areas close to known concentrations of Rwandan combatants. 21. Contacts have been restored with the Ugandan rebel group, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), representatives of which have indicated interest in being repatriated to Uganda. At the request of ADF elements, MONUC is exploring, with the Government of Uganda, the possibility of a visit of some 30 ADF members to Uganda. MONUC has also been accommodating some 100 Burundian ex-combatants in a temporary transit facility at Adikivu near Bukavu, pending agreement with the Government of Burundi to establish a mechanism to receive them. After several high-level international démarches, it now appears that the Government of Burundi has agreed to designate its Commission nationale de réhabilitation des sinistrés to facilitate the repatriation of the Burundian ex-combatants. In particular, procedures have been agreed for the repatriation and reintegration of Burundian former child soldiers. Normalization of relations with neighbouring States 22. Since the establishment of the Transitional Government, efforts to normalize relations between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours have been intensified. On 25 September, I convened a high-level meeting of heads of State and senior representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, as well as Angola, Mozambique, South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania, in New York, with a view to launching a new chapter of the peace process. The meeting adopted a declaration of Principles on Good-Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation, in which those present reaffirmed their respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of one another; and agreed to refrain from interfering directly or indirectly in one another's internal affairs. The countries concerned also promised to refrain from any action aimed at the partial or total disruption of the stability or territorial integrity of one another, and to prevent the direct or indirect supply of arms and support to armed groups operating in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During the meeting, the countries concerned were encouraged to turn their commitments into concrete action -- including by reopening diplomatic missions, developing trade links, resolving the issue of refugees, and normalizing border controls, with the assistance of MONUC. 23. On 20 October, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, Charles Murigande, visited Kinshasa for the first time since the beginning of the conflict. During the visit, he made a public statement expressing the support of the President, Paul Kagame, for the Transitional Government and announcing that the two countries had entered a new era in their bilateral relations and would work collaboratively to restore peace. The Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda also decided to reopen their respective embassies in Kigali and Kinshasa and to develop mechanisms for the exchange of information. MONUC has agreed to assist the two Governments in establishing a joint mechanism to address the disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of Rwandan combatants, primarily members of the former Forces armées rwandaises and Interahamwe militia remaining on Congolese territory. The Minister for Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mbusa Nyamwisi, visited Kigali from 29 to 31 October to further develop future cooperation between the two countries. 24. In a related development, the Ugandan Minister of State for Transport, Andruale Awuzu, met with Transitional Government officials in Kinshasa to explore possibilities for improving trade opportunities in the region. The Minister for Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo made a return visit to Kampala on 25 October to discuss the outstanding issues of the Luanda Agreement. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo also formally extended an invitation to the Government of Uganda to dispatch its ambassador, who had been nominated earlier in the year, to Kinshasa. In a parallel initiative, Vice-President Jean-Pierre Bemba visited Kampala on 25 and 26 October, and was received by the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni. Monitoring of the arms embargo 25. Since the adoption of resolution 1493 (2003), in which the Security Council imposed an arms embargo on the Kivus and Ituri, and requested MONUC to monitor arms flows in the region, efforts are being made to enhance the Mission's capacity to gather information on illegal arms flows. The tasks of MONUC military observers deployed to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo are being reconfigured to include the monitoring of supplies of illegal arms and related materiel at airfields and other locations. While many of the smaller, more remote airfields continue to be inaccessible, the expanding operations of both Task Force I and the Ituri brigade, including through the use of military aviation assets, are expected to improve the Mission's ability to monitor those sites. Although MONUC can contribute to efforts to monitor the arms embargo, it is unable to serve as the primary source of information owing to its limited capacity. Additional efforts that may be required in this regard are described in paragraph 72 below. 26. On 20 July 2003, RCD-K/ML authorities seized an Antonov-28 aircraft owned by Mavivi Airlines, a private company based in Butembo, when it was diverted because of weather conditions to Beni during a flight from Aru to Mongbwalu. Around 30 boxes of ammunition ranging from 7.62-mm to 82-mm mortar rounds were found on board the aircraft. The RCD-K/ML turned the ammunition over to MONUC on 24 July, when the latter transported it to Lubero, where it was subsequently destroyed. MONUC interviewed the passengers of the aircraft, who included military elements of the Forces armées du peuple congolais (FAPC) and the Front pour la résistance populaire de l'Ituri (FRPI). They indicated that the ammunition was destined for Commandant Jerome Kakawavu Bakonde (FAPC) to support FAPC and FRPI military activities around Mongbwalu against UPC. More recently, on 18 October, 36 rounds of mortar were discovered in Lume village in the Ruwenzori Mountains. Efforts are being made to determine the origin of the ammunition, which has since been handed over to MONUC for its ultimate destruction. III. Facilitating the political transition and elections Establishment of transitional institutions 27. The considerably improved prospects for the reduction of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are directly related to the substantial progress made in the establishment of the Transitional Government and its institutions. On 30 June 2003, the forty-third anniversary of the independence of the country, President Kabila signed a decree appointing the members of the Transitional Government. In accordance with the Global and All-Inclusive Agreement on the Transition, of 17 December 2002, the Government is composed of 36 Ministers and 25 Vice-Ministers from the eight components and entities of the inter-Congolese dialogue. The Ministers and Vice-Ministers were chosen by the components under the auspices of the Follow-up Commission, which was established on 14 April 2003 to address outstanding issues necessary for the installation of the Transitional Government. However, two major political parties, the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social and the Parti Lumumbiste unifié, are not represented in the Transitional Government as they did not agree with the other members of the political opposition on the process of nominating representatives to the Transitional Government. 28. Despite initial difficulties over the wording of the oath of office, all the new Ministers and Vice-Ministers were sworn in from 18 to 24 July. In preparation for the swearing-in of the four Vice-Presidents, and after the parties reached an agreement on the number of bodyguards to be assigned to the members of the Transitional Government, on 15 July, representatives of RCD-Goma arrived in Kinshasa, many for the first time since 1999. The MLC and RCD-Goma leaders arrived in Kinshasa that same week. On 17 July, Abdoulaye Yerodia Ndombasi (former government component), Azarias Ruberwa (RCD-Goma), Jean-Pierre Bemba (MLC) and Arthur Z'Ahidi Ngoma (political opposition) were sworn in as Vice-Presidents of the Transitional Government. On 24 July, the first meeting of the Council of Ministers, under the chairmanship of President Kabila and with the participation of all the Vice-Presidents, Ministers and Vice-Ministers, was held. 29. On 1 August, the neutral facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire, formally handed over to President Kabila the final report of the dialogue and its 36 resolutions, which are to form the basis of the Transitional Government's activities during the two-year period leading to elections. Having completed the tasks assigned to it under the All-Inclusive Agreement, the Follow-up Commission held its final meeting on 18 August and presented its final report to the Council of Ministers on 29 August. 30. Since 25 July, the Council of Ministers and four inter-ministerial commissions, the Commissions on Politics and Security, Finance and Economic Matters, Reconstruction and Development, and Social and Cultural Matters, chaired by Vice-Presidents Ruberwa, Bemba, Yerodia and Ngoma, respectively, have met on a regular basis. Although the Transitional Government has yet to present its definitive programme to the National Assembly, it has begun to address some of the difficult issues that will have to be resolved if elections are to be held within the next two years. On 8 August the Council of Ministers adopted a comprehensive set of policy goals, including the removal of all barriers to the re-establishment of the national radio, press and television network; the formation of an integrated national army and integrated national police force; the harmonization of customs and taxes; and the rapid formation and deployment to Ituri of integrated units from the Congolese national police and the new Forces armées de la Republique démocratique du Congo. On 6 September, the Council of Ministers adopted a series of draft decrees on the organization and functioning of the Government, the various ministries, and the General Secretariat of the Government. 31. The 500-member National Assembly and the 120-member Senate were inaugurated in Kinshasa on 22 August, Olivier Kamitatu (MLC) leading the National Assembly and Marini Bodho (civil society) leading the Senate. MONUC transported 180 of the parliamentarians from around the country to Kinshasa, during the days leading up to the inauguration ceremony. Since their inauguration, both houses of the Transitional Parliament have adopted their internal rules of procedure. The National Assembly began its first ordinary session on 6 October. It is expected to adopt, inter alia, the proposed laws on amnesty, political parties, and the five institutions in support of democracy (the Independent Electoral Commission; the Truth and Reconciliation Commission; the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission; the National Human Rights Observatory; and the High Media Authority). The Assembly is also expected to consider the readjusted national budget for 2003. 32. The process leading to the installation of the Transitional Government was not an easy one and was actively supported throughout by the International Committee in Support of the Transition, chaired by my Special Representative. The timely advice and intervention of the Committee was instrumental in resolving several deadlocks between the parties. After the installation of the transitional institutions, signs and symbols of the reunification of the Democratic Republic of the Congo started to emerge. The new national flag was raised in territories controlled by former belligerents, and postal services and cellular telephone networks were expanded to cover different parts of the country. Commercial airline services were re-established to connect Kinshasa with cities controlled by those opposed to the former Government, including Goma and Gbadolite. On 3 August, a convoy of eight commercial barges arrived in Kisangani, the first since the outbreak of the war, effectively reopening the Congo River to civil and commercial traffic. Role of MONUC in security arrangements in Kinshasa 33. The continued presence of all major transitional leaders in Kinshasa owes much to the deployment by MONUC of the "neutral force" to provide security reassurance to those members of the Transitional Government who are assessed to require it. Comprising over 900 troops (Ghana and Tunisia), military police (Bangladesh and South Africa) and four teams of military observers, the force has established its presence in an area of Kinshasa designated as the security zone (from and between Ndjili airport and the Gombe district of Kinshasa). The zone has recently been expanded to include the residential area of Macampagne, where several transitional politicians have chosen to live. Moreover, MONUC civilian police personnel serve as technical advisers to various Congolese police and security entities. 34. While the presence of MONUC and its regular patrols and escorts have contributed to diffusing tensions and reassuring the local population and members of the transition, the Government is ultimately responsible for its own security and that of the city in general. MONUC has facilitated a series of meetings between the Chiefs of Police of the various Congolese parties. The meetings have resulted in agreement, in principle, on an operative framework and command structure for the bodyguards of the transitional leaders in Kinshasa; the modalities for the setting up of the Integrated Police Unit; and the establishment of a Joint Security Operations Centre for the multi-layered security arrangements operating in Kinshasa. It is important that the Integrated Police Unit be established urgently; discussions between the United Nations and the European Union are continuing over arrangements to facilitate its formation. Reform of the security sector 35. A key challenge for the establishment of the Transitional Government was to reach agreement on integrating the armed forces of the belligerents. After considerable negotiation among the parties, on 24 June 2003, at the request of the Follow-up Commission, the International Committee in Support of the Transition proposed a power-sharing formula to assist the parties to reach agreement on the integrated High Command. Further discussions among the Congolese parties were held under the auspices of my Special Envoy, Moustapha Niasse, assisted by retired Lieutenant General Maurice Baril (Canada), together with the South African Minister for Local and Provincial Government, Fholisani Sydney Mufamadi. As a result of their efforts, on 29 June, the Congolese parties signed Memorandum II on the army and security, which provided for the allocation of senior posts in the integrated High Command of the armed forces. On 6 August, agreement was reached to allocate three military regions to the former Government; two each to MLC and RCD-Goma; and one each to RCD-National, RCD-K/ML and the Mayi-Mayi. On 19 August, after further discussion among the parties on the nominees to fill the posts, President Kabila signed decrees appointing the Chiefs of Staff of the armed forces, and the commanders and deputy commanders of the 10 military regions, who have started to take up their posts. 36. However, at this juncture, aside from the appointment of the senior military leaders and most regional commanders, there is still a lack of clarity on the modalities for the integration and restructuring of the armed forces. There also appears to be an absence of effective collaboration at the level of the Chiefs of Staff. 37. Under the All-Inclusive Agreement, a 12-member Supreme Defence Council, comprising the President, the four Vice-Presidents, the Ministers of Defence, the Interior and Foreign Affairs, the Chief of Staff of the armed forces and the Chiefs of Staff of ground, air and navy forces, is to be established. The Council is to hold consultations on issues such as the formation of restructured and integrated Congolese national armed forces and the disarmament of armed groups. It will therefore play a crucial role in determining concrete measures for security sector reform. However, a divergent interpretation of the Agreement has thus far precluded the convening of the Council. Progress towards elections 38. The All-Inclusive Agreement calls for free, democratic and transparent elections to be held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo within two years after the establishment of the Transitional Government. With this in mind, MONUC has facilitated meetings of members of the international community in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to ensure coordinated support to the electoral process. Although a formal law establishing the Independent Electoral Commission is yet to be adopted by the Transitional Parliament, nominated members have attended several working meetings held at MONUC headquarters and have presented a draft organic law currently under review by that legislative body. They have also presented a plan to start their operations, register voters and conduct the electoral processes during the transitional period. The Sun City resolution dealing with elections gives the responsibility for their organization to the Independent Electoral Commission, in cooperation with competent institutions of the Transitional Government. Whatever roles are ultimately decided upon must guarantee the independence and impartiality of the Commission. A United Nations electoral assessment team visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo early in October to address these and other issues; a second mission is currently under way to help the Commission to assess its financial and logistical needs, and to define appropriate electoral systems. 39. An Electoral Assistance Unit has been established in MONUC to coordinate the support of the international community to the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To date, the Unit has assisted the Independent Electoral Commission in developing an organizational structure and electoral road map. It also participated in a workshop on voter registration methodology, and recommended a course of action which emphasizes only the registration of eligible voters for the upcoming electoral process. The Unit is assisting the Commission in developing operational plans and budgets for both the registration process and the elections. Nonetheless, the absence of logistical infrastructure in most areas, and the lack of definition of basic electoral processes in the Congolese context (e.g. nationality, voter registration laws) pose an additional challenge to the organization of national elections. IV. The rule of law and human rights Rule of law 40. Restoring and strengthening the rule of law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo entails supporting the transition process to ensure a stable environment where the rule of law can prevail, as well as creating the institutions and processes that give substance to the notion of the rule of law. The European Union has initiated a comprehensive assessment of the justice sector in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the close participation of MONUC, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNDP, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and the Governments of Belgium, France and the United Kingdom. The assessment, which commenced on 15 October, is expected to provide recommendations to restore and strengthen a capacity for the administration of justice, particular attention being paid to the organization and functioning of the judiciary and the police and penal institutions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The mission, which completed its first phase of assessment early in November, is expected to finalize recommendations in the first quarter of 2004 and provide short-, medium- and long-term strategies prepared by various donors for the reform of rule of law institutions and processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 41. In the meantime, an interim concept of operations for MONUC activities related to the rule of law has been adopted. It includes the provision of immediate support for the establishment of an emergency justice capacity in Ituri (see para. 46); proposed actions in support of national reconciliation efforts which aim, inter alia, to remedy past abuses and to prevent current and future ones by ensuring basic rule of law systems; the promotion of a human rights culture by integrating human rights components in capacity-building exercises; and the provision of support to the reform of the Congolese national police and related criminal justice matters. A new structure consisting of a dedicated rule of law unit has been established within MONUC, to support a soon-to-be-established rule of law Task Force, comprising United Nations agencies and other international organizations. Police reform 42. In addition to its work in Bunia and with the MONUC "neutral force" in Kinshasa, MONUC through its civilian police component is encouraging bilateral and multilateral actors to actively support the establishment of the Integrated Police Unit and future integrated Congolese national police (see para. 34). It should be noted that, in August, MONUC successfully completed its mandated training programme of Congolese police personnel in Kisangani. A total of 107 trainers, 253 judicial police officers and 265 rapid intervention police officers have been trained since the inception of the programme in August 2002. The overall goal of MONUC in this area has remained to facilitate the development of a national police that provides democratic policing and respects the rights of all citizens. Human rights 43. Establishing respect for human rights remains a major challenge. Massive violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, including massacres, summary executions, forced disappearances, abductions, arbitrary arrests, rape and other forms of sexual violence and torture, have continued unabated despite political progress at the national level. Atrocities and human rights violations have been particularly egregious in the east, including the Kivus, Ituri, Katanga, Orientale Province and Maniema. Violations, which result from ongoing clashes between different armed groups, have been committed by all the parties. In Uvira, Burundian rebel combatants attacked Rusabaki locality from 24 to 26 August, killing 16 civilians and burning several houses. As massive movements of FDD, FNL and Interahamwe troops are reported in the Uvira territory, and local troops of the former RCD-Goma become increasingly undisciplined, the local population has been left trapped in a vicious cycle of lawlessness and reprisal attacks between the numerous national and foreign armed factions operating in those areas. Inhuman and degrading treatment, armed robberies and widespread harassment and ransoming are reported regularly, committed by all sides. On 6 October, FDD and/or FNL troops were reported to be responsible for the particularly ruthless massacre of 16 persons in an ambush in Ndundu/Rulimbu (Kabunambo area). Preliminary investigations carried out by MONUC indicate that, while the rebel troops were well armed, their victims were killed with axes, knives and rope. Like the massacres in August in Rusabaki, the Ndundu killings appeared to have been a reprisal against the population of Sangi and Rusabaki for their "cohabitation" with RCD-Goma. 44. During fighting in Kinkondja and Malemba Nkulu (Katanga Province) early in August, the Mayi-Mayi allegedly killed numerous people and burned several houses. From May to July, the Mayi-Mayi were accused of rape, destruction of hundreds of houses, abduction of dozens of people, and summary executions in the Kama area. Those in Maniema (Kindu) and North Kivu have also abducted women and minors, particularly internally displaced persons seeking refuge in forests, and subjected them to sexual violence. 45. The MONUC human rights section, through its Kinshasa office and 12 field offices, is purposefully changing its emphasis from general fact-finding to systematized data-gathering and analysis. Special investigations of gross violations of human rights are carried out, with a focus on the monitoring and reporting of cases of sexual violence. The section is actively engaged in training for MONUC staff, including those in human rights, the civilian police and the military; it is also engaged in capacity-building for Congolese civil society and officials. Support is also being given to the National Human Rights Observatory and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. A bill on the powers, organization and functioning of the National Human Rights Observatory was submitted to Parliament for review by one of eight parliamentary commissions, after consultation between civil society, MONUC and OHCHR. At least two separate bills on the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission have been submitted, a reflection of the problems surrounding its creation. It is hoped that there will be a period of national consultation to address many of the outstanding issues surrounding the Commission, including its composition, functioning and timing. 46. In regard to Ituri, given the disturbing human rights situation described above, MONUC, the European Union, Coopération française and the Transitional Government are coordinating efforts for the rapid restoration of a justice capacity in Bunia. On 20 October, a joint meeting was organized with the Congolese Minister of Justice to discuss the appointment of personnel to restart police, judicial and penal institutions in Ituri. MONUC is ready to support those institutions, including with the provision of security and transport for the personnel. Rehabilitation work is under way on Bunia prison and is expected to be completed by the end of November. While the court building is in working order, the Ministry of Justice must nominate and officially convey to MONUC the list of names of those to be appointed to Bunia, to allow arrangements to be made for their deployment. A limited number of judicial police are working in cooperation with MONUC, and 70 Bunia police officers completed their training with MONUC on 27 October. MONUC civilian police intend to deliver technical assistance to the local police in Bunia. In addition, MONUC has contacted donors and asked for their support in meeting the costs associated with the creation and deployment of a sizeable police force for Bunia contemplated by the Transitional Government. In the meantime, MONUC has also conducted arrests in Ituri in compliance with its rules of engagement, which demand that any detainees be handed over to appropriate local authorities as soon as practicable. There being no appropriate local authority to deal with detention issues in Ituri, the national judicial capacity must be re-established to ensure that fair trial standards are maintained, and that rights are not violated. V. Human conditions for sustainable peace Humanitarian situation and assistance 47. Progress at the political level and the reduction of fighting in many areas have not yet reduced the massive humanitarian challenges throughout the country. The most recent data indicate that there are more than 3.4 million internally displaced people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the second largest internally displaced population in Africa. This represents a dramatic increase of 22 per cent, or approximately 662,000 people, since December 2002. The increase in displacement, primarily in the Orientale, North and South Kivu Provinces, exacerbates the already acute situation for vulnerable host communities, who are forced to share limited resources with the displaced and are facing worsening food security. 48. Humanitarian actors continue to face insecurity, limitations on access, and a critical lack of adequate and timely funding to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable. Looting, banditry, and harassment against the personnel of non-governmental organizations, United Nations agencies and the civilian staff of MONUC continue to occur. Late in July, a water engineer working for a British non-governmental organization was murdered in South Kivu along with 10 Congolese civilians working with him. In another incident, 12 vaccinators participating in the National Immunization Days were kidnapped and held captive for several weeks. 49. Despite these challenges, humanitarian organizations continue to deliver assistance in all areas of access and to conduct assessment missions to previously inaccessible areas. MONUC will also seek to explore the expansion of its humanitarian presence in the country. MONUC has been facilitating both access and logistical support for humanitarian organizations; and humanitarian actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have worked in close tandem with MONUC. In Ituri, the Mission has provided escorts and logistical support for those humanitarian actors endeavouring to provide assistance outside Bunia, and its permanent presence outside Bunia will allow for a dramatic increase in humanitarian access. In the Kivus, MONUC has been deeply involved in advocacy and negotiation efforts to improve access to long-isolated rural areas. Finally, MONUC has worked closely with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance and other humanitarian actors to devise a plan for the return of internally displaced persons to their areas of origin. Child protection 50. The Transitional Government has yet to tackle the challenge of protecting children, who are among the primary victims of the conflict. Advocating for and facilitating responses to this issue is a priority activity for MONUC, including through sensitization, capacity-building and the strengthening of accountability for abuse against children. Mine action 51. Closer cooperation has been established with international operators involved in mine clearance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that mine-related information is registered in a unique database. Efforts continued to deploy additional mine action assets so as to address humanitarian emergencies in Ituri. In recent months there were two accidents, one fatal, on the road from Bunia to Beni, but the situation is expected to improve as work to clear the road progresses. Gender issues 52. Despite the fact that article 51 of the Transitional Constitution calls for the "meaningful representation" of women at all decision-making levels, the Transitional Government includes only six female ministers out of 36 and two vice-ministers out of 25. The Bureau of the National Assembly has two female representatives out of eight, while no women sit on the bureau of the Senate. The eight-member Independent Electoral Commission includes one woman and another two are members of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. A seminar on gender issues organized by MONUC in Gbadolite on 22 July for women participants at the ministerial level, those charged with the running of local non-governmental organizations and others in key positions in civil society highlighted the necessity to include women in the transitional process. The MONUC gender unit is working to ensure that the capacity for female political leadership is reinforced and that all forms of sexual violence, to which so many Congolese women have fallen victim, are brought to an end. 53. The Mission's gender unit has actively promoted support for the capacity of women political leaders through conferences, including a major session in Kisangani, attended by politicians, senior military and civilian authorities, and non-governmental and religious groups. The gender unit also participated in the training of members of the Interim Observatory on Human Rights in Bunia on ways to help combat sexual and gender-related violence, and discussed the issue with judicial police trainees at training sessions in Bunia. HIV/AIDS 54. In collaboration with the National AIDS Control Programme, MONUC started weekly information broadcasts on Radio Okapi on HIV/AIDS and related issues in July. As from September, the MONUC HIV/AIDS programme was extended to cover the Mission's national civilian staff. The training and sensitization of Congolese police continues as part of the civilian police programme. MONUC received its first consignment of UNAIDS/Department of Peacekeeping Operations awareness cards and has begun distributing them to troops, following a launch on 29 May. This has significantly enhanced the ongoing sensitization and awareness programmes for the military contingents. Quick-impact projects 55. Since the formation of the Transitional Government, projects aimed at strengthening the transitional institutions are being increasingly funded by MONUC and other international partners. In Bunia, quick-impact projects in support of the Ituri Interim Administration were launched in August and included the rehabilitation of a road and health and school facilities, while, early in August, MONUC supported a workshop aimed at facilitating the establishment of the National Human Rights Observatory. Handover ceremonies for schools, hospitals, public water taps and bridges rehabilitated by the United Nations were held in Kindu, Kisangani, Kole, Kalemie and Bukavu. The aim of the project was to contribute to the normalization of the lives of internally displaced persons in the various localities, and to enhance interaction between MONUC personnel and the local population. MONUC intends to accelerate the implementation of quick-impact projects, devolving more responsibility to its offices outside Kinshasa, and thereby to facilitate the Mission's expanded mandate and operations. VI. Public information -- support and management Public information 56. To better support MONUC activities and the transitional political process, an updated public information strategy is being implemented in all sectors of MONUC deployment. MONUC has reinforced its public information presence in Bunia with the establishment of a Radio Okapi studio and a daily local broadcast. An FM transmitter has been operational in Lubumbashi since 12 September, bringing the total number of FM transmitters deployed throughout the country to 12. More transmitters will be installed since Radio Okapi can now operate on DSTV satellite distribution. The local United Nations studio in Gbadolite has now been relocated to Mbandaka, which will become the regional public information headquarters for Equateur Province. A comprehensive programme grid was launched on 20 October, broadcasting news bulletins and programmes seven days a week. At the same time, two radio studios have been installed by MONUC at the National Assembly, ensuring live coverage of the official opening session and subsequent parliamentary proceedings. 57. There has been a significant increase in the dissemination of the monthly MONUC magazine, and 15,000 copies are distributed across the country. Since it was redesigned, the MONUC web site (www.monuc.org) has received up to 65,000 visits a month. In the meantime, the video unit of MONUC has provided footage on events in Bunia to the international and local media, while up to 300 journalists were transported by MONUC to Ituri and the Kivus over the past four months. Successful community outreach activities were developed in the sectors; and theatrical programmes on MONUC and the transition process were staged. Logistics and support 58. To ensure optimal Mission deployment to meet the tasks set out in Security Council resolution 1493 (2003), MONUC continued the movement of military assets eastward. At the same time, MONUC has closed two coordination centres (Basankusu and Boende) and is in the process of closing a third one at Manono. To redeploy a battalion based in Kisangani to the Kivus and additional troops to Bunia, the Mission acquired three more C-130 aircraft and one MI-26 helicopter. The Bolivian contingent will be moved from Mbandaka to the Kivus and the Senegalese contingent from Kananga to Kisangani, and it is expected that the Uruguayan contingent in Bunia will be replaced by the Moroccan contingent in Kisangani, all of which movements present an enormous logistical challenge. In the meantime, two MONUC transit bases were installed at Entebbe and Kasese (Uganda), while the Bunia runway is being maintained on a daily basis. The aircraft parking area at Bunia was extended and an additional helipad, capable of handling heavy helicopters, has been built to increase the capacity of the airfield. Overcoming severe logistical obstacles, including the current lack of usable roads leading to Bunia and the limitations of the airport there, MONUC was able to complete the deployment of the Ituri brigade -- consisting of four infantry battalions, two engineering companies and aviation and airfield support units -- in an extremely short period of time. Recognizing the risks involved in sustaining the Ituri brigade solely by air, MONUC is now actively pursuing various options to open a surface line of communication from Uganda to Bunia. A MONUC engineering company has already begun work on the Bunia-Komanda portion of the Bunia-Beni road. VII. Financial aspects 59. Pending the submission of my proposed revised budget for MONUC for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004, the General Assembly, by its resolution 57/335 of 18 June 2003, appropriated an amount of $582 million for the maintenance of the Mission for that period. The revised budget has been finalized and I shall request the General Assembly to take action on it during the main part of its fifty-eighth session. 60. As at 30 September 2003, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for MONUC amounted to $239.2 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $1,559.5 million. 61. Since its establishment in October 1999, the Trust Fund to support the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has received voluntary contributions amounting to $1.2 million, and expenditures of $0.7 million have been incurred to date. In order to support the Ituri Pacification Commission, I also established in July 2003 a Trust Fund which has received to date $0.35 million in contributions and incurred expenditures in the amount of $0.21 million. VIII. Observations 62. While significant progress has been achieved in the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past five months, considerable work still remains to be done on a number of key issues of the peace process, in order to solidify it and ensure that it is irreversible. On the positive side, former belligerents are working together in the Transitional Government, the process of uniting the territory of the formerly divided country has begun, and there are encouraging trends in peacemaking at the local level. Moreover, MONUC and the wider international community are prepared to assist in strengthening the peace process through free and fair elections. All of these developments contribute to encourage and give hope to the Congolese people, who have suffered from the scourge of war for so long. 63. Also significant is the recent improvement in relations between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, as witnessed by the visit to Kinshasa of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, the first such visit of a senior Rwandan official in five years, and the visit to Kigali of the Minister for Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also welcome the decision by the Governments of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reopen their embassies and resume talks at the senior level. I urge the Governments of the region to capitalize on the goodwill generated by the high-level meeting I convened in New York on 25 September, and continue to follow up with concrete steps to address bilateral and multilateral issues of mutual concern. To that end, MONUC will continue to actively encourage the States of the region to take the action necessary to build mutual trust and good-neighbourly relations. Building on progress in this area, MONUC and the wider United Nations community stand ready to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours in promoting subregional cooperation, including through the combined efforts associated with the planned international conference for the Great Lakes region, as well as organizations such as the Southern African Development Community and the Communauté économique des pays des Grands Lacs. 64. I particularly appreciate the role played by South Africa, including the personal interest shown by President Thabo Mbeki, in collaborating closely with MONUC within the framework of the Third Party Verification Mechanism to help the parties implement the provisions of the Pretoria Agreement. It is a significant achievement of the Verification Mechanism that the parties have now agreed to pursue the remaining issues of the Agreement on a bilateral basis, with the assistance of MONUC where needed. 65. Nonetheless, significant challenges remain. Chief among these is the continuing presence of foreign armed combatants in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which affects the overall security situation in that part of the country. The recent agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to establish a joint mechanism with MONUC to address the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration of Rwandan combatants is a step in the right direction. Another key issue is the continuing allegations of the presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of Rwandan military personnel. While MONUC has received assurances from the Government of Rwanda that this is not the case, some MONUC investigations of such allegations have been impeded recently by RCD-Goma military personnel. I call on all parties concerned to fully support MONUC investigations of such allegations and provide full freedom of movement for its military observers. 66. The disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration of Rwanda combatants, and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of Congolese combatants, are intricately linked to local-level political and economic dynamics in the eastern part of the country. By undertaking local conflict resolution initiatives, MONUC is addressing the heart of the matter, as well as the broader issues of land, resources, nationality and trans-border cooperation. It is imperative that the Transitional Government extend State administration throughout the eastern part of the country, that real progress be made in the integration of the armed forces at the provincial level, and that the Transitional Government take up the challenge of extending political and economic benefits to the population in that part of the country, especially North and South Kivu. 67. The situation in Ituri has been of particular concern. I am especially grateful to the Government of France, and to the European Union, for responding rapidly to my request of 15 May to deploy a multinational force for a limited period of time. It is undeniable that the presence of a robustly equipped force in Bunia, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, helped to stave off an impending humanitarian crisis. Moreover, the deployment demonstrated the benefits of the international community working collectively and creatively in matters of peace and security. 68. Despite significant challenges, the efforts of MONUC and other international partners in stabilizing the situation in Ituri are having results. The effective handover of military tasks from the Interim Emergency Multinational Force to MONUC and the rapid deployment of four MONUC battalions and various support elements in a short period of time, as well as the subsequent expanded deployment to areas outside Bunia, have been major accomplishments. I thank the troop-contributing countries for their cooperation, in particular the Government of Uruguay, for agreeing to station a battalion in Bunia at the height of the crisis there. Nonetheless, in view of the grim humanitarian and human rights situation continuing to prevail in Ituri, the military deployment of MONUC must be accompanied by a sustained political, humanitarian and civil effort by the international community. 69. In spite of the progress made against difficult odds, the tangible benefits of peace have not yet filtered down to the war-weary Congolese population. Socio-economic conditions remain dire throughout the country, and gross human rights violations, including widespread sexual violence, continue to be perpetrated. Despite the strenuous efforts of the international community, the humanitarian situation is catastrophic. Much more work -- and substantial funding -- is required to ensure the implementation of the Transitional Government's road map for economic and social reunification and reconstruction, as well as the effective extension of its authority throughout the country. 70. While the elections planned for mid-2005 will be vital to setting down concrete foundations for a new, democratic and peaceful order in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it would be premature to begin active campaigning. The Congolese people have suffered for long and expect much of their leaders during the crucial two-year transitional period. A key condition for success in national reconciliation will be a true partnership between the former belligerents in managing the transition. I call on them to act collectively, in order to solidify the peace. They are also urged to redouble their efforts to take the necessary legal steps to establish the Integrated Police Unit and an integrated national police force; to finalize the process of appointing provincial governors and their deputies; to prepare a law on the army and defence policy; to elaborate and implement a comprehensive programme for the formation of an integrated national army; to establish a coordination body to elaborate and implement a national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme; and to take concrete measures to accelerate the process of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration in collaboration with MONUC and neighbouring countries. 71. A key concern during the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been the incessant flow of arms into the country, and its link to the illegal exploitation of natural resources. The arms transfers have contributed to the ongoing violence, especially in the east of the country, while the illegal exploitation of resources has robbed the Congolese people of their national wealth. 72. Under resolution 1493 (2003), the Security Council established an arms embargo on the Kivus and Ituri, and expressed its determination to consider necessary steps to ensure the effective monitoring and implementation of those measures, including the possible establishment of a monitoring mechanism. The Council also called on MONUC to step up is efforts in monitoring the arms embargo. I would like to propose that the Council consider a three-tiered approach to addressing the issue. Under the first tier, MONUC would continue to carry out its monitoring mandate, collecting and categorizing information in accordance with the means made available to it. Under the second tier, a small group of three to four technical experts would be formed to collect and conduct preliminary investigations of information both within the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in other countries as necessary. The group of experts would report to a third tier, a sanctions committee, which in turn would report and make recommendations to the Security Council and address the issue at the political level with Member States. Those reports would be independent of my regular progress reports on MONUC to the Council. 73. As the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has completed its work, it would also be important to keep the spotlight on that important issue, and to encourage the Transitional Government to adopt the necessary laws to ensure the fair and equitable management of natural resources and help the international community to regulate its involvement in this vital sector. My Special Representative is considering the best way in which the United Nations system can address the matter, taking into account the economic and social mandates of the United Nations agencies and programmes, and I shall revert to the Security Council on this matter in my next progress report. 74. In closing, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative, William Lacy Swing, and to all the men and women of MONUC for their outstanding efforts to support the peace process, despite the very challenging and often dangerous circumstances still prevailing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Annex United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: military and civilian police strength (as at 31 October 2003) Military component Troops Staff officers Observers Total Civilian police Algeria Argentina Bangladesh Benin Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Burkina Faso Canada Cameroon China Chile Côte d' Ivoire Czech Republic Denmark Egypt France Ghana Guinea India Indonesia Ireland Jordan Kenya Mali Malawi Malaysia Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Nepal Niger Nigeria Norway Pakistan Paraguay Peru Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation Senegal Serbia and Montenegro Sweden Switzerland South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Tunisia Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Uruguay Zambia 