%%%DEMILITARIZED ZONES|IRAQ|MILITARY ACTIVITY|UNITED STATES|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Identical letters dated 7 January 2003 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 5 January 2003 from Mr. Naji Sabri, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, concerning the escalation by the United States of its alarming acts of aggression and provocation directed against Iraq and the United Nations peacekeeping force in the boundary zone between Iraq and Kuwait. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed Salman Chargé d'affaires a.i. The United States has escalated its alarming acts of aggression and provocation directed against Iraq and the United Nations peacekeeping force in the boundary zone between Iraq and Kuwait. Thus at 1230 hours on 5 January 2003 a group of some 60 American heavy tanks and a number of other miscellaneous military vehicles began a military exercise near the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait that is controlled by the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM). The exercise was conducted in open combat formation and with the use of live ammunition, and the forces in question entered the demilitarized zone. They withdrew at 1630 hours on the same day. This action represents a dangerous escalation by the United States of the situation in the boundary zone between Iraq and Kuwait. It is a direct threat to regional and international peace and security and shows contempt for international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the Security Council resolutions urging States to respect Iraq's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. These same resolutions also require respect for the demilitarized zone and for the security and safety of UNIKOM personnel. This action comes on top of the other acts of aggression and terrorism being committed by the United States, which include its daily air raids, carried out with the participation of the United Kingdom, on Iraqi towns and villages in the two no-flight zones imposed in violation of international law and the resolutions of the Security Council, its provision of shelter, financing and weapons to groups of mercenaries and traitors so that they may commit terrorist acts inside Iraq, and its cheap leaflet-dropping campaign over Iraqi towns and villages for the purpose of intimidating Iraqi citizens. We call upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Security Council to send a fact-finding mission to document United States violations of the Charter of the United Nations and the Security Council resolutions relating to the situation between Iraq and Kuwait, to visit the demilitarized zone and to consider the adoption of appropriate measures to enforce respect for the relevant Security Council resolutions, including their stipulations concerning the tasks of the United Nations peacekeeping force. We further call upon the States Members of the United Nations, and upon the members of the Security Council in particular, to halt this violation of the rule of law in international relations and to declare their complete rejection and unequivocal condemnation of the aggressive designs of the United States with respect to Iraq, given that they are in violation of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions. (Signed) Naji Sabri Minister for Foreign Affairs 