%%%TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|TRUST FUNDS|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|DEFINITION|INTERNATIONAL LAW|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|

Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 1456 (2003) Addendum Responses from Security Council members [Original: Spanish] With regard to your letter dated 31 January in which you requested comments or replies to the proposals made during the ministerial meeting of 20 January on the Security Council's efforts to fight terrorism, I would like to inform you that my country believes first and foremost that joint efforts by the international community are a key aspect of a global anti-terrorism strategy. However, as far as the future work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee is concerned, we believe that it should focus on the following three areas: :: The Committee's group of experts should develop a proposed plan of work that includes operational measures that take into account the differing realities of regions and countries, aimed at supplying technical assistance for full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). :: The participation of international organizations, especially those with specialized expertise in areas relevant to the fight against terrorism, is a central factor in selecting objectives and priorities for global action. In that regard, we propose the establishment of an inter-agency coordination segment that would include specific sectoral activities and programmes. Coordination should also be extended to include the various Security Council committees concerned with combating terrorism. :: Regional and subregional organizations should be part of an integrated approach to the fight against terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee has begun programmes in this area that should be pursued. We also share your view that terrorism is a threat that demands a global response; that the United Nations should play an increasingly important role in deterring possible perpetrators of terror; that the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee should continue to play a key role in this area; that greater efforts are necessary to guarantee the universality, monitoring and full implementation of the key treaties regarding weapons of mass destruction; that any sacrifice of freedom or the rule of law within States would be equivalent to a victory by the terrorists; that the need to attempt to achieve the objectives enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations is no less pressing; and that to the extent that the Organization wins its fight against poverty, injustice, suffering and war, it can help to bring an end to the conditions that serve as justification for those who commit acts of terror. (Signed) Juan Gabriel Valdés Ambassador Permanent Representative [Original: French] As you know, France took the initiative during its presidency of the Security Council in January to hold a meeting of the Council at the ministerial level devoted to the fight against terrorism. In the view of the French presidency, that meeting had two main objectives: to strengthen the mobilization of the international community by giving new political impetus to the fight against terrorism and to open new lines of thought on ways to expand the role of the United Nations in combating this scourge more effectively. In his statement, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dominique de Villepin, made several proposals, in particular for the establishment within the United Nations of a fund for cooperation and assistance in the fight against terrorism. In the context of follow-up to the ministerial meeting of the Security Council of 20 January, in particular the report you have been requested to submit by Security Council resolution 1456 (2003), I am transmitting to you, attached, at the request of my Government, an aide-memoire giving details of Mr. Villepin's proposal for the establishment of such a fund. (Signed) Jean-Marc de La Sablière Aide-memoire concerning the French proposal for the establishment of a fund within the United Nations for cooperation and assistance in the fight against terrorism Given the serious and universal threat that terrorism continues to represent, France took the initiative, during its presidency of the Security Council in January, to hold a meeting of the Council at the ministerial level on the fight against terrorism. We had two objectives in holding that meeting: (1) to strengthen the mobilization of the international community by giving new political impetus to the fight against terrorism and (2) to open new lines of thought on the means of developing the role of the United Nations in the fight against terrorism. With this in mind, France submitted several proposals, in particular for the establishment within the United Nations of a fund for cooperation and assistance. Objectives of the fund: :: General objective: strengthen technical assistance within the United Nations framework, without excluding assistance provided by other organizations; greater involvement of developing countries; involvement of international financial institutions. :: Mission: support for bilateral and multilateral technical assistance in the areas of strengthening legislation and institutions responsible for combating terrorism, in accordance with the priorities set by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). This would support action by the CTC. Organization of the fund: :: A specific United Nations fund. :: A secretariat headed by an executive director appointed by the United Nations Secretary-General, after consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Bretton Woods institutions. :: Established by a General Assembly resolution and placed under the authority of the Assembly. :: Funding provided through voluntary contributions of Member States, under modalities to be defined; financial participation or even institutional association of multilateral donors (in particular the Bretton Woods institutions) could be considered. This fund will not self-execute its programmes: it will fund them but will entrust their execution either to the countries themselves or to other multilateral agencies. [Original: Arabic] The Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic presents its compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, and, referring to the note by the Secretary-General of 31 January 2003, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic requests that the following proposals be included in the report he will submit in accordance with paragraph 12 of the declaration annexed to resolution 1456 (2003): 1. Syria again stresses the initiative it launched more than 20 years ago to hold an international conference under United Nations auspices to define terrorism and to draw a distinction between it and the struggle of peoples against foreign occupation. 2. Syria reaffirms the role that the United Nations should play in mobilizing all Member States to combat international terrorism and insists on full respect for the goals and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations, international law and international humanitarian law, in order to combat it without sacrificing legal principles and fundamental freedoms under the pretext of combating terrorism. 3. Syria condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and requests that the causes and roots of terrorism be studied seriously to ensure that the consideration of this question is not superficial or temporary. 4. Syria reaffirms that it categorically rejects any attempt to establish a link between a given religion and terrorism, and it states that terrorism is neither a belief nor a culture nor a religion, in accordance with international conventions, legitimate human rights law and the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations. 5. Syria stresses the danger of the combination of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and urges the international community to make every effort to combat them jointly, and in that regard urges the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and nuclear, biological and chemical weapons in the Middle East, without exception for any State, in accordance with legitimate international resolutions on this question, far from the application of a double standard. 6. Syria reaffirms that occupation is the ultimate form of terrorism and urgently requests the international community to make every effort to find a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, which will represent an effective contribution to the efforts made to combat international terrorism. 7. Syria requests the international community to make a serious attempt to include a definition of terrorism and terrorist acts in the draft comprehensive convention against terrorism, in accordance with the proposal made by the States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and states in parallel that it is possible to resolve the pending difficulties with that draft convention and the draft international convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, the most important of which is the exemption of the military forces of States from the field of application of those conventions, so that they will not serve as a code for State terrorism. 