%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|VERIFICATION|IRAQ|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE|WEAPONS DESTRUCTION|BALLISTIC MISSILES|

Identical letters dated 23 February 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I wish to transmit to you herewith the daily report on the activities carried out by the inspection teams of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq on 22 February 2003. I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed A. Aldouri Permanent Representative Activities of the IAEA and UNMOVIC inspection teams in Iraq Inspection activities on Saturday, 22 February 2003 I. IAEA inspection team Group I A group of four inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 8.35 a.m. and went to the Qadisiyah State Company, one of the companies of the Military Industrialization Corporation, in the Yusufiyah area, 25 kilometres south of Baghdad. The group inspected all the workshops and warehouses of the company and found out about their activities. The group also inspected the "evacuation sites" and spread out the map they had with them and checked the machines marked with stickers. The group concluded its mission, which lasted three hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. Group II A group of four inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 8.30 a.m. and went to the 7 Nisan Company, one of the companies of the Military Industrialization Corporation, 25 kilometres east of Baghdad. The group inspected all the installations of the company, including workshops, warehouses, administrative buildings and service units, and compared them with earlier declarations. The group concluded its mission, which lasted three and a half hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. Group III A group of two inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 8.40 a.m. and made a radiation survey of a number of sites in the Abu Ghurayb area, namely: the State Dairy Company belonging to the Ministry of Industry, al-Dhahab al-Abyadh village, residential buildings, the Akarkuf electricity transformer station project belonging to the Electricity Corporation, the Samoud factory and the Yarmuk Company belonging to the Military Industrialization Corporation. The group also moved the air sampling device that had been installed in the Yarmuk Company. The group concluded its mission, which lasted three hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. II. UNMOVIC inspection team (missiles) A group of three inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 9 a.m. and went to the destroyed static rocket testing station in the Amiriyah Fallujah area 70 kilometres west of Baghdad. The group drove round the ruins of the site and then went to the Badr State Company, one of the companies of the Military Industrialization Corporation, 30 kilometres south of Baghdad. The group placed stickers on some programmed vertical turning machines used in the production of certain components of the Samoud missile. The group concluded its mission, which lasted two hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. A group of nine inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 9 a.m. and went to the Ibn al-Haytham site which belongs to the Karamah State Company, one of the companies of the Military Industrialization Corporation, in the Taji area, 10 kilometres north of Baghdad. The group inspected the installations of the site in order to familiarize themselves with all the equipment connected with the Samoud missile and placed stickers on the missiles that were still being manufactured, as well as on their warheads and engines. The group concluded its mission, which lasted four and a quarter hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. A group of five inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 8.30 a.m. and went to the AlNasr al-Azim Company which belongs to the Military Industrialization Corporation, in the Dawrah district of Baghdad. The group interviewed officials of the company, asking them about the missile parts that were being manufactured. The team then studied the declarations that had been made about the company after which it inspected the company's factories and checked the stickers that had been placed on the machines and the equipment. The group concluded its mission, which lasted two hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. III. UNMOVIC inspection team (biological) A group of four inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 8.30 a.m. and went to the Razi Centre which belongs to the Ministry of Industry. The team used the incinerator to destroy some growth media and destroyed some other media by treating them with water. The group then went to the food inspection laboratory belonging to the Ministry of Trade in the Jadiriyah district of Baghdad where it destroyed some chemical substances using bleach and a sterilizer. The group concluded its mission, which lasted three hours, and then returned to the Canal Hotel. A group of eight inspectors left the Ninawa Palace Hotel in Mosul at 8.40 a.m. and went to the College of Medicine of the University of Mosul. The group interviewed the dean of the Mosul College of Medicine, the dean of another college of medicine and a number of specialists, asking about the departments of the two colleges, the number of staff, more particularly the staff of the microbiology division, their diplomas, the number of students and the number of holders of higher education diplomas. The group inspected the laboratories and the animal house, and then went to the College of Pharmacology and interviewed the dean of the college, asking him about the college, its departments, and the most important items of research in the departments of clinical and industrial pharmacology. The group then inspected the chemistry and microbiology laboratories and the research laboratory used by higher education students. The group concluded its mission, which lasted three and a half hours, and then returned to the Ninawa Palace Hotel in Mosul. IV. Joint UNMOVIC inspection team A group of five inspectors left the Canal Hotel at 9 a.m. and went to the Liquid Fuel Analysis Laboratory belonging to the Ministry of Defence. The team interviewed the official in charge of the site, asking him about the explicit name of the site, its affiliations, the tasks of the laboratory and when it had been moved to its present location. The team then inspected all parts of the site and concluded its mission, which lasted one hour, after which it returned to the Canal Hotel. V. UNMOVIC joint inspection team in Mosul A group of four inspectors left the Ninawa Palace Hotel in Mosul at 9 a.m. and went to the Kindi State Company which belongs to the Military Industrialization Corporation. The team placed stickers on two items of equipment at the company. The team concluded its mission, which lasted 45 minutes, and then returned to the Ninawa Palace Hotel. VI. UNMOVIC inspection team (chemical) The team was to have taken off by helicopter from Rashid airfield but the mission was cancelled because of bad weather. VII. U-2 surveillance aircraft A U-2 surveillance aircraft entered Iraqi airspace at 10.15 a.m. and made a reconnaissance of several areas in Iraq. The aircraft left Iraqi airspace at 4.15 p.m. The reconnaissance operation lasted six hours. 