%%%SANCTIONS|TRADE RESTRICTIONS|DISCRIMINATORY TRADE PRACTICES|

98-21557 (E) 230798 United Nations A/53/185 General Assembly Distr.: General 22 July 1998 Original: English Fifty-third session Items 51 and 94 of the provisional agenda A/53/150. Elimination of coercive economic measures as a means of political and economic compulsion Macroeconomic policy questions Letter dated 22 July 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to enclose herewith the communiqué on the removal of unilateral coercive economic measures against sovereign States issued by the Permanent Mission of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the United Nations on 22 July 1998. I would appreciate if you would have the present letter and the annexed communiqué circulated as a document of the fifty-third session of the General Assembly under agenda items 51 and 94. (Signed) Li Hyong Chol Ambassador Permanent Representative A/53/185 Annex Communiqué of the Permanent Mission of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the United Nations, issued Unilateral coercive economic measures and related laws against sovereign States must be removed unconditionally At present, when the twentieth century is coming to an end, the removal of unilateral coercive economic measures and related laws constitutes one of the major areas of concern of the international community in doing away with the confrontational and oppressive modes of thinking of the cold-war era in international relations forever and ushering in a prosperous new millennium. Although the cold war is over, coercive economic measures and related laws remain intact, thus infringing upon the sovereign rights of the developing countries and seriously hindering their economic development. The Permanent Mission of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the United Nations hereby issues the following communiqué highlighting the position of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea concerning unilateral coercive economic measures. 1. Unilateral coercive economic measures are in complete contravention of the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, relevant international laws and declarations and programmes of action adopted in the General Assembly and United Nations conferences. Chapter I, Article 1 of the Charter provides that the main purpose of the United Nations is, inter alia, to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and achieve international cooperation in solving problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character. Article 32 of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in resolution 3281 (XXIX) adopted at the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly, also states that “No State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights”. In particular, reflecting the just demand of the developing countries, the idea of putting an end to unilateral coercive economic measures has begun to be on the agenda of the General Assembly since 1989; in the fifty-second session of the General Assembly in 1997, resolution 52/181 on “Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries” was adopted with the support of an absolute majority of 185 Member States, with only one Member State opposing. The resolution called on the international community to take effective measures immediately so as to remove unilateral coercive economic measures against developing countries as these measures are in violation of the Charter. In addition, the declarations and programmes of action and relevant documents, adopted at such international forums as the World Conference on Human Rights, the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, held in recent years, condemned unilateral coercive economic measures as acts of economic discrimination and gross human rights violations and called for their removal, with a view to promoting world peace and security and in conformity with the current trend towards reconciliation and cooperation. Unfortunately, however, certain countries that drafted and ratified the Charter at the initial stage of the inception of the United Nations, adopted a series of sanction measures, including unilateral coercive economic measures, as a means of political and economic coercion against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other developing countries, newly emerging nations in particular. Such measures still serve as a means of pursuit of political objectives, instead of being declared null and void with the end of the cold war. This is a well-known fact that cannot in any way be justified. Therefore, the removal of unilateral coercive economic measures is a unanimous demand of an international community aspiring to peace and prosperity for humankind as well as an important and urgent matter that should be realized without fail, in keeping with the overall principles of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations. 2. Unilateral coercive economic measures and related laws must be removed unconditionally. The international community strongly opposes the use of unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion, and those countries that still resort to such anachronistic measures in disregard of the requirements of the present era are subject to criticism accordingly. In recent years, there have been some positive efforts on the part of member States of the European Union to develop economic ties with developing countries, including Asian countries. It is noteworthy that the United States is also talking about reviewing its unilateral coercive economic measures, paying attention to the demands of the international community. In actual fact, it is none other than the United States that has still been maintaining various coercive economic measures and related laws against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In particular, the United States has been continuously imposing comprehensive economic sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, based on more than a dozen laws, such as “the Trading With the Enemy Act” and “Foreign Assets Control Regulation” legislated on 28 July and 17 December 1950 respectively. The fact that the United States has been maintaining economic sanction measures and related laws against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for about five decades shows that it has no intention of giving up its policy of isolating and stifling the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Even though four years have elapsed since the conclusion of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-United States of America Agreed Framework, the United States has yet to implement the provision of the Agreed Framework concerning the relaxation of barriers to trade and investment. Instead, it continues to resort to a hostile policy by committing itself only to conditional lifting of sanctions. The United States must discard unilateral economic measures as a means of political coercion, which is a mode of thinking of the cold-war era, and remove all economic sanction measures and related laws against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea immediately and unconditionally in line with its obligations under the Agreed Framework. The Member States of the United Nations are called upon to pay further attention to ensuring that the General Assembly resolution on the removal of unilateral coercive economic measures is duly implemented in accordance with the purpose of the Charter of the United Nations. In doing so, they will have to take all appropriate measures aimed at preventing the recurrence of the twentieth century’s use of unilateral economic measures as political coercion in the new century, thereby contributing to the promotion of world peace and development. 