%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|VERIFICATION|IRAQ|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|BALLISTIC MISSILES|

Identical letters dated 12 March 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I wish to transmit to you herewith the daily report on the activities carried out by the inspection teams of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq on 12 March 2003. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammed A. Aldouri Permanent Representative Activities of the IAEA and UNMOVIC inspection teams in Iraq Inspection activities carried out on Wednesday, 12 March 2003 I. IAEA inspection team The team left the Canal Hotel at 9.15 a.m. and went to the Saddam Centre for Cancer and Medical Genetics Research. The team enquired about the work done at the Centre and about whether radiation sources were used to treat cancer. The team then proceeded to the Saddam Centre for Neurological Sciences, which belongs to the Ministry of Health. The team verified the arrival of an apparatus comprising a radiation source used to treat brain cancer and asked where it was obtained and how it worked. It then inspected the gamma-radiation operating room and observed the apparatus and its uses. On completing its mission, which lasted 1 hour and 15 minutes, the team returned to the Canal Hotel. II. UNMOVIC inspection team (missiles) Group I The group left the Canal Hotel at 8.30 a.m. and went to the Technical Battalion located in the Taji area. It oversaw the destruction of three Sumud-2 missiles. On completing its mission, which lasted 4 hours, the group returned to the Canal Hotel. Group II The group left the Canal Hotel at 8.40 a.m. and went to the Karamah State Company, which belongs to the Military Industrialization Corporation (MIC). The group took an inventory of Sumud-2 missile parts, transferred them to the Technical Battalion at Taji, destroyed the blueprints for the missile and deleted the missile-related programmes in the computers. On completing its mission, which lasted 4 hours and 30 minutes, the group returned to the Canal Hotel. Group III The group set out from the Canal Hotel at 8.30 a.m. The group leader asked to go to the Mu`tasim plant, which belongs to the Rashid State Company. When halfway there, the group leader asked to go back to the Canal Hotel. The group did indeed return there without giving any reasons. III. UNMOVIC inspection team (chemical) The team left the Canal Hotel at 8.30 a.m. and went to the Dhat al-Sawari State Company for Chemical Industries, which is owned by the Ministry of Industry and Minerals. The team met Company officials and enquired about the nature of the Company's production, the number of plants it has, its connection with other companies and whether it cooperates with MIC. The team then inspected all the Company's departments and plants. On completing its mission, which lasted 3 hours, the team returned to the Canal Hotel. IV. UNMOVIC inspection team (biological) The group left the Canal Hotel at 9.15 a.m. and went to the Iraqi Dairy Products and Soft Drinks Company, which belongs to the private sector. The group met with the Company manager and asked him about the Company's activities, the nature of its products, the number of employees and the type of testing done in the Company laboratory. It then inspected all the Company's departments. On completing its mission, which lasted 1 hour and 30 minutes, the group returned to the Canal Hotel. The group left the Canal Hotel at 9.15 a.m. and went to the Baghdad Juice Production Company. The group met company officials and asked them when the Company had ceased to operate and when it had resumed operation, whether it had a quality control laboratory, what kind of testing was done in the laboratory and how many employees the Company had. It then inspected all the Company's departments and warehouses. On completing its mission, which lasted 1 hour and 15 minutes, the group returned to the Canal Hotel. V. UNMOVIC joint inspection team in Baghdad The team left the Canal Hotel at 9 a.m. and went to one of the missile battalions belonging to the Ministry of Defence. The group met with one of the battalion officers and asked him about the battalion's technical equipment and the formal name of the unit. The team then inspected the unit. On completing its mission, which lasted 1 hour, it returned to the Canal Hotel. VI. Interviews UNMOVIC requested a private interview in a Baghdad hotel with an Iraqi expert. The National Monitoring Directorate encouraged him to hold the interview and notified him that he should appear at the appointed time and place. The interview was in fact conducted by UNMOVIC. 