%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|COTE D'IVOIRE|TERRORISM|TERRORISM FINANCING|FROZEN ASSETS|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|BORDER TRAFFIC|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS|ASYLUM SEEKERS|REFUGEE STATUS|

Letter dated 15 April 2003 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council I write with reference to my letter of 14 August 2002 (S/2002/960). The Counter-Terrorism Committee has received the attached supplementary report from Côte d'Ivoire, submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001) (see annex). I should be grateful if you could arrange for this letter and its attachment to be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Inocencio F. Arias Chairman Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism [Original: French] Note verbale dated 8 April 2003 from the Permanent Mission of Côte d'Ivoire to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and, in reply to his letter dated 8 August 2002, has the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Ivorian Government under resolution 1373 (2001), paragraph 6 (see enclosure). A list of 15 documents contained in annex to this report is also attached. Supplementary report of the Ivorian Government, submitted to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism* Pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and at the request of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Ivorian Government has the honour to transmit to the Committee this additional information on measures taken in the area of counter-terrorism. Paragraph 1 (a) What measures if any have been taken to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist acts in addition to those listed in your responses to questions on 1 (b) to (d)? Measures have been taken at two levels: (1) At the international level Côte d'Ivoire ratified the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism on 3 January 2002. (2) At the West African subregional level (a) Within the framework of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Côte d'Ivoire participated in the Conference of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in Dakar, Senegal on 12 December 1999, at which it was decided to establish the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money-Laundering (GIABA). This Group is responsible for organizing and coordinating action to combat money-laundering and for harmonizing the legislation of States signatory thereto. GIABA was established and its statutes were adopted by the Heads of State at Bamako, Mali in December 2000. A provisional administrative secretary and a national correspondent in each State were appointed. The Ivorian correspondent has already been appointed; he is Mr. Onozon, Assistant Director of External Finance in the Treasury Department. Telephone: (225) 20 21 90 67. Activities designed to make officials in the areas of political and economic affairs more aware of the risks and threats which money-laundering poses for national economies will soon be carried out. (b) Côte d'Ivoire is a member of two organizations which are working to combat terrorism through the creation of arrangements and regulations to prevent and punish the financing of terrorist acts: the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and ECOWAS. In a meeting held in Cotonou, Benin on 19 September 2002, the Council of Ministers of WAEMU adopted Directive No. 07/2002/CM/UEMOA (Annex 1) on control of money-laundering in States members of WAEMU. The purpose of this Directive is to establish a legal framework for combating money-laundering in States members in order to prevent the use of WAEMU economic, financial and banking networks to launder money or any other asset of illegal origin. Under article 42 of the Directive, States members must adopt uniform legislation on money-laundering within six months of the date on which they sign it. Pursuant to this obligation, a validation seminar on the topic of the draft harmonized legislation on combating money-laundering in States members of WAEMU (Annex 2) was held in Dakar on 27 and 28 January 2003. Each State member was required to incorporate the provisions of this legislation into its domestic law and to ensure adoption of the harmonized legislation by its parliament. (b) What are the offences and penalties in your country with respect to the activities listed in this subparagraph? Of the activities listed in resolution 1373 (2001), paragraph 1, only the provision of funds to be used in order to carry out terrorist attacks is an offence within the meaning of article 27 of the Ivorian Penal Code (Annex 3). The Code states that anyone who provides funds for the commission of an offence shall be deemed to be an accomplice. The applicable penalties for complicity are the same as those associated with the primary offence and set forth in articles 28 to 30 of the Code. (c) What legislation and procedures exist for freezing accounts and assets at banks and financial institutions? It would be helpful if States supplied examples of any relevant action taken. There is no Ivorian legislation concerning the freezing of funds associated with the financing of terrorism. However, pending a decision by the Council of Ministers of WAEMU, the National Director of the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO), in a note dated 9 October 2001, instructed banks and financial institutions to monitor the accounts of persons, entities, bodies and organizations under suspicion of terrorist activities at the international level. In addition, banks and financial institutions are required to report monthly to the Ministry of the Economy and Finance and BCEAO on transactions affecting the monitored accounts under article 42 of the Banking Act (Annex 4). Failure to fulfil this reporting obligation constitutes a violation of article 42 of the Act and carries the penalties established in articles 52 and 54 thereof. (d) What measures exist to prohibit the activities listed in this subparagraph? Legal measures exist to prevent terrorists acting from Ivorian territory against other States and citizens. These measures have their basis in both international conventions and domestic law. Under article 4, paragraph 1, of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism (Annex 5), which Côte d'Ivoire has signed, "States undertake to refrain from any acts aimed at organizing, supporting, financing, committing or inciting to commit terrorist acts, or providing havens for terrorists, directly or indirectly, including the provision of weapons and their stockpiling in their countries and the issuing of visas and travel documents". Article 4 also lists a series of measures to be taken by States in order to prevent terrorists from acting from their territories against other States or their citizens. The OAU Convention is in the process of ratification and could provide a legal basis for all counter-terrorist action in Côte d'Ivoire. Within the framework of WAEMU, Côte d'Ivoire is involved in the preparation of harmonized legislation on combating money-laundering (Annex 6), which will strengthen efforts to combat the financing of terrorism and trafficking in narcotic drugs. In addition, Regulations aimed at combating the financing of terrorism were adopted at a meeting of Ministers of the Economy in Cotonou, Benin on 19 September 2002. These international counter-terrorism instruments provide a legal framework for strengthening Government action in this area. In addition, domestic legislation on combating drugs (Act No. 88-686 of 22 August 1988; Annex 7) and banking regulations (Act No. 90-589 of 25 July 1990; Annex 4) establish penalties for anyone committing terrorist acts from the territory of Côte d'Ivoire. Lastly, articles 83, 84 and 158 to 164 of Act No. 81-640 of 31 July 1981 (the Penal Code Adoption Act), as amended by Acts Nos. 95-522 of 6 July 1995, 96-764 of 3 October 1996, 97-398 of 11 November 1997 and 98-716 of 23 December 1998, establish penalties for terrorist acts. This legal arsenal provides an adequate basis for effective action to prevent terrorists from acting from Ivorian territory. Paragraph 2 (a) What legislation or other measures are in place to give effect to this subparagraph? In particular, what offences in your country prohibit (i) recruitment to terrorist groups and (ii) the supply of weapons to terrorists? What other measures help prevent such activities? Since Côte d'Ivoire has not yet enacted any legislation on the issue of terrorism, there are no recent provisions prohibiting the new manifestations thereof. However, there is general legislation under which the offences mentioned in this subparagraph can be punished. Recruitment to terrorist groups may be punished under articles 164, 165, 186 and 187 of the Penal Code, which cover the offences of consorting with criminals and harbouring criminals. Sentences vary from one to 20 years depending on the gravity of the offence. Fines range from 360,000 to 1 million CFA francs for the lesser crimes and from 5 million to 10 million CFA francs for the most serious crimes. From 7 to 11 October 2002, the Ivorian officials responsible for preparing draft legislation participated in a training seminar on counter-terrorism legislation in Washington, D.C. Lessons learned from the seminar will lead to proposals for the drafting of specific legislation in this area. (b) What other steps are being taken to prevent the commission of terrorist acts, and in particular, what early warning mechanisms exist to allow exchange of information with other States? In addition to increased patrolling and investigation, Côte d'Ivoire has early warning mechanisms, which are specialized units within its defence and security forces, for use in the event of a general alert. These include: The National Gendarmerie Intervention Unit, which has qualified staff trained in the use of explosive devices and in techniques for the investigation of explosions and the liberation of hostages. These staff have received counter-terrorism training in Louisiana, United States of America as part of that country's assistance in that area; The Counter-Terrorism Unit in the Territorial Surveillance Division of the National Police; and The Counter-Terrorism Unit in the National Police Riot Squad, whose members also received counter-terrorism training in Louisiana, United States of America. The primary mechanism for the rapid exchange of information with other States is the International Criminal Police (Interpol) network. In Côte d'Ivoire, this network operates at two levels: The Subregional Bureau of Interpol in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, which covers 26 West and Central African countries. Côte d'Ivoire's representatives to that Office are in constant contact with the National Central Bureau (NCB-Interpol). The National Central Bureau (NCB-Interpol), which operates within the Judicial Police. There are several overseas representatives of Côte d'Ivoire's armed forces; 18 defence attachés are posted abroad in order to improve the exchange of information with other States. (c) What legislation or procedures exist for denying safe haven to terrorists, such as laws for excluding or expelling the types of individuals referred to in this subparagraph? It would be helpful if States supplied examples of any relevant action taken. Côte d'Ivoire has provisions which allow it to deny entry to or expel from its territory anyone whom it deems to constitute a threat to public safety. These provisions include: (1) Administrative measures The Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization may issue a decree ordering the expulsion of anyone present in Ivorian territory who is officially recognized at the international level as having carried out terrorist activities. Entry into Côte d'Ivoire is subject to the inspection of travel documents (passport, laissez-passer, national identity card or refugees' and stateless persons' travel authorization by national security officials. However, entry into Ivorian territory may be denied to any foreigner whose presence constitutes a threat to public order or in respect of whom a prohibition of entry or a decree of expulsion has been issued. Foreigners illegally present in the country may also be escorted to the border or expelled (Act No. 2002-03 of 3 January 2002 on the identification of persons and the stay of foreigners in Côte d'Ivoire, which repealed Act No. 98-448 of 4 August 1998; Annex 8). (2) Legal measures Entry or stay in the country can be prohibited through judicial proceedings. Where an individual carries out a terrorist act in Ivorian territory, judicial proceedings are initiated and culminate in criminal sanctions. These sanctions include a primary penalty (involving a term of imprisonment and a fine) and an accessory penalty (which prevents the person in question from committing the same offence in the future). Expulsion from the national territory constitutes such an accessory penalty. Such judicial proceedings have their basis in articles 158 and 164 of the Ivorian Penal Code and prohibitions of entry or stay in articles 83 and 84 thereof. Under the agreements on legal assistance to which it is a party, the Government of Côte d'Ivoire may deny asylum to anyone against whom a warrant of arrest for terrorist acts has been issued by another State. (d) What legislation or procedures exist to prevent terrorists acting from your territory against other States or citizens? It would be helpful if States supplied examples of any relevant action taken. Since Côte d'Ivoire has not yet enacted any legislation on the issue of terrorism, there are no recent provisions prohibiting the new manifestations thereof. However, there is general legislation under which terrorist offences can be punished. Pending the incorporation into domestic law of the seven international counter-terrorism conventions ratified by Côte d'Ivoire, legal measures exist to prevent terrorists from acting from its territory. The legal measures are designed to punish terrorist acts and those who commit them. These measures are based on provisions of the above-mentioned Ivorian Penal Code (arts. 83, 84 and 158-164). There are also legal measures to combat drug trafficking, which may be used for the financing of terrorism. The penalties for drug trafficking have their basis in Act No. 88-686 of 22 August 1986 on prevention of the illegal use of and trafficking in drugs, narcotics, psychotropic substances and poisons. There is also a WAEMU Directive on the control of money-laundering adopted on 19 September 2002 in Cotonou; it will be used to combat the financing of terrorism by preventing money-laundering in the WAEMU zone, which includes seven other countries of the subregion in addition to Côte d'Ivoire. The Directive will soon be replaced by a harmonized law, the draft of which was discussed on 27 and 28 January 2003 in Dakar, Senegal, by experts from the States members of WAEMU and the Bank of France. Each State will now have to enact legislation that is consistent with the provisions of the Community law. Lastly, the WAEMU Regulations on counter-terrorism were adopted by the Council of Ministers on 19 September 2002 in Cotonou. These Regulations and the Directive will strengthen efforts to combat terrorism in the WAEMU community. (e) What steps have been taken to establish terrorist acts as serious criminal offences and to ensure that the punishment reflects the seriousness of such terrorist acts? Please supply examples of any convictions obtained and the sentence given. Côte d'Ivoire has not yet enacted any legislation on terrorism. However, Côte d'Ivoire has ratified seven of the 12 international counter-terrorism conventions listed in paragraph 3 (d) of the present report. In the meantime, the provisions of the Penal Code (arts. 158 to 164) under which terrorist acts may be punished, classify such acts as the most serious crimes. The applicable punishment for such acts is the same as the one applicable to crimes, i.e., life imprisonment (arts. 158 to 168 of the Penal Code). It should be noted that our national courts have not yet dealt with such acts. (f) What procedures and mechanisms are in place to assist other States? Please provide any available details of how these have been used in practice. Côte d'Ivoire has signed a series of subregional bilateral and multilateral conventions in the field of administrative and judicial assistance that allow it to assist other States to combat serious acts that may be considered as acts of terrorism (Annex 9). It is also involved, within the framework of WAEMU, in efforts to put in place in each State counter-terrorism legislation, including the draft harmonized WAEMU legislation on combating money-laundering. In the specific area of terrorism, the Ivorian Government receives lists of organizations and individuals suspected of involvement in terrorist activities from international bodies or third States such as the United Nations Security Council, the European Union and the United States of America. These lists are sent to the Ministry of the Economy and Finance and the Ministry of the Interior, which then process them through the financial institutions and security services. The financial institutions identify the accounts of the organizations or individuals concerned and put them under close surveillance. The security services verify the physical movements of members of the above-mentioned organizations or individuals and endeavour to locate them in the event of an alert. (g) How do border controls in your country prevent the movement of terrorists? How do your procedures for issuance of identity papers and travel documents support this? What measures exist to prevent their forgery etc? In Côte d'Ivoire, normal control measures are used to identify travellers and monitor migratory flows. In the specific case of terrorism, special and tighter controls may be put in place with respect to the organizations and individuals identified as being involved in or suspected of carrying out terrorist acts. As far as information exchange is concerned, NCB-Interpol and the subregional office of ICPO-Interpol, upon receipt of the lists transmitted to the Government of Côte d'Ivoire by the United Nations, the European Union and the United States of America, tighten control measures at the borders and thus prevent the movements of terrorists. The establishment of a Migration Policy and Border Control Division of the National Identification Office will strengthen the border control mechanisms (Annex 10). As a rule, travel documents are prepared in accordance with the norms of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The competent Ivorian authorities have established strict criteria for the issuance of such documents, including proof of identity and nationality, and the categories of Ivorian nationals entitled to diplomatic or service passports. In order to prevent forgery new types of travel and identity documents incorporating tamper-proof elements that comply with international standards have been developed. In addition, the Immigration Policy and Border Control Division of the National Identification Office has a documentary fraud unit. Paragraph 3 (a) What steps have been taken to intensify and accelerate the exchange of operational information in the areas indicated in this subparagraph? The following measures have been taken to intensify and accelerate the exchange of operational information: - establishment of counter-terrorism units within the police and Gendarmerie (DST, BAE, UIGN); - specialization of the staff of such units through appropriate training; - establishment of an intelligence and operational monitoring unit staffed by military and police officers; - issuance of new travel documents that meet ICAO security norms in order to prevent forgeries; - establishment of the National Identification Office; - plan to establish at the WAEMU level national financial intelligence processing units as part of the efforts to combat money-laundering and terrorism. The purpose of the national financial intelligence units is to receive, analyse and process the information required to verify the origin of transactions or the nature of transactions reported as suspicious (see draft harmonized WAEMU legislation annexed hereto). In other words, the investigations conducted by the national financial intelligence units on the basis of reports of suspicious transactions should allow them to come up with evidence of money-laundering before bringing the matter before the Public Prosecutor. Côte d'Ivoire uses traditional methods of communication, including the telephone, facsimile and mail, to intensify and accelerate the exchange of operational information; the Internet is also used, although to a lesser extent. There are ongoing efforts to improve such exchange of information, including through the establishment of the Regional African Satellite Communications Organization (RASCOM) based in Côte d'Ivoire. The aim of RASCOM is to acquire a satellite for the African continent in order to make information exchange faster, more efficient and cheaper. (b) What steps have been taken to exchange information and cooperate in the areas indicated in this subparagraph? The exchange of information and cooperation in administrative and judicial matters are carried out in accordance with the conventions on mutual assistance in judicial matters (Annex 9) as well as in the context of diplomatic courtesy. It should also be noted that information is exchanged pursuant to the implementation of the international conventions to which Côte d'Ivoire is a party. (c) What steps have been taken to cooperate in the areas indicated in this subparagraph? Côte d'Ivoire has signed and begun the procedure for ratifying the OAU (now African Union) Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism. (d) What are your Government's intentions regarding signing and/or ratifying the conventions and protocols referred to in this subparagraph? The Ivorian Government has signed and ratified seven of the 12 international conventions in the field of counter-terrorism (Annex 11). They are: - International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (1999); - International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings (1997); - Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents (1973); - Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation (1971); - International Convention against the Taking of Hostages (1979); - Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation (1971); - Convention on Offences and Certain other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft (1963). The five others listed below are in the process of being ratified: - Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection (1991); - Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf (1988); - Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (1980); - Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (1970). (e) Provide any relevant information on the implementation of the conventions, protocols and resolutions referred to in this subparagraph. Following the events of 11 September 2001, the Office of the President of the Republic issued a communiqué in which the Ivorian Head of State, His Excellency Laurent Gbagbo, condemned those acts and appealed to all States to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security. Moreover, Côte d'Ivoire participated at the highest level (President of the Republic) in the Dakar counter-terrorism summit (17 October 2001), thus demonstrating the Government's willingness to cooperate, at the subregional and regional levels as well as at the international level, in efforts to prevent and combat international terrorism. Legislative and administrative measures have been taken to combat terrorism and others are being taken at the regional, West African subregional and national levels. At the regional level, the OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism is in the process of ratification. The Supreme Court is currently examining this Convention to determine whether it is consistent with the Ivorian Constitution. At the West African subregional level, WAEMU validated a draft harmonized legislation on the control of money-laundering, which will be incorporated into Ivorian law after its adoption by the competent WAEMU bodies. Moreover, WAEMU also adopted Regulations on counter-terrorism. At the national level, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ivorians Abroad established an inter-ministerial committee on counter-terrorism, which is basically responsible for monitoring legal instruments on counter-terrorism. Thus, the measures taken pursuant to the United Nations conventions and protocols on counter-terrorism are the Act authorizing the President to ratify these conventions as well as ratification and issuing decrees. Under those measures, any citizen may invoke these conventions in any Ivorian court. Foreign diplomats based in Abidjan may, in the course of their duties, invoke these conventions to avoid prosecution in Côte d'Ivoire. Lastly, pursuant to these conventions, third States may request Côte d'Ivoire to take action to prevent terrorist movements from preparing and launching attacks from Ivorian territory against them. Since the United Nations Security Council resolutions on terrorism fall under Chapter 7 of the Charter on the maintenance of international peace and security, they are binding on Côte d'Ivoire and must be implemented by the Ivorian authorities. (f) What legislation, procedures and mechanisms are in place for ensuring asylum-seekers have not been involved in terrorist activity before granting refugee status? Please supply examples of any relevant cases. Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Constitution provides (Annex 12) for the right to asylum: "Anyone persecuted for his political, religious or philosophical beliefs or for his ethnic background may be entitled to asylum in the territory of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, provided that he obeys the laws of the country." The application on Ivorian territory of the right of asylum has its basis in the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 on the status of refugees, supplemented by the Protocol of 31 July 1967, and on the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa of 10 September 1969. These Conventions and Protocol were ratified by Côte d'Ivoire. Côte d'Ivoire established a National Eligibility Commission to consider applications for refugee status. In that regard, a preliminary draft law on the status of refugees in Côte d'Ivoire (Annex 13) was submitted to members of the Commission for their approval. This preliminary draft law will be transmitted to the Council of Ministers, which will then transmit it in the form of a draft law to the National Assembly for consideration and adoption. The preliminary draft law excludes any applicant suspected of having committed: (1) A crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity, within the meaning of the relevant international instruments (article 2, paragraph 1, subparagraph 1); (2) A serious offence under ordinary law outside national territory before entering Côte d'Ivoire (article 2, paragraph 1, subparagraph 2); (3) Activities contrary to the aims and principles of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity (article 2, paragraph 1, subparagraph 3). Thus, any application for refugee status must meet the new criteria required by the preliminary draft law. The work of the National Eligibility Commission is based on responses to questionnaires given to applicants by a subcommittee composed of representatives of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); Office for Aid and Assistance to Refugees and Stateless Persons (SAARA); and the Department of Territorial Oversight. In-depth investigations are conducted into an applicant's background to determine whether he can be granted refugee status. The subcommittee submits the findings of its investigation to the National Eligibility Commission, which comprises representatives of the following bodies: - Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ivorians Abroad (Chairman); - Ministry of Justice, Civil Liberties and Human Rights (Vice-Chairman); - Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization (member); - UNHCR (observer); - Office for Aid and Assistance to Refugees and Stateless Persons (observer). (g) What procedures are in place to prevent the abuse of refugee status by terrorists? Please provide details of legislation and/or administrative procedures which prevent claims of political motivation being recognized as grounds for refusing requests for the extradition of alleged terrorists. Please supply examples of any relevant cases. Apart from the strict conditions for the granting of refugee status, the preliminary draft law gives the Ivorian State the right to expel from its territory any legally admitted refugees on grounds of national security or public order. Moreover, the OAU Convention signed and ratified by Côte d'Ivoire prohibits refugees established on Ivorian territory from taking up arms to attack any other State, attacking such State through the print media and radio broadcasts, or conducting activities likely to create tensions between States. The Eligibility Commission is composed of senior civil servants of high moral standing, who are specialists in humanitarian affairs, are not politicians and are objective enough to evaluate applications for refugee status. The conditions stipulated in the preliminary draft law and the provisions of the international conventions constitute the juridical bases which prevent claims of political motivation being recognized as grounds for refusing requests for the extradition of alleged terrorists. The convention signed on 12 September 1962 among the 12 member countries of the African and Mauritian Common Organization (OCAM) (Annex 14) includes an extradition clause between the signatory countries under which extradition on political grounds is prohibited. Furthermore, the convention on cooperation between France and Côte d'Ivoire in judicial matters of 24 April 1964 also includes an extradition clause which prohibits extradition on political grounds. In addition to those two conventions, mention should be made of the ECOWAS Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters and on Extradition signed on 6 August 1994 by the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS. This Convention also prohibits extradition on political grounds. Lastly, the Act of 10 March 1927 (Annex 15), a French Act which has been applied in Côte d'Ivoire as originally drafted since independence, governs extradition in our country. This Act, like all the above-mentioned conventions, prohibits extradition on political grounds. In any case, anyone suspected of being a terrorist will be extradited. 