%%%SANCTIONS|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|IRAQ|FORCE IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

Letter dated 22 May 2003 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council The Chargé d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations presents his compliments to the President of the Security Council for the month of May 2003 and, upon instructions from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, has the honour to inform him that Syria would have voted in favour of resolution 1483 (2003) if enough time had been given to its delegation to receive the relevant instructions from its capital. Annexed to the present letter you will find the explanation of vote that the Syrian Arab Republic would have given in respect of the resolution. It would be greatly appreciated if the present letter and its annex were circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Fayssal Mekdad Chargé d'affaires [Original: Arabic] Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations New York For years the Syrian Arab Republic has been calling for the lifting of the sanctions imposed on the Iraqi people and a redressing of the wrongs suffered by it as a result of the unjust embargo, malnutrition and the lack of medical supplies. In this it has been prompted by the keen desire of the people and leadership of the Syrian Arab Republic for an improvement in the situation of the fraternal Iraqi people. It has seen fit to vote in favour of this resolution despite its conviction that it does not meet the aspirations of Iraqi citizens to see their country free and sovereign, with its territory and people united, benefiting from its natural resources and playing its active role at the Arab and the international levels. The Syrian Arab Republic's vote in favour of this resolution does not by any means imply a change in its position rejecting the war against Iraq as illegitimate, since it is inconceivable that the United Nations could confer any legitimacy on foreign occupation. The Syrian Arab Republic has sought, together with other members of the Security Council, to introduce important amendments to the draft resolution submitted so as to give the United Nations a central role in Iraq and to ensure that Iraq's wealth accrues to its people and that the occupation of its territory is ended as soon as possible. The Syrian Arab Republic's vote in favour of this resolution is consistent with its constant desire to preserve unity in the Security Council as the principal framework for the maintenance of international legitimacy. 