%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DEMILITARIZED ZONES|BOUNDARIES|ERITREA|ETHIOPIA|

Progress report of the Secretary-General on Ethiopia and Eritrea Addendum Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission Schedule of the order of activities ahead as at 16 July 2003 Late July 2003 1. Appointment of field liaison officers for the remaining demarcation activities. 2. Award of contracts on pillar emplacement and as-built survey. Early August 2003 3. Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission meeting to issue demarcation instructions for the factual survey of Tserona and Zalambessa as well as the field assessment of pillar sites in the Central and Western Sectors. 4. Preparation of equipment and other logistical matters by contractors. Late August 2003 5. Production of marked maps for the Eastern Sector and their delivery to the parties for comments. 6. Liaison meeting with Ethiopia. 7. Liaison meeting with Eritrea. 8. Commencement of the factual survey of Tserona and Zalambessa as well as the field assessment of pillar sites in the Central and Western Sectors. 9. Commencement of demining of access to pillar sites. 10. Deployment of staff and shipment of equipment by contractors to the field. September 2003 11. Receipt of parties' comments on marked maps and the Boundary Commission's decision on a final boundary line and pillar sites in the Eastern Sector. 12. Completion of factual survey of Tserona and Zalambessa as well as the field assessment of pillar sites in the Central Sector. 13. Delivery of the factual report on Tserona and Zalambessa as well as the field assessment report on pillar sites in the Central Sector to the parties for comments. October 2003 14. Receipt of parties' comments on the factual report on Tserona and Zalambessa as well as the field assessment report on pillar sites in the Central Sector. 15. The Boundary Commission's decision on Tserona and Zalambessa as well as on proposed pillar sites in the Central Sector. 16. Production of marked maps for the Central Sector and their delivery to the parties for comments. 17. Arrival of contractors in the field. 18. Commencement of pillar emplacement and as-built survey in the Eastern Sector. 19. Completion of the field assessment of pillar sites in the Western Sector. November 2003 20. Delivery of the field assessment report on pillar sites in the Western Sector to the parties for comments. 21. Receipt of parties' comments on marked maps and the Boundary Commission's decision on a final boundary line and pillar sites in the Central Sector. 22. Receipt of parties' comments on the field assessment report on pillar sites in the Western Sector. December 2003 23. The Boundary Commission's decision on proposed pillar sites in the Western Sector. 24. Production of marked maps for the Western Sector and their delivery to the parties for comments. 25. Completion of pillar emplacement and as-built survey of the Eastern Sector. January 2004 26. Issuance by the Boundary Commission to the parties of the final map of the Eastern Sector with a copy of the relevant pages of the register recording the final location of each pillar. 27. Commencement of pillar emplacement and as-built survey in the Central Sector. 28. Receipt of the parties' comments on marked maps and the Boundary Commission's decision on a final boundary line and pillar sites in the Western Sector. March 2004 29. Completion of pillar emplacement and as-built survey of the Central Sector. 30. Issuance by the Boundary Commission to the parties of the final map of the Central Sector with a copy of the relevant pages of the register recording the final location of each pillar. 31. Commencement of pillar emplacement and as-built survey in the Western Sector. June 2004 32. Completion of pillar emplacement and as-built survey of the Western Sector. July 2004 33. Issuance by the Boundary Commission to the parties of the final map of the Western Sector with a copy of the relevant pages of the register recording the final location of each pillar. Assumptions. The present schedule is dependent on various critical deadlines being met to enable key milestones to be achieved as scheduled, including such issues as the timely approval of flights and site inspections; the timely deployment of contractors; full cooperation by the parties; the guarantee of security for Boundary Commission field staff and contractors and so on, as noted in S/2003/257, annex I, appendix. 