%%%ANGOLA SITUATION|

98-23914 (E) 190898 United Nations A/53/229 General Assembly Distr.: General 14 August 1998 Original: English Fifty-third session * A/53/150. Item 35 of the provisional agenda* Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity Letter dated 7 August 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith a communiqué of the meeting of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Heads of State and Leaders of Delegation, held in Swakopmund, Namibia, on 28 July 1998 on the situation in Angola. I request that the present letter and its annex be circulated to all Member States as a document of the General Assembly under item 35 of the provisional agenda. (Signed) Martin Andjaba Ambassador and Permanent Representative A/53/229 Annex Communiqué of the Southern African Development Community Heads of State and Government and Heads of Delegation who attended the Second Southern Africa International Dialogue on Smart Partnership, held in Swakopmund, Namibia, on 28 July 1998, on the critical situation in Angola The meeting was attended by: King Mswati III, of Swaziland President Joachim Chissano of Mozambique President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe President Sam Nujoma of Namibia President Benjamin Mkapa of the United Republic of Tanzania President Festus Mogae of Botswana Prime Minister Bethuel Mosisili of Lesotho Executive Deputy President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa Vice President Lt. Gen. Christon Tembo of Zambia Foreign Minister Dr. Mapopa Chipeta of Malawi Foreign Minister Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia Executive Secretary of the Southern African Development Community Dr. Kaire Mbuende The Leaders of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) expressed grave concern over the continuous violation of the Lusaka Protocol by the União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) and the rapidly deteriorating situation in Angola. The meeting condemned, in the strongest possible terms, the resumption of acts of hostility that amounted to a declaration of war by Dr. Jonas Savimbi and UNITA which could lead to a full-scale war and thereby derail and undermine the Angolan peace process. Furthermore, the meeting strongly urged UNITA and Dr. Jonas Savimbi to comply fully with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and the Security Council resolutions and to desist forthwith from prolonging the suffering of the people of Angola. SADC Heads of State and Government called upon Dr. Savimbi to proceed to Luanda without further delay and to play a constructive role in the reconstruction and development of Angola. SADC leaders reiterated their support and solidarity with the Government and people of Angola and encouraged them to ensure the maintenance of national unity and reconciliation, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their country. SADC leaders committed themselves to do everything within their power to ensure that the Angolan peace process remained on course and was speedily and successfully completed. SADC countries further renewed their resolve to work together to ensure that their territories were not used as springboards to undermine and destabilize Angola. Lastly, the meeting called upon the international community to assist in all possible ways to ensure the speedy implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to comply fully with the letter and spirit of the Security Council resolution on Angola. 