%%%DECOLONIZATION|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|VISITING MISSIONS|NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|INTERNATIONAL WEEKS|

98-25780 (E) 230998 United Nations A/53/23 (Part II) General Assembly Distr.: General 17 September 1998 Original: English Fifty-third session * A/53/150. ** The present document contains chapters III and IV of the Special Committee’s report to the General Assembly. The general introductory chapter will be issued under the symbol A/53/23 (Part I). Other chapters of the report will be issued under the symbol A/53/23 (Parts III to IX). The complete report will be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/53/23). Item 18 of the provisional agenda* Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ** (covering its work during 1998) Rapporteur: Mr. Fayssal Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) Chapters III and IV Contents Chapter Paragraphs Page III. Dissemination of information on decolonization A. Consideration by the Special Committee B. Recommendation of the Special Committee IV. Question of sending visiting missions to Territories B. Decision of the Special Committee A/53/23 (Part II) Chapter III Dissemination of information on decolonization 1. At its 1484th meeting, on 6 February 1998, the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of the dissemination of information on decolonization as a separate item and to consider it at its plenary meetings (see A/AC.109/L.1871). 2. The Special Committee considered the question at its 1487th meeting, on 29 June 1998. 3. In its consideration of the question, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, resolution 52/79 of 10 December 1997 on the dissemination of information on decolonization, and resolution 52/78 of the same date on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 4. The Special Committee held consultations with the representatives of the Department of Public Information and of the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat at its 1487th meeting (see A/AC.109/SR.1487). 5. At the same meeting, the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee drew attention to a draft resolution prepared by the Chairman, contained in document A/AC.109/L.1872. 6. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/L.1872 without a vote (A/AC.109/2120). Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of All Colonial Territories Fighting for Freedom, Independence and Human Rights 7. The Special Committee observed the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of All Colonial Territories Fighting for Freedom, Independence and Human Rights during its 1486th meeting, held at United Nations Headquarters on 22 May 1998. 8. At the 1486th meeting, the Acting Chairman and the Secretary-General made statements. A statement was also made by the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People (see A/AC.109/SR.1486). 9. At the same meeting, statements were also made by the representatives of Colombia (on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries), Mauritius (on behalf of the African Group of States), Indonesia (on behalf of the Asian Group of States) and Brazil (on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group of States and also on behalf of the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR)) as well as the observer delegation of Palestine to the United Nations (see A/AC.109/SR.1486). 10. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the Chief Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development of Montserrat (see A/AC.109/SR.1486). 11. At the same meeting, statements were also made by the representatives of Portugal and Jamaica. Statements were made in the exercise of the right of reply by the representatives of Indonesia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Brazil and Portugal (see A/AC.109/SR.1486). 12. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2120) adopted by the Special Committee at its 1487th meeting, on 29 June 1998, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly: The General Assembly, Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization,1 Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 52/79 of 10 December 1997, Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options of self-determination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to achieving complete decolonization by the year 2000, Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims of the Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to achieve self-determination, Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the Secretary-General in accordance with the terms of Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization, 1. Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat; 2. Considers it important to continue its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options of self-determination available for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories; 3. Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to take into account the suggestions of the Special Committee to continue their efforts to take measures through all the media available, including publications, radio and television, as well as the Internet, to give publicity to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia: (a) To continue to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories; (b) To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred to above; (c) To maintain a working relationship with the appropriate regional and intergovernmental organizations, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, by holding periodic consultations and exchanging information; (d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization; (e) To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present resolution; 4. Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to continue to extend their cooperation in the dissemination of information referred to in paragraph 2 above; 5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session. Notes 1 The present chapter. Chapter IV Question of sending visiting missions to Territories 1. At its 1484th meeting, on 6 February 1998, the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of sending visiting missions to Territories as appropriate. The Special Committee further decided that the item should be considered in its plenary meetings and, as appropriate, in connection with its examination of specific Territories. 2. The Special Committee considered the question at its 1487th and 1499th meetings, on 29 June and 11 August 1998. 3. In its consideration of the question, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, the pertinent provisions of resolution 52/78 of 10 December 1997 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and resolution 52/77 of the same date relating to specific Territories. The Special Committee also considered Assembly resolution 45/33 of 20 November 1990 relating to the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration. 4. During its consideration of the question, the Special Committee had before it the report of the Acting Chairman (A/AC.109/L.1882 and Add.1) on his consultations with representatives of the administering Powers, undertaken in accordance with paragraph 4 of the resolution adopted by the Committee at its 1474th meeting, on 16 June 1997.1 5. At the 1499th meeting, on 11 August 1998, the Chairman drew attention to his report on the item (A/AC.109/L.1882), as well as a draft resolution prepared by the Chairman, contained in document A/AC.109/L.1884. 6. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/L.1884 without a vote (A/AC.109/2130) (see para. 9). 7. In addition to the consideration of this question, the Special Committee considered the specific Territories referred to it, taking into account the relevant provisions of the General Assembly resolutions mentioned in paragraph 3 above, as well as previous decisions of the Special Committee relating to the question. 8. By adopting at its 1496th meeting, on 13 July 1998, a consolidated resolution on 10 small Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/AC.109/2128) as well as resolutions on Tokelau (A/AC.109/2124) and Guam (A/AC.109/2129), the Special Committee endorsed a number of conclusions and recommendations concerning the sending of visiting missions to Territories, as reflected in chapter X of the present report (A/53/23 (Part VI)), relating to American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, and chapters XI and XII of the present report (Parts VII-VIII), relating, respectively, to Tokelau and Guam. 9. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2130) adopted by the Special Committee at its 1499th meeting is reproduced below: The Special Committee, Having considered the question of sending visiting missions to Territories, Having examined the report of the Acting Chairman on the question,2 Recalling, the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee requesting the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the United Nations by receiving visiting missions in the Territories under their administration, Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an effective means of assessing the situation in those Territories and of ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the peoples thereof regarding their future status, Conscious that United Nations visiting missions enhance the capacity of the United Nations to assist the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories in attaining the objectives set forth in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and in other relevant resolutions of the Assembly, Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand, as an administering Power, in the work of the Special Committee, and that, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, a visiting mission was dispatched to Tokelau in July 1994,3 Recalling the dispatch in 1979 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory of Guam, noting the recommendation of the 1996 Pacific regional seminar that a visiting mission be sent to Guam, and taking note of resolution No. 464 (LS), adopted by the twenty-third Guam legislature on 19 July 1996, in which it requested the dispatch of a United Nations visiting mission to that Territory, Welcoming the invitation extended at the Pacific regional seminar held at Nadi, Fiji, from 16 to 18 June 1998, by the Governor of American Samoa to the Special Committee to send a visiting mission, Welcoming the commencement of informal dialogue between the Special Committee and some administering Powers, 1. Stresses the need to dispatch periodic visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories in order to facilitate the full, speedy and effective implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to those Territories; 2. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate or continue to cooperate with the United Nations by receiving United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under their administration; 3. Requests the administering Powers to consider new approaches in the work of the Special Committee, and calls upon them to cooperate with the Special Committee in its efforts; 4. Requests its Acting Chairman to continue consultations with the administering Powers concerned on the implementation of paragraph 2 of the present resolution and to report thereon to the Special Committee as appropriate; 5. Also requests its Acting Chairman to enter into consultations with the administering Power of Guam with a view to facilitating the dispatch of a United Nations visiting mission to that Territory. 1 See A/52/23 (Part II), chap. IV, para. 10. The complete report of the Special Committee will be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/52/23). 2 A/AC.109/L.1882. 3 A/AC.109/2009. 