%%%ON-SITE INSPECTION|VERIFICATION|IRAQ|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS|CHEMICAL WEAPONS|BALLISTIC MISSILES|

Identical letters dated 22 January 2003 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I wish to transmit to you herewith the daily report on the activities carried out by the inspection teams of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq on 22 January 2003. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Said Shihab Ahmad Chargé d'affaires a.i. Activities of the IAEA and UNMOVIC inspection teams in Iraq Inspection activities carried out on Wednesday, 22 January 2003 I. IAEA inspection team Group I A group of three inspectors left the Canal Hotel in Baghdad at 9.10 a.m. and arrived at the Taji Camp, where, using portable equipment, it performed a motorized radiation survey of the Camp that included the principal and side streets. The mission lasted approximately three hours, after which the group returned to the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. Group II A second group, composed of four inspectors, left the Sheraton Hotel in Basra at 9.15 a.m. and arrived at the office of the president of the University of Basra. Upon arriving, the group met the assistant president of the University and asked him questions about the number of colleges and sites belonging to the University, the names of research centres, the number of undergraduate and graduate students and the financing entity. The group next visited the College of Science and met with the dean of the College, questioning him about the number of students, the number of departments, the number of doctoral students, the College's acquisitions since 1998 and the purpose for which radiation sources are used. The group also visited the College of Engineering and met its dean, asking him questions about the number of College departments, the number of graduate students, the activity of the Naval Engineering Department, the College's budget and the financing entity. Lastly the group visited the College of Education and, meeting with its dean, questioned him about the number of College departments, the number of students, the size of the teaching staff and the number of radiation sources located in the College. The group visited a number of laboratories belonging to the Colleges mentioned above. At the end of the mission, which lasted approximately 5.5 hours, the group returned to the Sheraton Hotel in Basra. Group III A third group, composed of five inspectors, left the Canal Hotel in Baghdad at 11.30 a.m. and arrived at the State Company for Geological Survey, which belongs to the Ministry of Industry and Minerals and is located at Andalus Square in Baghdad. The group met an official of the Company and questioned him about radiation sources located in the Company and the names and locations of mines situated in Iraq. The group inspected the reconnaissance station, the laboratories and the library as well as the radiation source room. The mission lasted approximately 2.25 hours, after which the group returned to the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. II. UNMOVIC inspection team (biological) A team of nine inspectors left the Canal Hotel in Baghdad at 2.30 a.m. and arrived at the Institute of Technology in the Za`faraniyah district of Baghdad. The team met the dean of the Institute and asked him about the size of the teaching staff and the number of students. It also asked him whether graduate courses and courses in microbiological sciences were taught there. The team next visited the departments of Mechanics, Chemical Industries, Irrigation and Vehicles. The mission lasted approximately 3 hours, after which the team returned to the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. III. UNMOVIC joint inspection team in Mosul A team of eight inspectors left the Nineveh Palace Hotel at 9 a.m. and arrived at the Qayyarah refinery, which belongs to the North Oil Company. The team met with the director of the refinery and asked him questions about the ownership of the refinery, about some of the neighbouring buildings belonging to the North Gas Company and about production operations. The team then checked some of the equipment and inspected the refinery. The mission lasted approximately 2.5 hours, after which the team returned to the Nineveh Palace Hotel in Mosul. IV. UNMOVIC inspection team (missiles) A team of 16 inspectors left the Canal Hotel in Baghdad at 2.30 a.m. and arrived at the Badr State Company, which belongs to the Military Industrialization Corporation (MIC). The Company is located in the Yusufiyah area, 25 kilometres south of Baghdad. One group of team members inspected all the Company facilitates, while another met with the general manager of the Company and questioned him about the Company's production, in particular its products related to the Sumud and Fath missiles. The team then verified the declarations. The mission lasted approximately 3.5 hours, after which the team returned to the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. V. UNMOVIC inspection team (chemical) A team of 13 inspectors left the Canal Hotel in Baghdad at 9 a.m. and arrived at the Qa`qa` State Company, an MIC company located 50 kilometres south of Baghdad. The team met the Company's liaison officer and asked him about equipment and systems included under the monitoring regime and the origins of that equipment. The team then inspected the "Pfizer cellulose" [nitrocellulose?] production unit, the Research and Development Department, the nitric acid concentration plant and the raw material warehouse. It also inspected the Khalid plant, the Sa`d plant and the Tariq plant, checked the tagged items and took 13 samples and two swab samples of various materials. The mission lasted approximately 5.5 hours, after which the team returned to the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. The team left the Sheraton Hotel in Basra at 7 a.m. and arrived at the Ur State Company, an MIC company located in the city of Nasiriyah. The team met the general manager of the Company and asked him questions about the Company's activities, products and specialization. The team then took a tour around the Company enclosure, checked the Company's electricity consumption in previous years and requested a copy of one of the electricity bills. The mission lasted approximately 4 hours, after which the team returned to the Sheraton Hotel in Basra. 