%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|ASIA|EUROPE|TERRORISM|CONFERENCES|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|TERRORISM FINANCING|CAPACITY BUILDING|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|EDUCATION|LAUNDERING OF FUNDS|LAW ENFORCEMENT|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|REGIONAL COOPERATION|

Letter dated 14 October 2003 from the Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to enclose herewith the text of the Chair's summary of the Asia-Europe Meeting Seminar on Anti-Terrorism. The Seminar was held at Beijing on 22 and 23 September 2003. I would be most grateful if you could arrange to have the text of the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Wang Guangya Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of China [Original: Chinese and English] Chair's summary of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Seminar on Anti-Terrorism (Beijing, 22 and 23 September 2003) 1. The ASEM Seminar on Anti-Terrorism was held in Beijing, China, on 22 and 23 September 2003. The Seminar, co-sponsored by China, Denmark, Germany, Japan and Spain, was endorsed at the fourth ASEM summit in Copenhagen in September 2002. It was attended by representatives from ASEM partners. The Seminar opened with a welcoming address by H.E. Mr. Shen Guofang, Chinese Assistant Minister of Foreign Affairs, and was chaired by Heads of Delegations of the five Co-sponsors. 2. The Seminar held comprehensive, in-depth and fruitful discussions on three topics: assessment of the situation of anti-terrorism in Asia and Europe as well as in the rest of the world, exchange of experiences and practices of anti-terrorism, and consideration of concrete measures to strengthen ASEM anti-terrorism cooperation. 3. The Seminar deemed terrorism a global threat. Despite an increasingly strengthened international campaign against it, terrorism in the international scene remained a source of serious concern and a profound threat to stability, peace and security in Asia, Europe and beyond. 4. The Seminar recognized that terrorism, including its links with transnational organized crimes such as money-laundering, trafficking in persons, illicit arms trafficking and the production and trafficking in illicit drugs, posed serious threats to the peace and security of both regions and beyond. The Seminar condemned all acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, irrespective of their motivation, forms and manifestations. The Seminar called for a concerted effort of the international community to combat terrorism, including the related crimes mentioned, and for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). 5. The Seminar affirmed that the fight against terrorism must be carried out in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and general norms of international law including human rights and humanitarian law. The Seminar further underlined that the fight against terrorism requires a comprehensive approach by the international community comprising political, economic, diplomatic, military and legal means in accordance with our respective domestic laws, duly taking into account root causes of terrorism without acknowledging these as justifications for terrorist and/or criminal activities. The fight against terrorism should involve active participation and collaboration of all States, international and regional organizations as well as of civil society. In this regard, the Seminar firmly supported the central role of the United Nations in the international campaign against terrorism. The Seminar urged the speedy conclusion of the negotiations on a United Nations comprehensive convention on international terrorism as an important instrument in the combat against terrorism. 6. The Seminar emphasized that the international community should continue promoting the dialogue among civilizations so as to broaden their understanding. The Seminar opposed any attempt to associate terrorism with any religion, race, culture or nationality and held that regional conflicts and social and economic factors, providing a fertile ground for hatred and terrorism, should be tackled in an appropriate way. 7. The Seminar was informed of the ASEM symposium on combating underground banking and the need of supervising alternative remittance services in European and Asian countries, organized jointly by Germany and Malaysia on 30 and 31 October 2003 in Berlin, Germany. The Seminar also welcomed the establishment of the South-East Asia Regional Centre for Counter Terrorism in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 8. The Seminar took note of the concerns of countries having a responsibility to issue travel advice for the safety of their travelling nationals and equally the concerns of those countries affected by the potential adverse effects on their economies. The Seminar also took note of the suggestions of ASEAN partners that travel advice be communicated in advance to affected countries when possible. 9. The Seminar held that ASEM should play an active role in the fight against terrorism. Guided by the Declaration on Cooperation against International Terrorism endorsed at the Fourth ASEM Summit and its Program, the Seminar suggested that the following concrete steps be taken: (a) Enhancing information exchanges, in particular, on terrorists and terrorist organizations, their movement and funding, and any other information needed; (b) Strengthening capacity-building efforts through training and education, seminars, conferences to support ASEM partners in their efforts to implement Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and relevant international conventions and protocols on anti-terrorism. Cooperation at regional level should focus on areas where common needs exist and where there is an added value. In this respect, the ASEM anti-money-laundering project should continue and be supported; (c) Links between legislative and law enforcement agencies should be strengthened to promote practical cooperations on anti-terrorism legislation and law enforcement. Such cooperation should be promoted at both bilateral and regional levels; (d) Exploring practical initiatives to support the United Nations in its central role in the fight against terrorism. The existing ASEM coordination among permanent representatives at the United Nations should in particular focus on the development of such initiatives; (e) Establishing a network of ASEM contact points on anti-terrorism to facilitate the implementation of above-mentioned proposals and prepare for future possible ASEM meetings at director-general level on anti-terrorism; (f) Considering study visits among ASEM partners to achieve a better understanding of each other's operating environment and a better networking. 10. The Seminar agreed that the results of this Seminar would be presented at the Sixth ASEM Foreign Ministers' Meeting in April 2004, Dublin. 