%%%CLAIMS|WAR DAMAGE COMPENSATION|IRAQ|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS S Security Council Distr. GENERAL S/AC.26/Dec.210 (2003) 18 December 2003 Original: UNITED NATIONS COMPENSATION COMMISSION GOVERNING COUNCIL Decision concerning the fifteenth instalment of "E2" claims taken by the Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission at its 133rd meeting, on 18 December 2003 The Governing Council, Having received, in accordance with article 38 of the Provisional Rules for Claims Procedure ("the Rules"), the report and recommendations made by the panel of Commissioners concerning the fifteenth instalment of "E2" claims, covering 258 claims, 1. Approves the recommendations made by the panel of Commissioners, and, accordingly, 2. Decides, pursuant to article 40 of the Rules, to approve the amounts of the recommended awards concerning the claims covered in the report. The aggregate amounts awarded per country, based on the recommendations contained in annex II of the report, are as follows: Country or submitting entity Number of claims recommended for payment Number of claims not recommended for payment Amount of compensation claimed (USD) Amount of compensation recommended (USD) Austria nil Bahamas Canada Cyprus Egypt France Germany Greece India Iran Israel Italy Netherlands Pakistan Republic of Korea Saudi Arabia Spain Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Turkey United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Wong and Sons Trading Co. (claim No. 4002391) a Total a Claim submitted directly to the Commission by the claimant pursuant to article 5(3) of the Rules. 3. Notes that, as referred to in paragraph 3 of the report, seven claims were withdrawn by claimants in the course of the Panel's review of this instalment, and that one claim was transferred to a different panel of Commissioners, 4. Reaffirms that when funds become available payments shall be made in accordance with decision 197 (S/AC.26/Dec.197 (2003)), 5. Recalls that when payments are made in accordance with decision 197, and pursuant to the terms of decision 18 (S/AC.26/Dec.18 (1994)), Governments shall distribute amounts received to the designated claimants in respect of approved awards within six months of receiving payment, and shall, not later than three months after the expiration of this time limit, provide information on such distribution, 6. Requests the Executive Secretary to provide a copy of the report to the Secretary-General, to the Government of the Republic of Iraq and to each respective Government. 