%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|DRUG CONTROL|AFGHANISTAN|REGIONAL COOPERATION|SOUTHWEST ASIA|AFGHANISTAN SITUATION|DRUG POLICY|INTERNATIONAL POLICE|INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|NEIGHBOURING STATES|AIDS|DRUGS OF ABUSE|ILLICIT TRAFFIC|OPIUM|CROP ERADICATION|LAW ENFORCEMENT|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|REPORT PREPARATION|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 4774th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 June 2003, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. "The Security Council stresses that security remains a serious challenge facing Afghanistan. In particular, the Council expresses its concern over the increased number of attacks against international and local humanitarian personnel, Coalition forces, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and Afghan Transitional Administration targets by Taliban and other rebel elements. In this regard, the Council condemns in the strongest terms the attack against the ISAF in Kabul on 7 June. The Council also expresses its concern over other security threats, including from illicit drug trafficking. The Council stresses the need to improve the security situation in the provinces and further to extend the authority of the Afghan Transitional Administration throughout the country. Against this backdrop, the Council underlines the importance of accelerating the comprehensive reform of Afghanistan's security sector, including the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants. "The Security Council welcomes the establishment and deployment of international civilian-military Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRT) in the provinces and encourages States to support further efforts to assist with improving security in the regions. "The Security Council believes that constructive and mutually supportive bilateral and regional relations between Afghanistan and all States, and in particular its neighbours, based on the principles of mutual respect and non-interference in each other's affairs, are important for stability in Afghanistan. The Council calls upon all States to respect the Kabul Declaration on Good-Neighbourly Relations (S/2002/1416) and to support the implementation of its provisions. "The Security Council reaffirms the principles established in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, inter alia, that action against the world drug problem is a common and shared responsibility requiring an integrated and balanced approach in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. "The Security Council recognizes the links between illicit drug trafficking and terrorism, as well as other forms of crimes, and the challenges posed by these activities inside Afghanistan, as well as to the transit, neighbouring and other States affected by the trafficking of drugs from Afghanistan. "The Security Council also expresses its concern at the increasing risk of the spread of HIV/AIDS associated with drug abuse in the region and beyond. "The Security Council stresses that security will be enhanced by continued coordinated efforts to combat the production of illicit drugs in Afghanistan, as well as to interdict narco-trafficking beyond its borders. The Council recognizes that the effort to counter the problem of drugs originating in Afghanistan will only be effective when it is integrated into the wider context of reconstruction and development programmes in the country. "The Security Council expresses its concern, that despite the efforts pursued, volume of illegal opium production inside Afghanistan in year 2002 has returned to former high levels. The Council notes with concern the assessment contained in the Opium Rapid Assessment Survey of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) that opium poppy cultivation has been reported in several districts of Afghanistan for the first time. The Council stresses the need to promote the comprehensive international approach, carried out, inter alia, under the auspices of the United Nations and through other international fora, in support of the Afghan Transitional Administration's Drugs Strategy to eliminate the illicit cultivation of opium poppy. The Council also supports the fight against illicit trafficking of drugs and precursors within Afghanistan and in neighbouring States and countries along trafficking routes, including increased cooperation among them to strengthen anti-narcotic controls to curb the drug flow. Extensive efforts have also to be made to reduce the demand of drugs globally in order to contribute to the sustainability of the elimination of illicit cultivation in Afghanistan. The Council welcomes the comprehensive drug strategy for Afghanistan as set out in the Transitional Administration's Drugs Strategy and calls for help to be provided within the framework of that strategy. The Council also welcomes the `Paris Pact' (S/2003/641) introduced at the International Conference on Drug Routes From Central Asia to Europe held in Paris on 21-22 May 2003, and thanks the Government of France for convening the Conference. "The Security Council expresses support for the commitment by the Afghan Transitional Administration to eliminate drug production by the year 2013 and its efforts to implement the decrees prohibiting the cultivation, production and processing of the opium poppy, including illicit drug trafficking and drug abuse. "The Security Council welcomes the significant contribution by the UNODC and notes that the work of this Office in Afghanistan is restrained by the lack of general stability and security in the opium growing areas of that country which the international community as a whole should endeavour to ensure. The Council further welcomes projects under way by individual states to counter the threat of drugs in Afghanistan. Most of these projects are long-term, which is vital to eliminate drugs on a sustainable basis. The Council underscores the pressing need to achieve as soon as possible a significant and sustainable decrease in opium production in Afghanistan. "The Security Council acknowledges the necessity of coordination through the lead nation on this and all issues in Afghanistan; and expresses in this regard its gratitude to the United Kingdom and Germany for their work on counternarcotics and police issues, respectively. "The Security Council recognizes the problems caused to neighbouring countries, by the increase in Afghan opium production as well as the efforts made by them and other countries to interdict illicit drugs. "The Security Council stresses the need to promote effective realization of anti-drug projects for Afghanistan. These efforts can be reinforced through promulgation of a comprehensive programme of action in the region and the states of transit and destination. The Council notes in this regard a major coordinating capacity available with the UNODC, and calls upon all those concerned to cooperate with the UNODC in order to adopt harmonized measures in this area. The Council notes the call for all those concerned to adopt compatible and harmonized measures for law enforcement and counternarcotics efforts through support for implementation of the Afghan Transitional Administration's Drugs Strategy and the `Paris Pact', supported by the G-8 Summit in Evian on 3 June 2003. The Council urges donor States to work within such a consultative process to maximize the effects of their bilateral and multilateral assistance programmes. "The Security Council urges the international community, in collaboration with the UNODC and in accordance with the Afghan Transitional Administration's Drugs Strategy, to provide assistance to the Afghan Transitional Administration that addresses, inter alia, certain key areas, including development of alternative livelihood and markets, improving national institutional capacities, enforcing prohibitions on illicit cultivation, manufacturing, and trafficking of drugs, encouraging demand reduction, and building up the effective use of intelligence including aerospace monitoring. "The Security Council urges the international community, in collaboration with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the UNODC to encourage cooperation among affected countries, specifically in strengthening border controls, assisting the flow of information between and among appropriate security and law enforcement agencies, combating groups involved in illicit drug trafficking and related crimes, particularly money-laundering, carrying out operational interdiction activities and controlled deliveries, encouraging demand reduction, and coordinating information and intelligence to maximize the effectiveness of all measures taken inside Afghanistan and beyond its borders. "The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to include in his next report to the Security Council and the General Assembly on the situation in Afghanistan a summary of proposals made during its 4774th meeting held on 17 June 2003 and any commentary and response to these proposals by any Member State and to submit his relevant recommendations to the Security Council for its consideration. "The Security Council decides to remain seized of the matter." 