%%%RULES AND REGULATIONS|PROJECT PERSONNEL|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|

Secretary-General's bulletin Amendments to the 200 series of the Staff Rules (ST/SGB/2002/2) The Secretary-General, pursuant to staff regulations 12.2, 12.3 and 12.4 and staff rule 212.1 (a), hereby promulgates the text of the amendments to the 200 series of the Staff Rules promulgated in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2002/2. The text of the amendments is set out in the annex to the present bulletin. Section 1 Purpose 1.1 The text of the Staff Rules listed below is amended for the reasons set out below in relation to each rule: (a) Rule 201.2, Basic rights and obligations of project personnel, is amended by adding a new paragraph (j) to clarify that undue influence in the administration of justice process will not be tolerated and will be treated as misconduct. The subsequent paragraphs of the rule are renumbered accordingly; (b) Rule 203.9, Daily subsistence allowance, is amended to simplify the text and harmonize it with the corresponding provision in the 100 series of the Staff Rules; (c) Rule 204.3, Types of appointment, is retitled Types of appointment and re-employment, and is amended to clarify that the agreement reached by the Consultative Committee on Administrative Questions in 1963 also applies to project personnel. The paragraphs of the rule are renumbered accordingly; (d) Rule 207.17, Computation of the daily subsistence allowance while in travel status, is amended to formalize a long-standing practice under which no subsistence allowance is paid to project personnel who travel on appointment, assignment or repatriation, except for authorized stop overs that are actually made; (e) Rule 210.1, Disciplinary measures, is amended to remove previously existing restrictions on project personnel's choice of counsel in disciplinary proceedings and appeals; (f) Appendix II is amended to reflect the amendments made by ST/SGB/2003/1 to staff rule 111.1, Establishment [of Joint Appeals Boards], and staff rule 111.2, Appeals. 1.2 Attached for insertion into the printed copy of ST/SGB/2002/2 are new pages containing the amendments to Staff Rules and the changes in the Staff Regulations and their annexes, and in the appendices to the Staff Rules, resulting from General Assembly resolution 57/285 of 20 December 2002. Section 2 Final provisions Unless otherwise indicated, the amendments introduced in the present bulletin shall enter into force on 1 January 2003. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Secretary-General Chapter I DUTIES, OBLIGATIONS AND PRIVILEGES Rule 201.1 Status of project personnel (a) The declaration made by project personnel on appointment shall be placed in their official status file. A new declaration shall be made after a break in service that exceeds three months. (b) The declaration administered under regulation 1.1 (b) shall not prevent the close collaboration of project personnel with a Government pursuant to an agreement between that Government and the United Nations. Rule 201.2 Basic rights and obligations of project personnel General (a) Disciplinary procedures set out in article X of the Staff Regulations and chapter X of the Staff Rules may be instituted against project personnel who fail to comply with their obligations and the standards of conduct set out in the Charter of the United Nations, the Staff Regulations and Rules, the Financial Regulations and Rules and all administrative issuances. (b) Project personnel shall follow the directions and instructions properly issued by the Secretary-General and their supervisors. (c) Project personnel must comply with local laws and honour their private legal obligations, including, but not limited to, the obligation to honour orders of competent courts. Specific instances of prohibited conduct (d) Any form of discrimination or harassment, including sexual or gender harassment, as well as physical or verbal abuse at the workplace or in connection with work, is prohibited. (e) Project personnel shall not disrupt or otherwise interfere with any meeting or other official activity of the Organization, nor shall they threaten, intimidate or otherwise engage in any conduct intended, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the ability of other project personnel or staff members to discharge their official duties. (f) Project personnel shall not intentionally misrepresent their functions, official title or the nature of their duties to Member States or to any entities or persons external to the United Nations. (g) Project personnel shall not intentionally alter, destroy, misplace or render useless any official document, record or file entrusted to them by virtue of their functions, which document, record or file is intended to be kept as part of the records of the Organization. (h) Project personnel shall not seek to influence Member States, principal or subsidiary organs of the United Nations or expert groups in order to obtain a change from a position or decision taken by the Secretary-General, including decisions relating to the financing of Secretariat programmes or units, or in order to secure support for improving their personal situation or the personal situation of other project personnel or staff members or for blocking or reversing unfavourable decisions regarding their status or their colleagues= status. -7- 1 January 2003 (i) Project personnel shall neither offer nor promise any favour, gift, remuneration or any other personal benefit to another staff member or to any third party with a view to causing him or her to perform, fail to perform or delay the performance of any official act. Similarly, project personnel shall neither seek nor accept any favour, gift, remuneration or any other personal benefit from other project personnel, staff members or any third party in exchange for performing, failing to perform or delaying the performance of any official act. (j) Project personnel shall not unduly interfere or seek to interfere in the proper establishment or the functioning of the joint bodies established under articles X and XI of the Staff Regulations to advise the Secretary-General on disciplinary matters or on appeals by staff members against an administrative decision. Similarly, project personnel shall not unduly influence or attempt to influence any individual participating in the process in the exercise of his or her functions. Nor shall any project personnel threaten, retaliate or attempt to retaliate against such individuals or against staff members or project personnel exercising their right to appeal against administrative decisions. Honours, gifts or remuneration (k) Acceptance by project personnel of any honour, decoration, favour, gift or remuneration from nongovernmental sources requires the prior approval of the Secretary-General. Approval shall be granted only in exceptional cases and where such acceptance is not incompatible with the interests of the Organization and with the project personnel=s status as international civil servants. However, project personnel may occasionally accept, without prior approval, minor gifts of essentially nominal value having regard to the duty station concerned, provided that all such gifts are promptly disclosed to the head of the office, who may direct that the gift be entrusted to the Organization or returned to the donor. (l) The Secretary-General may authorize project personnel to accept from a non-governmental source or a university academic awards, distinctions and tokens of a commemorative or honorary character, such as scrolls, certificates, trophies or other items of essentially nominal monetary value. (m) Project personnel, as part of their official functions, will be expected from time to time to attend governmental or other functions, such as meals and diplomatic receptions. Such attendance is not considered receipt of a favour, gift or remuneration within the meaning of the Staff Regulations and Rules. (n) The Secretary-General may, in exceptional cases, provided that this is in the interest of the United Nations and not incompatible with project personnel=s status, authorize them to receive from a non-governmental source an honour, decoration, favour, gift or remuneration other than those referred to in rules 201.2 (k) to (m) above. Conflict of interest (o) Project personnel who have occasion to deal in their official capacity with any matter involving a profit-making business or other concern in which they hold a financial interest, directly or indirectly, shall disclose the measure of that interest to the Secretary-General and, except as otherwise authorized by the Secretary-General, either dispose of that financial interest or formally excuse themselves from participating with regard to any involvement in that matter which gives rise to the conflict-of-interest situation. (p) The Secretary-General shall establish procedures for the filing and utilization of financial disclosure statements. Outside activities (q) Project personnel shall not, except in the normal course of official duties or with the prior approval of the Secretary-General, engage in any of the following acts, if such act relates to the purpose, activities or interests of the United Nations: -8- 1 January 2003 (i) Issue statements to the press, radio or other agencies of public information; (ii) Accept speaking engagements; Take part in film, theatre, radio or television productions; Submit articles, books or other material for publication. (r) Membership in a political party is permitted, provided that such membership does not entail action, or an obligation to take action, by the project personnel contrary to staff regulation 1.2 (h). The payment of normal financial contributions to a political party shall not be construed as an activity inconsistent with the principles set out in staff regulation 1.2 (h). (s) The Secretary-General shall establish procedures whereby project personnel may seek in confidence clarification as to whether proposed outside activities would conflict with their status as international civil servants. Travel and per diem for outside activities (t) Project personnel who are authorized by the Secretary-General to participate in activities organized by a Government, intergovernmental organization, non-governmental organization or other private source may receive from the Government, intergovernmental organization, non-governmental organization or private source accommodation and travel and subsistence allowance generally in line with those payable by the United Nations. In such cases, the travel subsistence allowance that may otherwise be payable by the United Nations shall be reduced as envisaged by rules 207.16 (a) and 203.9 (f). Rule 201.3 Performance of project personnel (a) The performance of project personnel shall be evaluated to assess their efficiency, competence and integrity and to ensure their compliance with the standards set out in the Staff Regulations and Rules for purposes of accountability. (b) Performance reports shall be prepared in accordance with procedures established by the Secretary-General. Rule 201.4 Hours of work and official holidays (a) Project personnel shall observe the working hours established for the duty station or established by the senior officer in the field in consultation with representatives of other international organizations in the area. (b) The number of official holidays shall be 10 days in each year, including those mandated by the General Assembly, which shall be observed at all duty stations and in the field. When an official holiday falls on a non-working day, the preceding or following working day which is closest to the holiday shall be observed as an official holiday. (c) The official holidays not mandated by the General Assembly shall be determined by the Secretary-General at Headquarters, by the head of office at other duty stations or by the senior officer in the field in consultation with representatives of other international organizations in the area. -9- 1 January 2003 Article II CLASSIFICATION OF POSTS AND STAFF Regulation 2.1 In conformity with principles laid down by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General shall make appropriate provision for the classification of posts and staff according to the nature of the duties and responsibilities required. -10- 1 January 2003 (h) Two return journeys may be paid for children of eligible project personnel serving at designated duty stations, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Tuition in the mother tongue (i) Tuition in the mother tongue under staff regulation 3.2 (c) may be reimbursed subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General. Special education grant for disabled children (j) A special education grant for disabled children shall be available to project personnel in intermediate-term or long-term status, whether or not serving in their home country. The amounts to which project personnel are entitled under the grant are set out in appendix III to the present Rules, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Claims (k) Claims for the education grant shall be made in accordance with conditions established by the Secretary-General. Rule 203.9 Daily subsistence allowance (a) Except for those who normally reside in the mission area, project personnel in short-term status shall receive, during the period of their service in the mission area, a subsistence allowance at such daily rates as are approved from time to time by the Secretary-General. The allowance shall be payable in local currency. (b) The daily subsistence allowance shall normally be computed on the basis of the average cost for a reasonable standard of board and lodging plus an amount to cover incidental expenses such as service charges, gratuities and laundry. The daily subsistence allowance shall normally be based on costs in the capital city and the same rate shall apply throughout the country, provided that, where there exists a significant disparity in costs as between the capital city and other parts of the country, separate rates may be established for areas outside the capital city. (c) The daily subsistence allowance for a period of stay in one place within a country may be fixed at a lower rate after 60 days and further reduced after 120 days, consecutive or otherwise. (d) When project personnel in intermediate-term or long-term status are to serve at a duty station for less than one year, the Secretary-General shall decide whether to pay a daily subsistence allowance for the duration of such a tour of duty or pay assignment grant under rule 203.10, the hardship and nonremoval elements of the mobility and hardship allowance under rule 203.11 and the post adjustment under rule 203.5. (e) Daily subsistence allowances under this rule shall continue to be paid during periods of authorized sick leave, except that if project personnel are hospitalized, only one third of the relevant daily rate shall be paid. (f) The applicable rate of the daily subsistence allowance shall be subject to reduction when lodging or meals are provided free of charge by the United Nations, by a Government or by a related institution. Rule 203.10 Installation (Cancelled) -19- 1 January 2003 Assignment grant (a) Except for special mission service, project personnel who travel at United Nations expense to a duty station for an assignment expected to be of at least one year=s duration shall be paid an assignment grant, subject to the conditions set forth below. (b) The amount of the assignment grant shall be equivalent to: (i) Thirty days of subsistence allowance at the daily rate applicable under rule 203.9 (a) above; (ii) Thirty days of subsistence allowance at half such daily rate in respect of each family member for whom travel expenses have been paid by the United Nations under rule 207.2 (a) (i). The above-mentioned amounts shall be calculated on the basis of the rate prevailing on the date of arrival at the duty station of the individual or of his or her family member. (c) Under conditions established by the Secretary-General, the limit of 30 days provided in paragraph (b) above may be extended to a maximum of 90 days. The amount of the grant during the extended period shall be up to 60 per cent of the appropriate prevailing rate. (d) In addition to any amount of grant paid under paragraph (b) above, a lump sum calculated on the basis of the project personnel=s net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment at the duty station of assignment may be paid under conditions established by the Secretary-General. The lump sum shall be payable at the following rates: (i) At headquarters duty stations and other designated duty stations, a lump sum equivalent to one month=s net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment, provided the individual is not entitled to removal costs under staff rule 200.1 (a); (ii) At all other duty stations: a. Where the individual is entitled to removal costs under rule 200.1 (a), one month=s net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment; b. Where the individual is not entitled to removal costs, one month=s net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment if the assignment is for less than three years, and two months= net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment if the assignment is for three years or more. If an assignment for less than three years is extended to three years or more, the staff member shall be paid at that time a second onemonth lump sum. (e) If a change of official duty station or a new appointment involves a return to a place at which the individual was previously stationed, the full amount of the assignment grant shall not be payable unless the individual has been absent from the place for at least one year. In the case of a shorter absence, the amount payable shall normally be that proportion of the full grant which the completed months of absence bear to one year. (f) Where both husband and wife are employed by the United Nations and travel at United Nations expense to a duty station, and taking into account rule 204.7, the assignment grant shall be paid to each in respect of himself or herself. If they have a dependent child or children, the assignment grant in respect of such child or children shall be paid to the project personnel on whom each child is recognized to be dependent. (g) If both husband and wife would otherwise qualify for the lump sum portion of the grant, such lump sum shall only be paid to the spouse whose lump sum portion yields the higher amount. -20- 1 January 2003 Chapter IV APPOINTMENT Rule 204.1 Letter of appointment The letter of appointment granted to project personnel shall contain expressly or by reference the terms and conditions of employment. Rule 204.2 Effective date of appointment The appointment of project personnel shall take effect from the date on which they enter into official travel status to assume their duties or, if no official travel is involved, from the date on which they enter upon their duties. Rule 204.3 Types of appointment and re-employment (a) Project personnel shall be granted temporary appointments as follows: (i) Temporary appointments shall be for a fixed term and shall expire without notice on the date specified in the respective letter of appointment. They may be for service in one or more mission areas and may be for short, intermediate or long term, as defined in rule 200.2 (f). (ii) Project personnel who are initially granted appointments for less than one year but whose appointments are subsequently extended so that the total continuous contractual service is one year or more but less than five years shall be considered to be in intermediate-term status with effect from the date from which their appointment is extended or converted to intermediate-term status. (iii) Project personnel in intermediate-term status who complete five years= continuous service and whose appointments are extended for at least one further year shall be considered to be in long-term status with effect from the date on which they complete five years= continuous service. (iv) A temporary appointment does not carry any expectancy of renewal. (b) Former project personnel who are re-employed shall be given a new appointment, the terms of which shall be fully applicable without regard to any period of former service. However, when project personnel receive a new appointment in the United Nations common system less than twelve months after separation, any entitlement, benefit or accrual project personnel may have when separated at the end of the new appointment shall be adjusted in such a way that the total payments on subsequent separations do not exceed the amounts that would have been paid had the service been continuous. -25- 1 January 2003 Rule 204.4 Notification by project personnel and obligation to supply information On appointment, project personnel shall be responsible for supplying the Secretary-General with any information that may be required for the purpose of determining their status under these rules and for completing administrative arrangements in connection with their appointments. Specifically, this requirement shall include information on nationality, passport and visa, marital status, dependency status, information relevant to home leave and designation of beneficiary. They shall be responsible also for promptly notifying the Secretary-General, in writing, of any subsequent changes affecting their status under these Rules. Rule 204.5 Nationality (a) In the application of these Rules, the United Nations shall not recognize more than one nationality for project personnel. (b) When project personnel have been legally accorded nationality status by more than one State, nationality for the purpose of these Rules shall be the nationality of the State with which, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, the individual is most closely associated. Rule 204.6 Medical examination (a) Project personnel shall undergo a medical examination prior to appointment. The examination shall be made by a United Nations medical officer or, if no such officer has been designated, by another qualified member of the medical profession. A report on the examination shall be submitted to and approved by the United Nations Medical Director before the individual leaves the home country and shall include an opinion on the individual=s fitness for living, working and travelling under the conditions in the country to which he or she is assigned for duty. (b) Project personnel may be required to undergo periodic medical examinations. They shall undergo a medical examination on separation from service, and the report on this last examination shall be submitted to the United Nations Medical Director for review. Rule 204.7 Effect of marriage on contractual status and entitlements Where both husband and wife are employed by the United Nations, their contractual status shall not be affected by their marriage, but their entitlements and other benefits shall be modified as provided in the relevant staff regulations and rules. However, if the spouses maintain separate households because they are assigned to different duty stations, the Secretary-General may decide to maintain separate entitlements and benefits, provided that this is not inconsistent with any staff regulation or other decision of the General Assembly. The same modifications shall apply in the case of an individual whose spouse is employed by another organization participating in the United Nations common system. -26- 1 January 2003 an overnight stay away from the residence, no allowance shall be paid for a journey of less than 10 hours, and 40 per cent of the allowance shall be paid for a journey of 10 hours or more. (b) Where travel is by sea, a full day=s allowance at the appropriate rate shall be paid for the day of arrival at the port of disembarkation provided that the traveller remains in official travel status for more than 12 hours thereafter. No allowance shall be paid for the day on which embarkation takes place. This payment shall be in addition to the transit allowance under rule 207.18. (c) No allowance shall be paid when a traveller returns to his or her official duty station within 12 hours after departure. (d) When it is necessary for the purpose of computing the amount of daily subsistence allowance payable to specify the Ahour of departure@ and the Ahour of arrival@, these shall be considered as the time when the train, vessel or airplane used by the traveller actually departs from or arrives at its terminal. (e) No travel subsistence allowance shall be payable in respect of travel on appointment, assignment or repatriation, and in respect of travel on home leave, family visit or education grant, provided that the allowance may be paid for stopovers actually made during such travel under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Where travel at United Nations expense is authorized for medical, safety, security or other reasons under rule 207.1 (vi) or 207.2 (a) (v), an appropriate amount of subsistence allowance may be paid at the discretion of the Secretary-General. (effective 1 September 2002) Rule 207.18 Expenses while in transit by sea (a) Project personnel authorized to travel by sea shall be entitled to a transit allowance instead of the daily subsistence allowance under rule 207.16. This allowance is a fixed amount designed to cover such expenditures as project personnel are normally obliged to incur on board ship. (b) The Secretary-General shall, from time to time, establish the transit allowance payable for specified journeys by sea, taking into account the cost of fares and the number of dependants accompanying the individual at the Organization=s expense. Rule 207.19 Miscellaneous travel expenses Necessary additional expenses incurred by project personnel in connection with the transaction of official business while in the performance of authorized travel shall be reimbursed by the United Nations after completion of travel, provided that the necessity and the nature of the expenses are satisfactorily explained and supported by proper receipts, which shall normally be required for any expenditures in excess of $20.00. Such expenses, for which advance authorization shall be obtained to the extent practicable, shall normally be limited to: (i) Hire of local transportation other than that provided for under rule 207.15; (ii) Telephone, telegraph, radio and cable messages on official business; (iii) Transfer of authorized baggage by railway express or other appropriate agency; (iv) Hire of room for official use; (v) Stenographic or word-processing services or rental of equipment required for the preparation of official reports or correspondence; (vi) Transportation or storage of baggage or property used on official business; (vii) Passport and visa costs. -41- 1 January 2003 Rule 207.20 Excess baggage and unaccompanied shipments Excess baggage (a) For the purpose of these Rules, Aexcess baggage@ shall mean baggage in excess of accompanied baggage carried without extra charge by transportation companies. (b) Project personnel travelling by air shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of excess baggage for themselves and their eligible family members to the extent of the difference between their free baggage allowance and the free baggage allowance in first-class air travel, subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General. (c) Additional excess baggage by air may be authorized for project personnel when, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, the circumstances so warrant. Wherever possible, however, such additional excess baggage will be shipped as unaccompanied shipment by air. General provisions on unaccompanied shipments (d) For the purpose of these Rules, Apersonal effects and household goods@ shall mean effects and goods normally required for personal or household use, excluding animals and power-assisted vehicles. (e) Unaccompanied shipments shall normally be made in one consignment, and shall be reimbursed on the basis of the maximum entitlement provided under this rule for transportation by the most economical means, as determined by the Secretary-General, between the places of departure and destination of the authorized travel of the project personnel and their family members. (f) The normal costs of packing, crating and lift vans, cartage, unpacking and uncrating shall be reimbursed for the shipment of the maximum entitlements set by this rule, except for shipments under subparagraph (h) (i) below, for which the cost of cartage only shall be paid. Costs for the servicing, dismantling, installing or special packing of personal effects and household goods shall not be reimbursed. Storage and demurrage charges shall not be reimbursed unless, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, they are directly incidental to the transportation of the consignment. (g) The weight or volume of unaccompanied shipments of personal effects and household goods for which expenses are borne by the Organization under this rule shall include packing but exclude crating and lift vans. Unaccompanied shipments on home leave, family visit or education grant travel (h) When the authorized travel is by air or by land, charges for unaccompanied shipment of personal effects or household goods relating to travel on home leave, family visit or education grant may be reimbursed to a maximum of: (i) 50 kilograms or 0.31 cubic metres by the most economical means per person in respect of each journey, except as provided in subparagraph (ii) below. At the request of the individual, this entitlement may be converted to 10 additional kilograms of accompanied excess baggage per person; (ii) 200 kilograms or 1.24 cubic metres by the most economical means for travel on education grant in regard to the first outward journey to, and the final return journey from, an educational institution. Unaccompanied shipments for project personnel in short-term status (i) Project personnel in short-term status may be authorized the shipment of personal effects and household goods by the most economical means, up to a maximum of 100 kilograms or 0.62 cubic metres. -42- 1 January 2003 Chapter X DISCIPLINARY MEASURES Rule 210.1 Disciplinary measures In any case involving possible disciplinary action, the Secretary-General may establish, on an ad hoc basis, machinery to advise him or her before any decision is taken. No disciplinary proceedings may be instituted against project personnel unless the individual concerned has been formally notified of the allegations against him or her and of the right to seek the assistance of counsel in his or her defence, and has been given a reasonable opportunity to respond to those allegations. Rule 210.2 Suspension pending investigation If a charge of misconduct is made against an individual and the Secretary-General so decides, the individual may be suspended from duty during the investigation. Such suspension shall be with pay unless, in exceptional circumstances, the Secretary-General decides that suspension without pay is appropriate. The suspension shall be without prejudice to the rights of the individual. -53- 1 January 2003 Article XI APPEALS Regulation 11.1 The Secretary-General shall establish administrative machinery with staff participation to advise him or her in case of any appeal by staff members against an administrative decision alleging the nonobservance of their terms of appointment, including all pertinent regulations and rules. Regulation 11.2 The United Nations Administrative Tribunal shall, under conditions prescribed in its statute, hear and pass judgement upon applications from staff members alleging nonobservance of their terms of appointment, including all pertinent regulations and rules. -54 - 1 January 2003 ANNEXES TO THE STAFF REGULATIONS Annex I SALARY SCALES AND RELATED PROVISIONS 1. The SecretaryGeneral shall establish the salary of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the salaries of United Nations officials in the Director category and above, in accordance with amounts determined by the General Assembly, subject to the staff assessment plan provided in staff regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied. If otherwise eligible, they shall receive the allowances that are available to staff members generally. With effect from 1 January 1998, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme shall receive a gross salary of US$ 175,344 per annum. 2. The SecretaryGeneral is authorized, on the basis of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make additional payments to United Nations officials in the Director category and above to compensate for such special costs as may be reasonably incurred, in the interests of the Organization, in the performance of duties assigned to them by the SecretaryGeneral. Similar additional payments in similar circumstances may be made to heads of offices away from Headquarters. The maximum total amount of such payments is to be determined in the programme budget by the General Assembly. 3. Except as provided in paragraph 5 of the present annex, the salary scales and the scales of post adjustment for staff members in the Professional and higher categories shall be as shown in the present annex. 4. Subject to satisfactory service, salary increments within the levels set forth in paragraph 3 of the present annex shall be awarded annually, except that any increments above step XI of the Associate Officer level, step XIII of the Second Officer level, step XII of the First Officer level, step X of the Senior Officer level and step IV of the Principal Officer level shall be preceded by two years at the previous step. The SecretaryGeneral is authorized to reduce the interval between salary increments to ten months and twenty months, respectively, in the case of staff subject to geographical distribution who have an adequate and confirmed knowledge of a second official language of the United Nations. 5. The SecretaryGeneral shall determine the salary rates to be paid to personnel specifically engaged for shortterm missions and conference and other short-term service, to consultants, to Field Service personnel and to technical assistance experts. 6. The SecretaryGeneral shall fix the salary scales for staff members in the General Service and related categories, normally on the basis of the best prevailing conditions of employment in the locality of the United Nations office concerned, provided that the SecretaryGeneral may, where he or she deems it appropriate, establish rules and salary limits for payment of a nonresident allowance to General Service staff members recruited from outside the local area. The gross pensionable remuneration of such staff shall be determined in accordance with the methodology specified in article 54 (a) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and are shown in the salary scales applicable to such staff. 7. The SecretaryGeneral shall establish rules under which a language allowance may be paid to staff members in the General Service category who pass an appropriate test and demonstrate continued proficiency in the use of two or more official languages. 8. In order to preserve equivalent standards of living at different offices, the SecretaryGeneral may adjust the basic salaries set forth in paragraphs 1 and 3 of the present annex by the application of nonpensionable post adjustments based on relative costs of living, standards of living and related factors at the office concerned as compared to New York. Such post adjustments shall not be subject to staff assessment. 9. No salary shall be paid to staff members in respect of periods of unauthorized absence from work unless such absence was caused by reasons beyond their control or duly certified medical reasons. -59- January 2003 Salary scale for staff in the Professional and higher categories showing annual gross salaries and net equivalents after application of staff assessment (United States dollars) Effective 1 January 2003 S T E P S Level I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV USG Gross Net D Net S ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 P-1 D = Rate applicable to staff members with a dependent spouse or child. S = Rate applicable to staff members with no dependent spouse or child. * The normal qualifying period for in-grade movement between consecutive steps is one year, except at those steps marked with an asterisk for which a two-year period at the preceding step is required. Appendix I SALARY SCALES AND SCHEDULE OF PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION Annual gross salaries and net equivalents after application of staff assessment L-7 L-6 L-5 L-4 L-3 L-2 L-1 Appendix II STAFF RULES 111.1 AND 111.2 Rule 111.1 Establishment (a) Joint Appeals Boards shall be established in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi and at such other duty stations as may be designated by the Secretary-General to consider and advise the Secretary-General regarding appeals filed under the terms of staff regulation 11.1. (b) Each Joint Appeals Board shall be composed of: (i) Chairpersons appointed by the Secretary-General after selection by the joint staff-management machinery in respect of the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which the Board is established; (ii) Members appointed by the Secretary-General; (iii) An equal number of members elected by ballot of the staff under the jurisdiction of the Board. The number of chairpersons and members of each Board shall be determined by the Secretary-General upon recommendation of the joint staff-management machinery in respect of the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which the Board is established. (c) The chairpersons and members of the Joint Appeals Board shall be appointed or elected for two years, shall be eligible for reappointment or reelection and shall remain in office until their successors are appointed or elected. (d) A chairperson may be removed from a Joint Appeals Board by the Secretary-General upon recommendation of the joint staff-management machinery in respect of the staff representative body or bodies of the duty station at which the Board is established. The members appointed by the Secretary-General may be removed by him or her. The members elected by the staff may be recalled by a majority vote of the staff under the jurisdiction of the Board concerned, taken at the initiative of any staff representative body at the duty station at which that Board is established. (e) Each Joint Appeals Board shall establish its own rules of procedure, which shall specify how its presiding officer and, where necessary, any alternate presiding officers shall be selected from among the chairpersons. (f) Each Joint Appeals Board may, by a majority vote of all its chairpersons and members, recommend to the Secretary-General changes in the present chapter of the Staff Rules. (g) The secretariat of each Joint Appeals Board shall consist of a secretary and such other staff as may be required for its proper functioning. Rule 111.2 Appeals (a) A staff member wishing to appeal an administrative decision pursuant to staff regulation 11.1 shall, as a first step, address a letter to the Secretary-General requesting that the administrative decision be reviewed; such letter must be sent within two months from the date the staff member received notification of the decision in writing. -67- 1 January 2003 (i) If the Secretary-General replies to the staff member=s letter, he or she may appeal against the answer within one month of the receipt of such reply; (ii) If the Secretary-General does not reply to the letter within one month in respect of a staff member stationed in New York, or within two months in respect of a staff member stationed elsewhere, the staff member may appeal against the original administrative decision within one month of the expiration of the time limit specified in this subparagraph for the Secretary-General=s reply. (b) At any time after a request for review has been submitted but before a panel of the Joint Appeals Board has been constituted to hear an appeal, conciliation may be sought on the issues involved at the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral, the staff member or the presiding officer of the Joint Appeals Board. The presiding officer shall refer the matter for that purpose to a chairperson or member of the Joint Appeals Board. This procedure is without prejudice to the right of the staff member to pursue an appeal under the provisions of this rule if the issues cannot be resolved through conciliation. (c) Neither a request for administrative review under paragraph (a) above nor the filing of an appeal under paragraph (d) below shall have the effect of suspending action on the contested decision: (i) However, the staff member concerned may request a suspension of action on such decision by writing to the Secretary of the appropriate Joint Appeals Board under paragraph (d) below. The request shall set forth the relevant facts and indicate how implementation would directly and irreparably injure the staff member=s rights; (ii) Upon receipt of such a request, a panel of the Board shall be promptly constituted and shall act expeditiously. If the panel, after considering the views of both parties, determines that the decision has not been implemented and that its implementation would result in irreparable injury to the appellant, it may recommend to the Secretary-General the suspension of action on that decision: a. Until the time limits specified in subparagraphs (a) (i) or (ii) have passed without an appeal having been filed; or b. If an appeal is filed, until a decision on the appeal is taken; (iii) The Secretary-General=s decision on such a recommendation is not subject to appeal. (d) An appeal pursuant to paragraph (a) or a request for suspension of action pursuant to paragraph (c) above shall be filed with the Secretary of the appropriate Joint Appeals Board, to be determined as follows: (i) With respect to staff members serving at a duty station at which a Board has been established or who are administered by organizational units located at such duty station, it shall be the Board; (ii) With respect to former staff members who last served at a duty station at which a Board has been established or who were administered by organizational units located at such a duty station, it shall be that Board; (iii) With respect to all other staff members and all other former staff members, it shall be the Board established in New York, provided that the Secretary-General may decide, at the request of the staff member, to refer the appeal to another one of the Boards or to establish an appropriate ad hoc body. Such staff members or former staff members may meet the time limits specified in subparagraphs (a) (i) or (ii) by delivering the requisite submissions within such limits to any office of the United Nations for transmission to the appropriate Board. -68- 1 January 2003 (e) (i) For the consideration of each appeal, the presiding officer of the appropriate Joint Appeals Board shall constitute a panel of the Board, composed as follows: a. A panel chairperson from among the chairpersons of the Board; b. A member selected from among those appointed by the Secretary-General; c. A member selected from among those elected by the staff; (ii) In constituting such panels, the maximum possible rotation of chairpersons and members of the Board shall be observed: the modalities of such rotation shall be specified in the rules of procedure of the Board. No person who has assisted the Secretary-General in a conciliation procedure referred to in paragraph (b) shall serve on a panel established to consider an appeal relating to the same case; (iii) Before a panel undertakes consideration of an appeal, the parties shall be notified of the proposed composition thereof. The presiding officer of the Board may, at the request of either party, disqualify the chairperson or either member if, in the opinion of the presiding officer, such action is warranted to ensure impartiality. He or she may also excuse the chairperson or either member from serving on the panel; (iv) Subject to the principles set out in subparagraphs (i) to (iii), the presiding officer of the Board shall fill any vacancies arising on the panel. (f) An appeal shall not be receivable unless the time limits specified in paragraph (a) above have been met or have been waived, in exceptional circumstances, by the panel constituted for the appeal. (g) At the duty station where the appeal is considered, the designated representative of the Secretary-General shall submit a written reply within two months following the date of receipt of the appeal. (h) Proceedings before a panel shall normally be limited to the original written presentation of the case, together with brief statements and rebuttals, which may be made orally or in writing, in one of the working languages of the Secretariat. (i) A staff member may arrange to have his or her appeal presented to the panel on his or her behalf by counsel. (j) Where the competence of the Joint Appeals Board is in doubt, the panel constituted for the appeal shall decide. (k) In the case of termination or other action on grounds of inefficiency or relative efficiency, the panel shall not consider the substantive question of efficiency but only evidence that the decision was motivated by prejudice or by some other extraneous factor. (l) The panel shall have authority to call members of the Secretariat who may be able to provide information concerning the issues before it and shall have access to all documents pertinent to the case. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should the panel wish to have information or documents relating to the proceedings of the appointment and promotion bodies in questions involving appointment and promotion, it shall request such information or documents from the Chairperson of the Appointment and Promotion Board, who shall decide on the panel=s request, taking into account the interests of confidentiality. This decision of the Chairperson is not subject to appeal. The Chairperson of the panel shall determine which documents are to be transmitted to all members of the panel and the parties. (m) In considering an appeal, the panel shall act with the maximum dispatch consistent with a fair review of the issues before it. -69- 1 January 2003 (n) Within one month of the date on which the consideration of an appeal has been completed, the panel shall, by majority vote, adopt and submit a report to the Secretary-General. The report shall be considered as constituting a record of the proceedings in the appeal and may include a summary of the matter as well as all recommendations that the panel considers appropriate. Votes on the recommendations shall be recorded, and any member of the panel may have his or her dissenting opinion included in the report. (o) Notwithstanding the above, if the appeal involves a claim having a cumulative maximum value not in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) on account of salary, emoluments or any other entitlement under the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules, such claim shall be considered a Asmall claim@ and shall be dealt with accordingly under appropriate rules of procedure which the Joint Appeals Board competent to hear the appeal may have adopted. Such rules may require the designated representative of the Secretary-General to submit comments within thirty days of receipt of the claim from the Joint Appeals Board secretariat. (p) The final decision on the appeal will normally be taken by the Secretary-General within one month after the panel has forwarded its report and shall be communicated to the staff member, together with a copy of the panel=s report. The Secretary-General=s decision and a copy of the panel=s report shall also be transmitted to a designated officer of the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which the Joint Appeals Board is established, unless the staff member objects. (q) To enable staff members to exercise their right to make application to the Administrative Tribunal under article 7, paragraphs 2 (b) and (c), of its statute, the Secretary of the Joint Appeals Board concerned shall, at the request of the staff member, communicate to him or her the report of the panel if the Secretary-General has not made a decision on the report within a period of one month after the date on which the report was submitted to him or her. -70- 1 January 2003 Appendix III EDUCATION GRANT ENTITLEMENTS APPLICABLE IN CASES WHERE EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES ARE INCURRED IN SPECIFIED CURRENCIES AND COUNTRIES Country/currency area Maximum admissible educational expenses and maximum grant for disabled children Maximum education grant Flat rate when boarding not provided Additional flat rate for boarding (for staff serving at designated duty stations) Maximum grant for staff members serving at designated duty stations Maximum admissible educational expenses for attendance (only when flat rate for boarding is paid) Part A Euro Austria Belgium Germany Finland France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Spain Danish krone Japanese yen Norwegian krone Pound sterling Swedish krona Swiss franc Part B United States dollar (outside the United States of America) Part C United States dollar (in the United States)* * Also applies, as a special measure, for China, Indonesia, Romania and the Russian Federation. -71- 1 January 2003 Where educational expenses are incurred in any of the currencies set out in the table above, the applicable amounts are set out in columns (1) to (6) against those currencies. Where educational expenses are incurred in the United States of America, the applicable amounts are set out in columns (1) to (6) against part C above. Where educational expenses are not incurred in any of the currencies set out in part A above or in the United States, the applicable amounts are set out in columns (1) to (6) against part B above. Attendance at an educational institution outside the duty station (i) Where the educational institution provides board, the amount shall be 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance and the costs of board up to the maximum indicated in column (1), with a maximum grant indicated in column (2) per year. (ii) Where the educational institution does not provide board, the amount shall be a flat sum as indicated in column (3), plus 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance up to a maximum grant as indicated in column (2) per year. Attendance at an educational institution at the duty station (iii) The amount shall be 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance up to the maximum indicated in column (1), with a maximum grant as indicated in column (2) per year. (iv) Where such an educational institution is located beyond commuting distance from the area where the staff member is serving and, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, no school in that area would be suitable for the child, the amount of the grant shall be calculated at the same rates as specified in (i) or (ii) above. Staff serving at designated duty stations with inadequate or no education facilities with attendance at an educational institution at the primary or secondary level outside the duty station (v) Where the educational institution provides board, the amount shall be: a. 100 per cent of the costs of board up to the maximum indicated in column (4); and b. 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance and of any part of the costs of board in excess of the amount indicated in column (4), with a maximum reimbursable amount as indicated in column (5). (vi) Where the educational institution does not provide board, the amount shall be: a. A flat sum for board as indicated in column (4); and b. 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance, with a maximum reimbursable amount as indicated in column (5). (vii) Paragraphs (v) and (vi) above are not applicable to special missions. -72- 1 January 2003 