%%%NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|DECOLONIZATION|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|VISITING MISSIONS|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|INTERGOVERNMENTAL BODIES|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONFERENCES|DOCUMENTS|INTERNATIONAL DECADES|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|GIBRALTAR QUESTION|NEW CALEDONIA QUESTION|WESTERN SAHARA QUESTION|AMERICAN SAMOA QUESTION|ANGUILLA QUESTION|BERMUDA QUESTION|BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS QUESTION|CAYMAN ISLANDS QUESTION|GUAM QUESTION|MONTSERRAT QUESTION|PITCAIRN QUESTION|SAINT HELENA QUESTION|TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS QUESTION|UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS QUESTION|TOKELAU QUESTION|FALKLAND ISLANDS (MALVINAS) QUESTION|

United Nations Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2003 General Assembly Official Records Fifty-eighth Session Supplement No. 23 (A/58/23) United Nations * New York, 2004 A/58/23 ISSN 0255-1217 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. The present version of the report of the Special Committee is a consolidation of the following documents as they appeared in provisional form: A/58/23 (Part I) of 3 July 2003, containing chapters I and II; A/58/23 (Part II) of 3 July 2003, containing chapters III to XI, and A/58/23 (Part III) of 3 July 2003, containing chapter XII. [16 March 2004] Contents Chapter Paragraphs Page Letter of transmittal vi Establishment, organization and activities of the Special Committee Establishment of the Special Committee Opening of the meetings of the Special Committee in 2003 and election of officers Organization of work Meetings of the Special Committee and its subsidiary bodies Question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable Consideration of other matters Matters relating to the small Territories Compliance of Member States with the Declaration and other resolutions on decolonization Question of holding a series of meetings away from Headquarters 3 Pattern of conferences Control and limitation of documentation Cooperation and participation of the administering Powers in the work of the Special Committee Participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the Special Committee Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories Representation at seminars, meetings and conferences of intergovernmental and other organizations Report of the Special Committee to the General Assembly Other questions Relations with United Nations bodies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations Economic and Social Council Commission on Human Rights Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination Specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations African Union Caribbean Community Pacific Islands Forum Movement of Non-Aligned Countries Non-governmental organizations Action relating to international conventions/studies/programmes International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination Review of work Future work Conclusion of the 2003 session Annex List of documents of the Special Committee, 2003 Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism Caribbean Regional Seminar on Advancing the Decolonization Process in the Caribbean and Bermuda, held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003 III. Dissemination of information on decolonization IV. Question of sending visiting missions to Territories V. Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non- Self-Governing Territories VI. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations VII. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations VIII. Gibraltar, New Caledonia and Western Sahara A. Gibraltar B. New Caledonia C. Western Sahara IX. American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, Turks and Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands X. Tokelau XI. Falkland Islands (Malvinas) XII. Recommendations A. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations B. Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories C. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations D. Question of New Caledonia E. Question of Tokelau F. Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands G. Dissemination of information on decolonization His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan Secretary-General of the United Nations New York [9 September 2003] Sir, I have the honour to transmit herewith to the General Assembly the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/140 of 11 December 2002. The report covers the work of the Special Committee during 2003. (Signed) Earl Stephen Huntley Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Chapter I Establishment, organization and activities of the Special Committee A. Establishment of the Special Committee 1. The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was established by the General Assembly pursuant to its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961. The Special Committee was requested to examine the application of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and to make suggestions and recommendations on the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration. 2. At its seventeenth session, after considering the report of the Special Committee, the General Assembly adopted resolution 1810 (XVII) of 17 December 1962, by which it enlarged the Special Committee with the addition of seven new members. It invited the Special Committee "to continue to seek the most suitable ways and means for the speedy and total application of the Declaration to all Territories which have not yet attained independence". 3. At the same session, by its resolution 1805 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on the question of South West Africa, the General Assembly requested the Special Committee to discharge, mutatis mutandis, the tasks assigned to the Special Committee for South West Africa by resolution 1702 (XVI) of 19 December 1961. By its resolution 1806 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, the Assembly decided to dissolve the Special Committee for South West Africa. 4. At its eighteenth session, by resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, the General Assembly decided to dissolve the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations. It also requested the Special Committee to take that information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration in each of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to undertake any special study and prepare any special report it might consider necessary. 5. At the same session and at each subsequent session, the General Assembly, after considering the report of the Special Committee, has adopted a resolution renewing the mandate of the Special Committee. 6. On the occasion of the tenth, twentieth, twenty-fifth and thirtieth anniversaries of the Declaration, the General Assembly, by approving the related reports of the Special Committee, adopted resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, 35/118 of 11 December 1980, 40/56 of 2 December 1985 and 45/33 of 20 November 1990, containing a series of recommendations with a view to facilitating the speedy implementation of the Declaration. 7. At its forty-sixth session, the General Assembly, by adopting resolution 46/181 of 19 December 1991, endorsed as a plan of action for the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism the proposals contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1). The plan, inter alia, contained the following provisions: "22. The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, with the cooperation of the administering Powers, should: "(a) Prepare periodic analyses of the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in each Territory; "(b) Review the impact of the economic and social situation on the constitutional and political advancement of Non-Self-Governing Territories; "(c) Organize during the Decade seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions alternately, as well as at United Nations Headquarters, to review the progress achieved in the implementation of the plan of action, with the participation of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, their elected representatives, the administering Powers, Member States, regional organizations, specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and experts. "23. The Special Committee should continue to seek, as a matter of priority, the full cooperation of administering Powers with regard to the dispatch of United Nations visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories. "24. The Special Committee, with the cooperation of the administering Powers, should make every effort to facilitate and encourage the participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in regional and international organizations, as well as in the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, the Special Committee itself and other United Nations decolonization bodies." 8. At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and called upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the plan of action, as contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1), updated where necessary, to serve as the plan of action for the Second Decade. The updated plan of action is contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General (A/56/61). 9. At its fifty-seventh session, after considering the report of the Special Committee, the General Assembly, on 11 December 2002, adopted resolution 57/140, in which, inter alia, it: "5. Approves the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 2002, including the programme of work envisaged for 2003; "8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration and to carry out the actions approved by the General Assembly regarding the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and the Second International Decade in all Territories that have not yet exercised their right to self-determination, including independence, and in particular: (a) To formulate specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session; (b) To continue to examine the implementation by Member States of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions on decolonization; (c) To continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to recommend, as appropriate, to the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories; (d) To finalize before the end of 2003 a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories; (e) To continue to dispatch visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories; (f) To conduct seminars, as appropriate, for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information on the work of the Special Committee, and to facilitate participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in those seminars; (g) To take all necessary steps to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national and international organizations, for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations; (h) To observe annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories; "14. Reaffirms that the United Nations visiting missions to the Territories are an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories, as well as the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants, and calls upon the administering Powers to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and to facilitate visiting missions to the Territories; "15. Calls upon the administering Powers that have not participated formally in the work of the Special Committee to do so at its session in 2003;". 10. At the same session, the General Assembly also adopted 10 other resolutions and 3 decisions relating to specific Territories or other items on the agenda of the Special Committee, as well as a number of other resolutions relevant to the work of the Special Committee, by which the Assembly entrusted the Special Committee with specific tasks in relation to those Territories and items. Those decisions are listed below. 1. Resolutions, consensus and decisions concerning specific Territories Resolutions Territory Resolution number Date of adoption Western Sahara 11 December 2002 New Caledonia Tokelau American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, Turks and Caicos Islands, United States Virgin Islands 57/138 A and B Decisions Decision number Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 11 November 2002 Gibraltar 2. Resolutions concerning other items Title Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories Dissemination of information on decolonization 3. Decision concerning other questions Military activities and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their administration 11. At its 47th plenary meeting, on 11 November 2002, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item entitled "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)" and to include it in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session (see decision 57/511). 4. Other resolutions and decisions relevant to the work of the Special Committee 12. Other resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session that were relevant to the work of the Special Committee and that were taken into consideration by the Special Committee are listed in a note by the Secretary-General on the organization of work of the Special Committee (A/AC.109/2003/L.1). 5. Membership of the Special Committee 13. As of 1 January 2003, the Special Committee was composed of the following 23 members: Antigua and Barbuda Iran (Islamic Republic of) Bolivia Iraq Chile Mali China Papua New Guinea Congo Russian Federation Côte d'Ivoire Saint Lucia Cuba Sierra Leone Ethiopia Syrian Arab Republic Fiji Tunisia Grenada United Republic of Tanzania India Venezuela Indonesia 14. A list of representatives who attended the meetings of the Special Committee in 2003 appears in document A/AC.109/2003/INF/1. B. Opening of the meetings of the Special Committee in 2003 and election of officers 15. The Secretary-General addressed the Special Committee at its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003. The Chairman made a statement at that meeting. Statements were also made by the representatives of Antigua and Barbuda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Venezuela and Fiji (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.1). 16. At the same meeting, the Special Committee unanimously elected the following officers: Chairman: Earl Stephen Huntley (Saint Lucia) Vice-Chairmen: Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué (Côte d'Ivoire) Rapporteur: Fayssal Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) C. Organization of work 17. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to maintain its Bureau as the only subsidiary body of the Committee. The Special Committee also decided to adopt the suggestions of the Chairman relating to the allocation of items and the procedure for their consideration (see A/AC.109/2003/L.2). 18. At the 1st meeting, the Chairman made a statement relating to the organization of work (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.1). 19. At the 4th meeting, on 4 June 2003, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegation of Spain had expressed the wish to participate in the proceedings of the Special Committee on the question of Gibraltar. The Special Committee decided to accede to the request. 20. At the 8th meeting, on 16 June, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegations of Argentina, Brazil (on behalf of the States members of the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) as well as Bolivia and Chile) had requested to participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas). The Special Committee decided to accede to the requests. D. Meetings of the Special Committee and its subsidiary bodies 21. In keeping with its resolve to continue taking all possible measures to rationalize the organization of its work, and with the full and close cooperation of its entire membership, the Special Committee and its subsidiary body were again able to keep to a minimum the number of their formal meetings, as indicated below, by holding, whenever possible, informal meetings and extensive consultations through officers of the Special Committee. 1. Special Committee 22. The Special Committee held 10 meetings at Headquarters during 2003, as follows: (a) First part of the session: 1st meeting, 12 February, and 2nd meeting, 11 April; (b) Second part of the session: 3rd and 4th meetings, 2 and 4 June; 5th and 6th meetings, 9 June; 7th and 8th meetings, 12 and 16 June; 9th and 10th meetings, 18 and 23 June. 23. During the session, the Special Committee considered in plenary meetings the following questions and adopted decisions thereon, as indicated below: Question Meetings Decision 3rd Chap. XII, sect. G Chap. XII, sect. A Question of sending visiting missions to Territories Para. 116 Special Committee decision of 10 June 2002 concerning Puerto Rico 6th Para. 33 Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands 10th Chap. XII, sect. F Question of Tokelau Chap. XII, sect. E 8th Para. 204 4th Para. 147 Question of New Caledonia 7th Chap. XII, sect. D 5th Para. 157 9th Chap. XII, sect. C Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories Chap. XII, sect. B 2. Subsidiary bodies Bureau 24. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to maintain its Bureau as the only subsidiary body of the Committee. During the period covered by the present report, the Bureau held eight meetings. 25. At its 10th meeting, on 24 June 2003, following the statement by the Chairman, the Special Committee adopted a report on pending matters related to its work (A/AC.109/2003/L.14), without a vote. E. Question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable 26. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to take the question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable as appropriate. In taking that decision, the Special Committee recalled that, in its report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, it had stated that, subject to any directives that the Assembly might wish to give in that connection, it would continue, as part of its programme of work for 2003, to review the list of Territories to which the Declaration applied. The Special Committee also recalled that, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 57/140, the Assembly had approved the report of the Special Committee, including the programme of work envisaged by the Special Committee for 2003. 27. At its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Special Committee decided to continue its consideration of the question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable at its next session, subject to any directives that the General Assembly might give at its fifty-eighth session (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14, para. 10). 28. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to take up as appropriate the item entitled "Special Committee decision of 10 June 2002 concerning Puerto Rico" and to consider it at plenary meetings. 29. At the 5th meeting, on 9 June 2002, the Chairman drew attention to a number of communications received from organizations expressing the wish to be heard on Puerto Rico by the Special Committee. At the same meeting, the Special Committee agreed to accede to those requests and heard the representatives of the organizations concerned at its 5th and 6th meetings (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.5 and 6), as indicated below: (a) 5th meeting Jorge Farinacci García, Frente Socialista; Angel Ortiz-Guzmán, PROELA, Berthaida Seijo Ortiz, Colegio de Abogados de Puerto Rico; Salvador Vargas, Jr., Concern Puertorican Americans; Alice Hernández, on behalf of Partido Nacionalista de Puerto Rico; Miguel Otero Chávez, on behalf of Gran Oriente Nacional de Puerto Rico; Francisco Velgara, Vieques Support Campaign; Betty Brassell, United for Vieques, Puerto Rico, Inc.; Benjamin Ramos Rosado, ProLibertad Freedom Campaign; Fernando Martín-Garcia, Partido Independentista Puertorriqueño; Vanessa Ramos, American Association of Jurists; Eliott Monteverde, on behalf of Comité Pro Rescate y Desarrollo de Vieques; Manuel Rivera, Puertorriqueños Unidos en Acción; Jose Adames, Al Frente; Nilda Luz Rexach, National Advancement for Puerto Rican Culture; Anita Vélez Mitchell, Primavera, Inc.; Julio Muriente Pérez, New Independence Movement of Puerto Rico; and Ms. Wilma Reverón Collazo, Comité Puerto Rico en la ONU. (b) 6th meeting Noel Colón Martínez, Congreso Nacional Hostosiano of Puerto Rico; Róger Calero, Political Rights Defense Fund; Martin Koppel, Socialist Workers Party; Luis Rosa-Pérez, Puertorican Human Rights Committee; Ricardo Gabriel, Hostos Puerto Rican Club at Hunter College; and Anthony Melé, 65th Honor Task Force. 30. At the 6th meeting, the representative of Cuba introduced draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.7. 31. At the 6th meeting, following the statement by the representative of Venezuela (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.6), the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.7 without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/22). 32. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.6). 33. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/22, adopted by the Special Committee at its 6th meeting, on 9 June 2003, appears below: The Special Committee, Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as the resolutions and decisions of the Special Committee concerning Puerto Rico, Considering that the decade of the 1990s was proclaimed by the General Assembly, in its resolution 43/47 of 22 November 1988, as the Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and that by resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, the General Assembly declared the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, Bearing in mind the 21 resolutions and decisions adopted by the Special Committee on the question of Puerto Rico, contained in the reports of the Special Committee to the General Assembly, Recalling that 25 July 2003 marks the one hundred and fifth anniversary of the intervention in Puerto Rico by the United States of America, Also recalling the diverse initiatives taken by the political representatives of Puerto Rico and the United States in recent years, which have thus far failed to set in motion the process of decolonization of Puerto Rico, Stressing the need for the United States to lay the groundwork for the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the resolutions and decisions of the Special Committee concerning Puerto Rico, Taking into account the measures adopted by both Chambers of the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico recommending the convening of a Status Assembly of the people of Puerto Rico as part of the search for procedures that would make it possible to launch the process of decolonization of Puerto Rico, Aware that Vieques Island, Puerto Rico, has been used for over 60 years by the United States Marines to carry out military manoeuvres, thereby limiting access by the civilian population to an area equivalent to barely a quarter of the island, with negative consequences for the health of the population, the environment and the economic and social development of that Puerto Rican municipality, Taking note with satisfaction of the decision adopted by the Government of the United States of America to put an end to the bombings and military manoeuvres on Vieques Island from 1 May 2003, Recognizing that such decision is the outcome of the prolonged process held during years of peaceful protests carried out by the people of Puerto Rico as well as the wide campaign of international solidarity, which has been appropriately reflected in the works and documents of the Special Committee, Noting also the consensus existing in the people and the Government of Puerto Rico on the necessity of realizing the devolution to the people of Puerto Rico of the territories previously used in military manoeuvres, as well as its decontamination, Recalling the release of 11 Puerto Rican political prisoners in 2000, Noting the consensus among the people of Puerto Rico in favour of the release of the four Puerto Rican political prisoners who are still serving sentences in United States prisons for cases related to the struggle for Puerto Rico's independence, Noting that the final document of the Thirteenth Summit of the Heads of State or Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003, reaffirms the right of the people of Puerto Rico to self-determination and independence on the basis of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and requests the Special Committee to continue actively pursuing the issue of Puerto Rico, Having heard statements and testimonies representative of various viewpoints among the people of Puerto Rico and their social institutions, Having considered the report of the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on the implementation of the resolutions concerning Puerto Rico, 1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Puerto Rico to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the applicability of the fundamental principles of that resolution to the question of Puerto Rico; 2. Reiterates that the Puerto Rican people constitute a Latin American and Caribbean nation that has its own unequivocal national identity; 3. Calls upon the Government of the United States of America to assume its responsibility of expediting a process that will allow the Puerto Rican people fully to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the resolutions and decisions of the Special Committee concerning Puerto Rico; 4. Notes with satisfaction that, in recent years, progress has been achieved towards the implementation of a mechanism that would ensure the full participation of representatives of all viewpoints prevailing in Puerto Rico, such as the proposals to convene a status Assembly of the people of Puerto Rico, based on the principle that any initiative for the solution of the political status of Puerto Rico should be originally taken by the people of Puerto Rico; 5. Reiterates the hope that the General Assembly will give comprehensive consideration to the question of Puerto Rico in all its aspects; 6. Urges the Government of the United States, in line with the need to guarantee the Puerto Rican people their legitimate right to self-determination and the protection of their human rights, return the occupied land on Vieques Island to the people of Puerto Rico, respect fundamental human rights, such as the right to health and economic development, assume the execution and the costs of the decontamination process of the impact areas previously used in military manoeuvres, and take care of the serious consequences to the health of the inhabitants of Vieques Island and the environmental degradation; 7. Requests the President of the United States of America to release all Puerto Rican political prisoners serving sentences in United States prisons for cases related to the struggle for the independence of Puerto Rico; 8. Notes with satisfaction the report prepared by the Rapporteur of the Special Committee,8 in compliance with its resolution of 10 June 2002; 9. Requests the Rapporteur to report to the Special Committee in 2004 on the implementation of the present resolution; 10. Decides to keep the question of Puerto Rico under continuous review. F. Consideration of other matters 1. Matters relating to the small Territories 34. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to include in its agenda the item entitled "Matters relating to the small Territories" and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 35. In taking those decisions, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 57/140, in paragraph 8 (c) of which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to recommend, as appropriate, to the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories; and in paragraph 8 (e) to continue to dispatch visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories. 36. During the year, the Special Committee gave extensive consideration to all phases of the situation obtaining in the small Territories (see chaps. IX-X). 2. Compliance of Member States with the Declaration and other resolutions on decolonization 37. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to consider in plenary meetings the question of compliance of Member States with the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on decolonization. 38. The Special Committee took that decision into account in its consideration of specific items. 3. Question of holding a series of meetings away from Headquarters 39. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to take up the question of holding a series of meetings away from Headquarters as appropriate. 40. Having regard to its programme of work for 2004, the Special Committee, at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, considered the question of holding meetings away from Headquarters, taking into account the provisions of paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and paragraph 3 (9) of resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, by which the Assembly authorized the Special Committee to meet elsewhere than at United Nations Headquarters whenever and wherever such meetings might be required for the effective discharge of its functions. At the same meeting, the Special Committee decided that it would consider accepting such invitations as might be received in 2004 and that, when particulars of such meetings had become known, it would request the Secretary-General to seek the necessary budgetary provision in accordance with established procedure (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14, paras. 2 and 3). 4. Pattern of conferences 41. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to take up as appropriate the item entitled "Pattern of conferences". In so doing, the Special Committee was conscious of the fact that it had initiated some important measures in rationalizing its work methods, many of which were subsequently incorporated in a number of resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly. Further recalling the measures it had taken theretofore in that connection, the Special Committee decided to continue to exercise its initiatives in the effective utilization of the limited conference resources and the further reduction of its documentation requirements. 42. The Special Committee also continued the practice of circulating communications and information material, as far as possible, in the form of informal notes and aides-memoires in the original language of submission, thus curtailing documentation requirements and accruing considerable savings for the Organization. A list of the documents issued by the Special Committee in 2003 is contained in the annex to the present chapter. 43. At its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Special Committee considered the item and noted that, during the year, it had closely followed the guidelines set forth in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the pattern of conferences, in particular resolution 57/283 A of 20 December 2002. By organizing its programme of work effectively and holding extensive consultations, the Committee strived to keep the number of its formal meetings to a minimum. The Special Committee decided, taking into account its probable workload for 2004, to consider holding its meetings in accordance with the following schedule: (a) Plenary February/March As required June/July Up to 30 meetings (6-8 meetings a week) (b) Bureau February/July 20 meetings It was understood that that programme would not preclude the holding of any ad hoc meetings that might be warranted and that the Special Committee might, in early 2004, review the scheduled meetings on the basis of any new developments. The Special Committee decided, subject to any directives given by the General Assembly, to strive, while fulfilling its mandate, to keep its meetings to a minimum (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14, paras. 5-7). 5. Control and limitation of documentation 44. At its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Special Committee considered the question of the control and limitation of documentation and noted that, during the year, it had taken further measures to control and limit its documentation in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolutions 34/50 of 23 November 1979, 39/68 D of 13 December 1984, 51/211 B of 18 December 1996 and 57/283 A of 20 December 2002. The Special Committee noted that, in its resolution 50/206 B of 23 December 1995, the General Assembly had approved the recommendation of the Special Committee to replace its verbatim records by summary records. Having reviewed the need for such records, the Special Committee decided to maintain its summary records (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14, paras. 8 and 9). 6. Cooperation and participation of the administering Powers in the work of the Special Committee 45. In compliance with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the delegation of New Zealand, as the administering Power, continued to participate, in accordance with established procedure, in the related work of the Special Committee (see chap. X). 46. The delegations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America did not participate in the work of the Special Committee. However, during informal consultations with the Special Committee held in May and June 2003, both administering Powers expressed their desire to continue informal dialogue with the Special Committee (see sects. I and J of the present chapter). The senior-level representative of the United Kingdom participated in the Caribbean regional seminar held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003 (see chap. II, annex). The Special Committee expressed deep satisfaction at the deepening of informal cooperation with the United Kingdom and also expressed the hope that that cooperation would eventually lead to formal participation of the United Kingdom in the work of the Special Committee. 47. In a related context, the Special Committee, at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, adopted resolution A/AC.109/2003/21 on the question of sending visiting missions to Territories. By that resolution, the Special Committee noted with appreciation that, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, two visiting missions had been dispatched to Tokelau, in July 1994 and August 2002. It called upon the administering Powers to cooperate or continue to cooperate with the United Nations by receiving United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under their administration (see para. 116). 7. Participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the Special Committee 48. At its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Special Committee considered the question of the participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in its work and decided that the participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the Special Committee at Headquarters, as recommended in the Plan of Action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism (A/56/61, annex), should continue to be facilitated through the reimbursement by the United Nations of the expenses relating to their participation under the terms of the guidelines amended by the Committee and approved by the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session (see A/AC.109/L.1791, annex, and A/AC.109/L.1804). In that regard, the Special Committee decided to consider the guidelines at its plenary meetings with a view to amending them further, where appropriate (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14, para. 13). 8. Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories 49. The question of the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories was considered by the Special Committee at its 2nd meeting, on 11 April 2003 (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.2). 9. Representation at seminars, meetings and conferences of intergovernmental and other organizations 50. At its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Special Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the Committee continue to be represented at seminars, meetings and conferences organized by United Nations bodies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in the field of decolonization. In keeping with its decision of 12 February 2003, the Committee would authorize its Chairman to hold consultations, as appropriate, concerning its participation in those meetings, as well as the level of representation, when accepting invitations. In accordance with established practice and on the basis of the principle of rotation, the Chairman would hold consultations with the Bureau members who, in turn, would consult with the members of the Committee from their respective regional groups. The Special Committee also decided that the Chairman would also have consultations with those members of the Committee whose regional group was not represented in the Bureau. It also decided to recommend that the General Assembly make appropriate budgetary provisions to cover such activities in 2004 (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14, para. 4). 10. Report of the Special Committee to the General Assembly 51. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), and in accordance with paragraph 31 of General Assembly decision 34/401 on the rationalization of the procedures and organization of the Assembly, the Special Committee decided to follow the procedure adopted at its 2003 session in connection with the formulation of its recommendations to the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. 52. At its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, with reference to its decision taken at the 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, the Special Committee, on the proposal of the Chairman, authorized the Rapporteur to reformulate the Committee's draft resolutions and decisions into the format of the General Assembly and to submit directly to the Assembly various chapters of the report in accordance with established practice and procedure. 11. Other questions 53. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, in its examination of specific Territories, to take into account the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions and decisions listed in the note by the Secretary-General on the organization of work of the Special Committee (A/AC.109/2003/L.1, para. 11). That decision was taken into account during the consideration of specific Territories and other items in plenary meetings. G. Relations with United Nations bodies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations 1. Economic and Social Council 54. In connection with the Special Committee's consideration of the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations, and in accordance with paragraph 17 of General Assembly resolution 57/133 relating to the item, consultations were held between the President of the Economic and Social Council and the Chairman of the Special Committee to consider appropriate measures for coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly (see E/2003/47). 2. Commission on Human Rights 55. During the year, the Special Committee closely followed the work of the Commission on Human Rights with regard to the question of the right of peoples to self-determination and its application to peoples under colonial domination, and to the question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in any part of the world, with particular reference to colonial and other dependent Territories. 56. In its consideration of the Territories concerned, the Special Committee took into account the relevant resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-ninth session, in 2003, including resolutions on the question of Western Sahara (2003/1), the question of the realization in all countries of the economic, social and cultural rights contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and study of special problems which the developing countries face in their efforts to achieve these human rights (2003/18), the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (2003/48), the working group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994 (2003/57), the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People (2003/58), and the work of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (2003/59). The Special Committee further took into account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolutions 57/183, 57/192, 57/197, 57/203 and 57/223 of 18 December 2002. 3. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 57. During the year, having regard to the relevant provisions of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Special Committee continued to follow the work of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (see also paras. 64 and 65 below). 4. Specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the 58. In accordance with the requests contained in the relevant General Assembly resolutions, the Special Committee continued its consideration of the question of the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (see also para. 53 above). An account of the Special Committee's consideration of the question is set out in chapter VI of the present report. 59. During the year, the Special Committee adopted decisions relating to the extension of assistance to the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories. Those decisions are reflected in recommendations of the Special Committee to the General Assembly (see chap. XII). 5. African Union 60. Bearing in mind its previous decisions to maintain contact with the African Union on a regular basis in order to assist in the effective discharge of its mandate, the Special Committee, as in previous years, closely followed the work of the African Union. 6. Caribbean Community 61. Bearing in mind its previous decisions to maintain contact with the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) on a regular basis in order to assist in the effective discharge of its mandate, the Special Committee, as in previous years, closely followed the work of CARICOM. 7. Pacific Islands Forum 62. The Special Committee continued to follow closely the work of the Pacific Islands Forum concerning the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the South Pacific region. 8. Movement of Non-Aligned Countries 63. The Special Committee continued to follow closely the work of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries regarding the issue of decolonization. 9. Non-governmental organizations 64. Having regard to the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 57/139 and 57/140, the Special Committee continued to follow closely the activities of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization. The participation of non-governmental organizations in the work of the Special Committee during the period under review is covered in detail in the Special Committee documents (see A/AC.109/2003/18) and the present report (see para. 29 above and chap. II, annex, below). The related decisions of the Special Committee are listed in chapter XII of the present report. H. Action relating to international conventions/studies/programmes 1. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 65. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided to include in the agenda of its 2003 session an item entitled "International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 66. The Special Committee continued to monitor related developments in the Territories, having regard to the relevant provisions of article 15 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX), annex). 2. Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination 67. The Special Committee continued to take into account the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations bodies concerned relating to the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination. I. Review of work 68. As noted elsewhere in the present report, the reform processes initiated by the Special Committee in 1991, which brought about a number of changes and improvements in its approach, methods and procedures, continued to be actively pursued in 2003. The measures adopted by the Special Committee included the streamlining and consolidation of a number of its resolutions. With regard to the preparation of the consolidated draft resolution, the Special Committee held extensive informal consultations with the administering Powers concerned and other States as well as with the representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories. The Special Committee's recommendation to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session on 12 Territories was consolidated into two resolutions (A/AC.109/2003/26 and A/AC.109/2003/27; see chap. XII, sects. E and F). 69. The Special Committee also reviewed its resolutions on information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (A/AC.109/2003/20), the question of sending visiting missions to Territories (A/AC.109/2003/21), implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (A/AC.109/2003/25) and economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/AC.109/2003/28). 70. As noted in chapter II of the present report, the Special Committee held a Caribbean regional seminar at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003 in implementation of the Plan of Action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism referred to in General Assembly resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000. 71. In accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly, the Special Committee continued to seek suitable means for the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) in all Territories to which the Declaration is applicable and formulated specific proposals and recommendations in that regard. 72. On the question of the publicity to be given to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, the Special Committee adopted a resolution (A/AC.109/2003/19) which it recommends to the General Assembly for action at its fifty-eighth session (see chap. XII, sect. G). 73. The Special Committee also continued its review of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable. With regard to its decision of 10 June 2002 concerning Puerto Rico, the Special Committee heard a number of representatives of organizations concerned and adopted a resolution on the matter (A/AC.109/2003/22), which is set out in paragraph 33. 74. During the period under review, the Special Committee continued the critical review of its work and its programme of future work by holding a number of informal meetings. The Special Committee continued discussion on the case-by-case work programmes for each of the Non-Self-Governing Territories within the framework of the informal working groups on the programme of work for specific Non-Self-Governing Territories and held informal consultations on the matter with the administering Powers concerned with a view to improving cooperation between the Committee and the administering Powers (see sect. J below). 75. In accordance with the guidelines established by the General Assembly, the Special Committee was able during the year to reduce the number of its formal meetings and to minimize the wastage resulting from cancellation of scheduled meetings. J. Future work 76. In accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly since 1961 and subject to further directives from the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, the Special Committee intends to continue during 2004 to pursue its efforts in bringing a speedy end to colonialism, in accordance with Article 73 of the Charter and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 77. The Special Committee will continue to fulfil the responsibilities that have been entrusted to it in the context of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, declared by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/146 and particularly with regard to the implementation of the Plan of Action contained in document A/56/61. 78. In order to discharge its responsibilities, the Special Committee will keep the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under continuous review, examining the impact of developments concerning each Territory on their political advancement. It will also review the compliance by Member States, particularly the administering Powers, with the relevant decisions and resolutions of the United Nations. 79. In 2004, the Special Committee intends to continue and intensify its dialogue and cooperation with the administering Powers for the purpose of furthering the cause of decolonization through the development of programmes of work for the decolonization of specific Territories. This will be done in agreement with the administering Powers, and with the participation of representatives of the Territories at every stage of discussion. The members of the Special Committee are particularly encouraged by the fruitful meetings held to date with the representatives of New Zealand and Tokelau regarding progress made in the process towards self-determination in this Territory and by the effective United Nations Mission to Tokelau, carried out in August 2002 (see A/AC.109/2002/31). Still to be developed are plans to conduct a study of the self-determination options and their implications for Tokelau. The Special Committee also intends to develop, in consultation with the administering Powers and the people of the Territories concerned, accelerated action plans for the decolonization of certain Territories, as set out by the Chairman in his statement to the Caribbean Regional Seminar held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003 (see chap. II, annex). 80. The Special Committee has been greatly encouraged by the growing interest and participation of the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the regional seminars it conducts annually and by the wider participation of Member States, specialized agencies and programmes, non-governmental organizations and experts. In this regard, the Special Committee will continue to conduct these seminars, for the purpose of assessing, receiving and disseminating information on the situation in the Territories, in order to facilitate implementation of its mandate. It will also continue to disseminate information on the work of the Special Committee. In this connection, the Special Committee will hold a seminar in the Pacific region in 2004. 81. The Special Committee will continue to seek the cooperation of the administering Powers in dispatching United Nations visiting missions to the Territories under their administration. Having regard to the constructive role played by such missions in the past, the Special Committee continues to attach the utmost importance to visiting missions as a means of collecting adequate and first-hand information on conditions in the Territories and on the wishes and aspirations of the peoples concerning their future status. Moreover, visiting missions are important in the context of furthering modalities and action plans for decolonization and observing acts of self-determination. 82. The Special Committee has consistently reiterated the importance of disseminating information on decolonization as an instrument for furthering the aims of the Declaration. Accordingly, the Committee will continue to use opportunities such as the regional seminars to disseminate information on its activities and on the Territories in an effort to mobilize world public opinion to support and assist the people of the Territories in bringing about a speedy end to colonialism. It also intends to develop, together with the Department of Public Information, programmes aimed at territories that have requested information about self-determination options. 83. The Special Committee will continue to pay attention to the specific problems of the small island Territories, which constitute the overwhelming majority of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories. The Special Committee is aware that, in addition to general problems facing developing countries, those island Territories also suffer handicaps arising from the interplay of such factors as size, remoteness, geographical dispersion, vulnerability to natural disasters, fragility of ecosystems, constraints in transport and communications, great distances from market centres, a highly limited internal market, lack of natural resources, and vulnerability to drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal activities. The Special Committee will continue to recommend measures to facilitate a sustained and balanced growth of the fragile economies of those Territories and increased assistance in the development of all the sectors of their economies, with particular emphasis on programmes of diversification. 84. It is the intention of the Special Committee to continue to follow closely the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international and regional institutions associated with the United Nations. The Special Committee will hold consultations with those organizations, as appropriate, and will continue the practice of holding consultations between its Chairman and the President of the Economic and Social Council. The objective of those consultations is to facilitate the effective implementation of the decisions of the various United Nations bodies and to foster cooperation between the specialized agencies and the regional organizations in providing assistance for the Non-Self-Governing Territories in a given region. 85. The Special Committee will also strive to follow up on the General Assembly's request that the participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of relevant meetings and conferences of the agencies and organizations be facilitated so that the Territories can benefit from the related activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system. 86. The Special Committee intends to take into account economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to continue its cooperation with interested States to ensure that the interests of the peoples of those Territories are protected. 87. In the light of the provisions of the General Assembly resolutions concerning the pattern of conferences and taking into consideration its experience in previous years as well as its probable workload for 2004, the Special Committee has approved a tentative programme of meetings for 2004, which it commends to the Assembly for approval. 88. The Special Committee suggests that, when the General Assembly, at its fifty-eighth session, examines the question of the implementation of the Declaration, it may wish to take into account the various recommendations of the Special Committee that are reflected in the relevant chapters of the present report and, in particular, to endorse the proposals outlined in the present section in order to enable the Special Committee to carry out the tasks it envisages for 2004. The Special Committee recommends that the Assembly renew its appeal to the administering Powers to take all necessary steps for the implementation of the Declaration and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples of the Territories concerned. In that connection, the Special Committee recommends that the Assembly request all the administering Powers to become involved with the work of the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to participate actively in the work relating to the Territories under their respective administrations. The Special Committee also recommends that the Assembly continue to invite the administering Powers to allow representatives of the Territories concerned to participate in the discussions in the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) and the Special Committee on the items relating to their respective Territories. Furthermore, the Assembly might also wish to renew its appeal to all States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to comply with the various requests addressed to them by the Assembly and the Security Council in their relevant resolutions. 89. The Special Committee recommends that, in approving the programme of work outlined above, the General Assembly make adequate provision to cover the activities that the Special Committee envisages for 2004. In that regard, the Special Committee recalls that the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 includes resources to provide for the programme of work of the Special Committee for 2004-2005 based on the level of activities approved for 2003, without prejudice to the decisions to be taken by the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. On that basis, the Special Committee understands that, should any additional provisions be required over and above those included in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, proposals for supplementary requirements would be made to the General Assembly for its approval. Finally, the Special Committee expresses the hope that the Secretary-General will continue to provide it with all the facilities and personnel necessary for the discharge of its mandate, taking into account the various tasks assigned to it by the Assembly as well as those arising from decisions taken by it during the current year. K. Conclusion of the 2003 session 90. At its 10th meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Chairman made a statement on the occasion of the closing of the 2003 session of the Special Committee (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.10) with the understanding that the Special Committee might hold additional meetings at a later stage to consider the question of sending visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories as well as to consider the reports of visiting missions. Document symbol Date Documents issued in the general series A/AC.109/2003/INF/1 List of delegations 28 May 2003 A/AC.109/2003/1 United States Virgin Islands (working paper) 5 February 2003 A/AC.109/2003/2 Montserrat (working paper) 27 February 2003 A/AC.109/2003/3 Gibraltar (working paper) A/AC.109/2003/4 Saint Helena (working paper) 12 March 2003 A/AC.109/2003/5 British Virgin Islands (working paper) A/AC.109/2003/6 Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism: Caribbean Regional Seminar on Advancing the Decolonization Process in the Caribbean and Bermuda, to be held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003: guidelines and rules of procedure 7 April 2003 A/AC.109/2003/7 New Caledonia (working paper) 26 March 2003 A/AC.109/2003/8 Turks and Caicos Islands (working paper) 8 April 2003 A/AC.109/2003/9 Cayman Islands (working paper) A/AC.109/2003/10 Tokelau (working paper) A/AC.109/2003/11 Anguilla (working paper) 10 April 2003 A/AC.109/2003/12 American Samoa (working paper) 11 April 2003 A/AC.109/2003/13 Bermuda (working paper) 30 April 2003 A/AC.109/2003/14 Western Sahara (working paper) 25 April 2003 A/AC.109/2003/15 Guam (working paper) 12 May 2003 A/AC.109/2003/16 Pitcairn (working paper) 19 May 2003 A/AC.109/2003/17 Falkland Islands (Malvinas) (working paper) 20 May 2003 A/AC.109/2003/18 Dissemination of information on decolonization during the period from June 2002 to May 2003: report of the Secretary-General 23 May 2003 A/AC.109/2003/19 Dissemination of information on decolonization: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003 2 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/20 Information on Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/21 Question of sending visiting missions to Territories: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/22 Special Committee decision of 10 June 2002 concerning Puerto Rico: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 6th meeting, on 9 June 2003 9 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/23 Question of New Caledonia: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003 13 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/24 Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas): resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 8th meeting, on 16 June 2003 16 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/25 Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 9th meeting, on 18 June 2003 18 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/26 Question of Tokelau: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003 24 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/27 Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003 23 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/28 Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories: resolution adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003 26 June 2003 Documents issued in the limited series A/AC.109/2003/L.1 Organization of work: relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly: note by the Secretary-General 10 January 2003 A/AC.109/2003/L.2 Organization of work: note by the Chairman A/AC.109/2003/L.3 Special Committee decision of 10 June 2002 concerning Puerto Rico: report prepared by the Rapporteur of the Special Committee A/AC.109/2003/L.4 Dissemination of information on decolonization: draft resolution submitted by the Chairman 27 May 2003 A/AC.109/2003/L.5 Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations: draft resolution submitted by the Chairman A/AC.109/2003/L.6 Question of sending visiting missions to Territories: draft resolution submitted by the Chairman A/AC.109/2003/L.7 Special Committee decision of 10 June 2002 concerning Puerto Rico: draft resolution submitted by Cuba A/AC.109/2003/L.8 Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories: draft resolution submitted by the Chairman 5 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/L.9 Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations: draft resolution submitted by the Chairman A/AC.109/2003/L.10 Question of New Caledonia: draft resolution submitted by Fiji and Papua New Guinea 6 June 2003 A/AC.109/2003/L.11 Question of Tokelau: draft resolution submitted by Fiji and Papua New Guinea A/AC.109/2003/L.12 Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas): draft resolution submitted by Bolivia, Chile, Cuba and Venezuela A/AC.109/2003/L.13 Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands: consolidated draft resolution submitted by the Chairman A/AC.109/2003/L.14 Report of the Special Committee 91. On 19 December 1991, at its forty-sixth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 46/181, entitled "International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism", and the Plan of Action contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1). In the Plan of Action, "aimed at ushering in, in the twenty-first century, a world free from colonialism", the Assembly, inter alia, requested the Special Committee: "[to] organize during the Decade seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions alternately, as well as at United Nations Headquarters, to review the progress achieved in the implementation of the plan of action, with the participation of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, their elected representatives, the administering Powers, Member States, regional organizations, specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and experts." 92. At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and called upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the Plan of Action, as contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991, updated where necessary, to serve as the Plan of Action for the Second Decade. The updated plan of action is contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the Second Decade (A/56/61, annex). 93. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, the Special Committee, mindful of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly in the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and by approving the recommendation of its Chairman on the organization of work of the Special Committee for the year (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), decided to allocate to plenary meetings of the Special Committee, as appropriate, the question of the "Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism". 94. The Special Committee considered the questions of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and the Caribbean Regional Seminar on Advancing the Decolonization Process in the Caribbean and Bermuda, held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003, at its 1st, 2nd and 9th meetings, on 12 February, 11 April and 18 June 2003. 95. The Special Committee had before it the guidelines and rules of procedure for the Pacific Regional Seminar (A/AC.109/2003/6). 96. At its 2nd meeting, on 11 April, following a statement by the Chairman, the Special Committee approved the composition of the official delegation of the Special Committee to the Caribbean Regional Seminar (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.2). 97. The Special Committee also decided to invite United Nations organs, agencies and institutions to apprise the Secretary-General of actions they had taken in implementation of General Assembly resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000 and to submit a report to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, subject to any directives that the Assembly might give at its fifty-eighth session in that regard (see A/AC.109/2003/L.14). 98. At the 9th meeting, on 18 June 2002, the Chairman of the Special Committee drew attention to the draft report of the Caribbean Regional Seminar, which had been circulated to members of the Special Committee as a conference room paper (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.9). 99. At the same meeting, following the statements made by the representatives of Côte d'Ivoire, Papua New Guinea, Antigua and Barbuda and Venezuela, the Committee adopted the draft report of the Caribbean Regional Seminar and decided to annex it to its report to the General Assembly. The full text of the report of the Caribbean Regional Seminar is contained in the annex to the present chapter. Caribbean Regional Seminar on Advancing the Decolonization Process in the Caribbean and Bermuda, held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003 Chairman: Earl Stephen Huntley (Saint Lucia) Introduction Organization of the Seminar Conduct of the Seminar Proceedings of the Seminar Summary of statements and discussions Conclusions and recommendations Appendices List of participants Statement by the Honourable Osbourne Fleming, Chief Minister of Anguilla Statement by Earl Stephen Huntley, Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia to the United Nations, Chairman of the Special Committee Message from the Secretary-General Resolution on expression of appreciation to the Government and people of Anguilla 1. At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and called upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the plan of action, as contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1), updated where necessary, to serve as the plan of action for the Second Decade. The report of the Secretary-General on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism (A/56/61) contains an updated plan of action. 2. In its resolution 57/140 of 13 December 2002, the General Assembly approved the report of the Special Committee,a which inter alia called for the holding of a seminar in the Caribbean region, to be organized by the Special Committee, in 2003. 3. As stated in the guidelines and rules of procedure for the Seminar (A/AC.109/2003/6), the purpose of the Seminar is to assess the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,b in particular their constitutional evolution towards self-determination, in order to facilitate the development by the Special Committee of a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories. The Seminar would also identify areas in which the international community could increase and enhance its participation in programmes of assistance and adopt a comprehensive and integrated approach to ensuring the political and sustainable socio-economic development of the Territories concerned. 4. The topics considered by the Seminar will assist the Special Committee in making a realistic evaluation of the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories. The Seminar gave pre-eminence to a broad range of views of the peoples of those Territories. It also sought to secure the participation of organizations and institutions that are actively involved in the political, economic and social development of those Territories. 5. The contributions of the participants served as a basis for the conclusions and recommendations of the Seminar, which will be carefully studied by the Special Committee with a view to submitting proposals to the General Assembly concerning the fulfilment of the objectives of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. II. Organization of the Seminar 6. The Seminar was held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003. a Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventy Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/57/23). b At present, the list of Territories with which the Special Committee is concerned and to which the Declaration is applicable includes American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Gibraltar, Guam, Montserrat, New Caledonia, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, Tokelau, Turks and Caicos Islands, United States Virgin Islands and Western Sahara. 7. The Seminar held six meetings in which representatives of States Members of the United Nations, Non-Self-Governing Territories, administering Power, regional organizations as well as experts took part. The list of participants is given in appendix I. The Seminar was organized to encourage an open and frank exchange of views. 8. The Seminar was conducted by Earl Stephen Huntley, Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia to the United Nations and Chairman of the Special Committee, with the participation of the following members of the Special Committee: Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia, Chile, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Fiji, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Indonesia, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Sierra Leone and United Republic of Tanzania. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland participated in the Seminar in its capacity as an administering Power. Argentina and Spain participated in the Seminar. 9. At the 1st meeting, on 20 May 2003, the following members of the Special Committee were appointed officers of the Seminar: Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué (Côte d'Ivoire), Orlando Requeijo Gual (Cuba) and Mehdi Mollahoseini (Islamic Republic of Iran) as Vice-Chairmen. The Chairman himself directed the work of the Drafting Group. The Drafting Group was composed of the representatives of Cuba, Fiji, the Russian Federation and the United Republic of Tanzania. 10. The agenda of the Seminar was as follows: 1. Role of the Special Committee in facilitating the decolonization of the Non-Self-Governing Territories. 2. Perspective of the administering Powers on the completion of the decolonization process in the Caribbean and Bermuda within the context of the United Nations decolonization mandate. 3. Views of the representatives of the Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories and Bermuda on their present status and the completion of the decolonization process in their Territories. 4. Overview of the implications of self-government in the Caribbean: (a) Political and constitutional advancement; (b) Economic implications of self-government. 5. Role of the United Nations system in providing assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories. 6. Views of the representatives of the non-Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories on their present status and the completion of the decolonization process in their Territories. 7. Recommendations: (a) Recommendations on advancement of the decolonization process in the Caribbean and Bermuda; (b) Recommendations on the decolonization process in other Non-Self-Governing Territories. III. Conduct of the Seminar A. Proceedings of the Seminar 11. On 20 May, Earl Stephen Huntley (Saint Lucia) opened the Seminar in his capacity as Chairman of the Seminar. 12. The Honourable Osbourne Fleming, Chief Minister of Anguilla, addressed the Seminar. His statement is reproduced in appendix II. 13. At the same meeting, the Chairman of the Special Committee made an opening statement (see appendix III). 14. At the same meeting, the Chief of the Decolonization Unit, Department of Political Affairs, of the United Nations Secretariat, read out a message from the Secretary-General (see appendix IV). 15. At its 6th meeting, on 22 May, the Seminar heard a statement by the Honourable Osbourne Fleming, Chief Minister of Anguilla. 16. At the same meeting, the Chairman made a concluding statement. 17. At the same meeting, the participants adopted by acclamation a resolution expressing appreciation to the Government and people of Anguilla (see appendix V). B. Summary of statements and discussions Member States 18. The representative of Argentina stated that the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) differed from traditional colonial cases and constituted a special and particular form of colonialism that affected the territorial integrity of the Argentine Republic. He recalled that resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee noted the existence of a sovereignty dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom over the Territory which was to be solved through bilateral negotiations, bearing in mind the interests of the population of the islands. He reiterated the position of his Government that the existence of the sovereignty dispute ruled out the applicability of the right to self-determination, since it would be unacceptable that British citizens residing in the Territory decide over a dispute to which their country is a party. He stated that Argentina had repeatedly expressed its determination to resume negotiations with the United Kingdom and to respect the way of life and interests of the inhabitants of the islands. He reiterated his Government's disposition to discuss all schemes that could lead to a final solution of the sovereignty dispute in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on that question. 19. The representative of Spain reiterated that the General Assembly adopted by consensus every year a decision on the question of Gibraltar that, inter alia, recalled the establishment of a negotiating process between Spain and the United Kingdom, aimed at overcoming all the differences between them over Gibraltar, including the issues of sovereignty. He expressed support for the conclusions adopted by consensus at the seminar held in Fiji in 2002 and noticed that, in the spirit of good relations existing between Spain and the United Kingdom, both Ministers for Foreign Affairs had met in 2001 and 2002, making good progress in the discussions about Gibraltar, in a process that was being wholeheartedly supported by the European Union. He stated that the unilateral initiative by the government of Gibraltar to hold a consultation in that territory lacked any legal foundation and was consequently devoid of any validity or effect, and he underlined that Gibraltar enjoyed nowadays a higher standard of living than the surrounding region, which was harming Spain. He also mentioned the non-compliance by Gibraltar with European Community legislation in a number of fields. He also referred to Gibraltar as an historical anomaly, stressing that Spain was prepared, through a comprehensive agreement with the United Kingdom, to ensure that Gibraltar could enjoy the maximum possible internal self-government to benefit from a new era of European cooperation. 20. The representative of the United Kingdom stated it was not clear that the debate on decolonization always fully recognized how democratic and economically vibrant the Overseas Territories of the United Kingdom were, nor did it give sufficient recognition to their pace of social and economic development. He said that the Special Committee should be aware of the extent to which Territories already ran their own affairs. He also noted that the United Kingdom might be able to encourage and influence overseas territorial governments to follow a particular line, but in large measurement a final decision rested with the government of the Territory. The Overseas Territories of the United Kingdom had been reviewing their Constitutions with his Government with a view to their modernization. That process had not been imposed or driven by London. The Overseas Territories had been responsible for the appointment of local constitutional review bodies, and one of the messages from the Overseas Territories was that they would like more autonomy and a diminution in the Governor's power. The United Kingdom was considering with the Governments of the Territories what might be possible in that regard. He concluded that, although the United Kingdom's policy on informal cooperation with the Special Committee remained unchanged, his Government welcomed the idea of territory-specific working groups within the Special Committee examining the process for "delisting". In his view, that should be as simple and pragmatic a process as possible, taking into consideration the Territories' capacity to cope with it. 21. The following Member States took part in the discussion of the seminar issues: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Indonesia, Spain, United Kingdom, and United Republic of Tanzania. Representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories 22. The representative of Anguilla stated that the United Kingdom and the United Nations, along with the Territories themselves, would have to develop new and creative constitutional and administrative solutions to the issue of how decolonization was ultimately obtained and maintained. Concrete mechanisms should be designed and established. For its part, the United Nations needed to "think outside the box" more aggressively. It was not the thought of self-determination that concerned him, but the practicalities of its implementation. In that regard, he pointed out that Anguilla was in the process of conducting a constitutional and electoral reform review. As Anguilla entered the next phase of that review exercise, several key issues regarding its existing status had to be addressed seriously if its relationship with the Government of the United Kingdom was to mature and achieve the level of democratic governance Anguilla was seeking. The United Kingdom should not simply restate that Anguilla was free to take up the responsibilities of self-determination. It was the expressed wish of the people of Anguilla to be prepared to devote serious financial and technical resources to train for the assumption of those responsibilities. 23. The representative of the Cayman Islands stated that the Islands enjoyed a long and amicable relationship with the United Kingdom and valued that association, though in recent times the partnership had become somewhat strained. Nevertheless, the people of the Cayman Islands did not wish the territory to become independent. Notwithstanding that, it had become increasingly clear that it was in the best interests of the Islands' cultural and economic well-being to progress on the continuum towards a greater degree of internal self-government, while retaining its ties with the United Kingdom. Constitutional consultation with the United Kingdom was at an advanced stage, but the process was carried out without an awareness of the full range of options available to a Non-Self-Governing Territory wishing to become more autonomous in running its affairs. Having been apprised of the options, the Cayman Government now felt it urgent and critical to study the implications of each in order to be able to make better-informed decisions. 24. The representative of Montserrat stated that, in the preceding six years, many of Montserrat's trained persons had migrated, owing to insufficient resources to house the thousands of residents who had been relocated from areas affected by volcanic activity. There were still more than 100 households occupying shelters. Montserrat recognized the need to attract its population back to its shores. The primary objective in the island's sustainable development plan was an increased population. The challenge, therefore, was to find the necessary resources to provide jobs and housing, which would trigger the growth of an economically viable population. He said that, since most of the infrastructure for economic development either had been destroyed or was inaccessible, the people of Montserrat had been forced to occupy and redevelop the northern third of the island. There was still no airport, but later in 2003, Montserrat hoped to commence construction of a new airstrip with funds provided by the Government of the United Kingdom and the European Union. He thanked the Government of the United Kingdom for its assistance in balancing the island's budget and providing some reconstruction financing. In conclusion, he noted that, while the governments in the Overseas Territories had continuously underscored their commitment to the objectives of good governance and transparency, Montserrat also expected that the Government of the United Kingdom would recognize the need to ensure that its Territories enjoyed a level playing field, especially in such areas as the financial services sector. 25. The representative of the Front de libération nationale kanak socialiste (FLNKS) of New Caledonia recalled that New Caledonia-Kanaky had been reinscribed in 1986 on the list of territories to be decolonized. Its land had been submitted to massive immigration, with a tremendous boom in the 1960s and 1970s, owing largely to the mining of nickel, its main natural resource. That boom had resulted in demographic and economic links unfavourable to the indigenous people. Support on the international scene for FLNKS in its claim to independence had so far come from countries in the Pacific region, but FLNKS was "afraid" that the French diplomatic offensive, in the form of aid packages to the region, might neutralize support for FLNKS. He asked the United Nations to help satisfy the aspirations of the indigenous people, while offering lasting prospects for all New Caledonians. 26. The representative of the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y del Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO) gave his perspective on the history of the dispute, and reaffirmed the principle of the right of the Saharawi people to self-determination as the only principle that should guide the actions of the United Nations in the process of decolonization in Western Sahara. After explaining the reasons why the Frente POLISARIO was objecting to the latest proposal put to the parties by the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on Western Sahara, he stated that the United Nations Settlement Plan continued to be the only option which benefited from an international consensus and the agreement of both parties in the conflict. 27. The representative of Pitcairn referred to the unfolding court case against some Pitcairn men. The islanders believed that the procedures being followed by the Government of the United Kingdom were impeding the development of self-government, were socially divisive and could destroy the community through loss of manpower. He noted that education was a key element in the decolonization process, and stated that the people in the Territory did not fully understand the possibilities or significance of the various political futures that might be available to them. Independence would require substantial external support of an economic and political nature, by treaty arrangement. Association with another State would immediately raise the question of a long-term association with the United Kingdom. Geographically, Pitcairn would not want to exclude a possible relationship with France and French Polynesia. The two other possibilities were New Zealand and Australia. Regarding integration, he continued, thoughts again focused on French Polynesia, New Zealand and Australia. For practical reasons, the United Kingdom seemed a less likely possibility for integrated status. The people of Pitcairn were eager to develop a work programme with the Special Committee and the United Kingdom Government, in accordance with the Committee's case-by-case approach. He also wished to explore the possibility of a United Nations visiting mission to Pitcairn at an early date. 28. The representative of Saint Helena noted that Saint Helena and Montserrat were the only two grant-aided Overseas Territories. In Saint Helena's case, that was due to its isolation and the fact that it did not produce enough raw materials to pay the bills. Presently, Saint Helena had no aspirations towards independence. It could not afford independence, nor did it want a flood of visiting Europeans, anyway. Saint Helena was "very satisfied" with what the United Kingdom had done for it, by balancing the books year after year. Like the others, it would like to have more say in managing its own affairs. 29. The representative of the Turks and Caicos Islands stated that the view had been clearly expressed that the political and constitutional advancement of the Islands had not kept pace with their economic development. In 2002, the first ever local Commission had been established to review the constitution and make recommendations to modernize it. The general consensus of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands was to remain an Overseas Territory, with increased powers vested in their locally elected body. There had been no calls for independence, but there had been a call to move towards self-sufficiency. He reviewed the current status of government in the islands. It was abundantly clear that, whereas the people of the Islands were seeking more powers for the locally elected government, they were not prepared to set an agenda towards independence. There appeared to be a desire to pace its social, economic and political development so that the Islands could comfortably move towards greater powers in the governing of their own affairs. That, in itself, could certainly be seen as a process of decolonization on a more gradual basis. 30. The representative of the United States Virgin Islands stated that it was particularly propitious to be convening the seminar in Anguilla, in that area of the north-eastern Caribbean region, which had a myriad of governance models among the small island countries. That part of the region contained perhaps the most diverse examples of political models found anywhere in such a small space. Increasingly, all of those jurisdictions were examining political and constitutional review, reform and modernization. He stated that it might be useful for the Special Committee to consider an activity that would provide information on how those models actually operated on the ground in the Caribbean, and in the Pacific, so that the Territories could gain a better understanding of how those models existed in the small island context in "real time", rather than only rely on theoretical definitions of the options, however well formulated. Constitutional and political advancement required informed judgements, which included defending the role of the United Nations in the islands' development processes. He requested that the Secretary-General's next report to the General Assembly on implementation of the decolonization resolutions be comprehensive and include the reasons for the deficiencies in carrying out the various mandates over the preceding 12-year period, including the key provisions of the plan of action of the first, and now the second, International Decade. He sought the further participation of the wider United Nations system in the development processes of the Territories. In the United States Virgin Islands, the 1993 referendum on political status options yielded inconclusive results, partly owing to deficiencies in the public education programme. United Nations Development Programme 31. The representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Barbados, briefed participants on the programming modalities of one of the four field offices of UNDP in the Caribbean. She recalled former high levels of resource allocation to the region from the 1970s through the early 1990s, and stated that, in response to the programming and policy reforms of the United Nations System, the Programme in Barbados had moved to a subregional programming framework. That framework still provided some limited access to programme resources for Anguilla, the British Virgin Islands and Montserrat. The priority areas were governance, poverty reduction and environmental sustainability, which included disaster management. If structured to support groupings of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and their common needs, the programme context of UNDP could provide them with capacity-building and institutional development assistance. Representatives of the regional organizations 32. The representative of the Organization of American States (OAS) highlighted education and public awareness in the Territories as being critical before any decisions were made or referendums were held. OAS had been involved in the constitutional reform of some of the independent Caribbean States, and education programmes and dialogue had been key to the involvement of the people. Although the three options had been set out, there were some variations that needed to be fleshed out within at least two of them. It would be useful for the Committee to build on the models put forth as a basis for public education campaigns. Experts 33. Experts presented papers dealing with questions and issues proposed by the Special Committee, as reflected above: (a) An expert from Montserrat performed a comparative analysis of constitutional modernization in Montserrat and the Cayman Islands and noted that the recommendations of the respective constitutional review commissions of both Territories reflected both their "progressive" position on constitutional advancement and their conservatism. The Cayman Islands had the human and material resources to propel them towards decolonization. While Montserrat proposed some transference of the Governor's powers to the elected officials, the Cayman Islands seemed to leave those powers largely untouched. The expert recommended further political education, leadership and a clearly defined vision of decolonization by the local authorities, presentation of the full range of self-determination options available and consideration of non-British models. He also recommended that the United Kingdom Government articulate what options it was prepared to consider without restricting the Territories to a rigid timetable for independence; (b) An expert from the Cayman Islands analysed self-government in the Cayman Islands from the perspective of non-governmental organizations. She noted that, its status as a Non-Self-Governing Territory notwithstanding, the Caymans had, over the years, developed a plan to virtually create itself out of nothing, with almost no aid or input from the United Kingdom Government over the preceding six decades. As a stable and sound financial centre, the Cayman Islands had done much right in its own development. How then, she asked, did one address the issue of self-government when a jurisdiction had enjoyed much success under the current system? It seemed that the Cayman Islands were at a crossroads. The Territory must ponder the question carefully as it had much to lose if it took the wrong path. While the people of the Territory did not seem to want independence, they should address the necessary reform of their Constitution and they should be educated about their rights regarding self-determination. A referendum might be required to measure the will of the majority; (c) An expert from Bermuda analysed the economic implications of independence for Bermuda and noted that, of all the remaining British Overseas Territories, Bermuda was the most constitutionally advanced and it had enjoyed prolonged economic stability. In recent years, pressures had been brought to bear on the island's financial services sector from major economic blocs, including the European Commission and the United Kingdom Government. There was also pending legislation in the United States that could deliver a severe blow to Bermuda's economy if passed. While there remained some concern in Bermuda about some of the economic implications of independence, sovereign status would give the island the flexibility to better pursue its interests in the global arena; (d) An expert from the United States Virgin Islands examined the political and constitutional implications of self-government in the Caribbean. He reviewed the three options for political equality and their implications and described the different models of self-government currently existent in the Caribbean region. He concluded that the remaining small island Non-Self-Governing Territories seemed to be focusing initially on the devolution of power and more autonomy for the elected governments as they proceeded along an evolutionary path towards full and absolute political equality through one of the available self-determination options. In the case of Territories where economic progress had been steady and sustained and where no grant in aid was received from the administering Power, concern was being expressed regarding restrictions imposed from the outside on their financial services sector. That could potentially nudge those Territories towards seeking independence, for they would wish to prevent their constitutional dependency from impeding their ability to adjust to global economic developments and remain competitive. Observers 34. The observers made presentations on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) and the process of decolonization from the perspective of Anguillan civil society. IV. Conclusions and recommendations 35. At its 6th meeting, held on 22 May 2003, the Chairman presented to the participants the following conclusions and recommendations: Role of the Special Committee and action plan 1. The participants reaffirm the role of the Special Committee as the primary vehicle to foster the process of decolonization and to expedite the goals of the Second Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism (2001-2010), as contained in General Assembly resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000. 2. The Seminar recommends that the Special Committee continue to participate actively in monitoring the evolution of the Non-Self-Governing Territories towards self-determination. 3. Further, the Seminar recommends that the Special Committee play a catalytic role in the search for a specific solution for each of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned, and in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations. 4. Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter. 5. The Seminar notes the proposal by the Chairman of the Special Committee to expedite a work programme with specified time frames based on the case-by-case approach in order to complete the decolonization process by the end of the Second Decade. The Seminar recommends that the Special Committee implement the programme in consultation and coordination with the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in which there are no pending sovereignty disputes and with the administering Powers concerned. Constitutional and self-determination issues in the United Kingdom's Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories and Bermuda 6. The participants welcome the cooperation of the Governments of Anguilla and the United Kingdom in holding the Seminar in Anguilla, the first time that it has been held in a Non-Self-Governing Territory. While aware that the approach of the Government of the United Kingdom with respect to its informal cooperation with the Special Committee has not changed, they welcome the participation in the seminar of a senior-level representative from the United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office and his Government's commitment to continue to engage with the Special Committee. 7. The Seminar notes that the United Kingdom Government's relationship with its Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories and Bermuda is based on its 1999 White Paper entitled "Partnership for Progress and Prosperity: Britain and the Overseas Territories"; that this partnership is based on four fundamental principles, the first being self-determination, and that it has led to the evolution of a degree of autonomy for the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the running of their own affairs. 8. The participants note, however, that all the elected representatives of the United Kingdom's Non-Self-Governing Territories in the region present at the Seminar called for greater devolution of powers from the governors to the locally elected representatives and the participants recommend that the United Kingdom Government and the representatives of the Territories discuss this issue further. 9. The participants note with satisfaction, however, the new stated policy of the Government of the United Kingdom for consultation with the elected officials of its Territories on the appointment of governors and urge the Government of the United Kingdom to act with consistency in that respect. 10. The participants welcome the ongoing dialogue between the Government of the United Kingdom and the elected representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories regarding the constitutional review process initiated by the Government of the United Kingdom. 11. While noting with satisfaction the evolutionary relationship of the Government of the United Kingdom with its Territories in the Caribbean and Bermuda and the ongoing process of constitutional review, the Seminar also observes that this approach does not reflect the full range of self-determination options available to the peoples of the Territories as set out in resolution 1541 (XV). 12. The Seminar further notes with concern that the constitutional review process, has not led, as yet, to a full examination and discussion of all the options for self-determination available to the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, as established in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV). 13. The Seminar reaffirms the right of the peoples of Non-Self Governing Territories to be informed about the full range of self-determination options available to them and their implications and urges the United Kingdom to broaden the discussion with the Territories to include the examination of all options for self-determination. 14. The Seminar also notes the concern expressed by some representatives of the region's Non-Self-Governing Territories that the policy of the Government of the United Kingdom requires its territories to amend their legislation on certain issues to comply with the international obligations of the administering Power. 15. The Seminar recommends that the Special Committee undertake in the immediate future consultations with the Government of the United Kingdom on the application of its policy of constitutional modernization in the Territories in the context of the United Nations policy for self-determination as outlined in resolution 1541 (XV). The Seminar also recommends that the Special Committee hold discussions with the Government of the United Kingdom, in consultation with the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned, on which of the Territories in the region will achieve a full measure of self-government in the near future and, accordingly, would be subject to "de-listing". 16. The Seminar welcomes the statement by the representative of the United Kingdom that his Government would agree to visiting missions by the Special Committee to its Caribbean Territories and Bermuda following invitations issued by the territorial authorities. It also welcomes the assurance by the representative of the United Kingdom that his Government would not object to the Special Committee working with the peoples of the Caribbean Territories and Bermuda to facilitate public awareness campaigns aimed at fostering an understanding of the options available to them for self-determination included in the relevant United Nations resolutions. 17. The Seminar recommends that, following invitations by local authorities, the Special Committee undertake missions to all the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean, as well as Bermuda, in the coming year, in order to further discuss the question of self-determination with the representatives of the administering Power and the peoples of the Territories. 18. The Seminar also recommends that, during the same time frame, the Committee undertake to have studies conducted on the implications of all the self-determination options for these Territories and welcomes the possibility of assistance in this regard from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and appropriate institutions in the region. 19. The participants welcome the presence at the Seminar of a representative of the Barbados office of UNDP and the insight which was provided into the work of UNDP in support of governance in some Eastern Caribbean States and Territories. The Seminar recommends that UNDP provide capacity-building and institutional development assistance for all the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean region that are reviewing their self-determination options. Developments in Non-Self-Governing Territories 20. The participants welcome the participation in the Seminar of the Chief Minister of Anguilla, as the host of the Seminar, and note that Anguilla is in the process of conducting a constitutional and electoral reform review, particularly addressing several key issues regarding its existing status with the Government of the United Kingdom. They also note that the people of Anguilla should be prepared and trained for the assumption of their responsibilities with regard to self-determination. 21. The participants take note that the constitutional consultations between the Cayman Islands and the Government of the United Kingdom are at an advanced stage. However, the desire of the Territory not to request independence remains. The participants further note that, as a result of the visit to the Cayman Islands by the Chairman of the Special Committee in early April 2003, the people of the Territory were made aware of the various options available to them for self-determination and will have to examine these options. 22. The participants note that the main challenge facing Montserrat is to find the necessary resources to create jobs and housing, which would trigger the growth of an economically viable population, as well as the importance of generating a plan of action taking forward the constitutional, political, social and economic advancement of the people of Montserrat. 23. The participants take note of the general consensus of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands to remain a "British Overseas Territory" and their desire for greater powers in the governing of their own affairs, as they are not prepared to set an agenda towards independence. 24. The participants note that the United States Virgin Islands is exploring modalities to draft a local constitution on the internal structure of the Government with the aim of a decentralized system with local governance functions on each island. This is to replace the Revised Organic Act of 1954, which was written by the administering Power. 25. The participants take note of the unique position of Bermuda in terms of its constitutional advancement and prolonged economic stability and, bearing in mind the economic implications of independence, at the same time note that sovereign status for the island would give it the flexibility to better pursue its interests in the global arena. 26. With regard to Saint Helena, the participants note the importance it attaches to the support of the Special Committee for those Non-Self-Governing Territories that have no desire for independence but still wish to develop a more democratic government through constitutional change in a long-term and closer relationship with the United Kingdom. The participants further note that a substantial part of Saint Helena's proposals for a new Constitution has been accepted by the United Kingdom. 27. With regard to New Caledonia, the participants note with concern that some measures of the Noumea Accord are still not implemented. At the same time, they note that FLNKS of New Caledonia is seeking the vigilance and support of the United Nations for the respect of this accord and its implementation in a way that will satisfy the aspirations of the indigenous people of New Caledonia. They also note the request of the FLNKS representative that a United Nations visiting mission be dispatched to New Caledonia to assess the situation on the ground. 28. The participants hold the view that the question of Western Sahara is an issue of decolonization and that it is necessary to implement without further delay the United Nations Settlement Plan, in particular the holding of an impartial, free and fair referendum for the people of Western Sahara. They take note of the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy on this question and urge the parties to continue, under the auspices of the Secretary-General's Personal Envoy, to try to resolve the multiple problems relating to the implementation of the Settlement Plan and try to agree upon a mutually acceptable political solution to their dispute over Western Sahara, in order to allow the people of Western Sahara to exercise their right to self-determination. 29. The participants note that people of Pitcairn are not fully aware of all the possibilities or the significance of the various self-determination options that may be available to them and are therefore eager to develop with the Special Committee and the Government of the United Kingdom a work programme in accordance with the Committee's case-by-case approach to the future status of the Territories. 30. The participants reiterate that the Special Committee should continue to encourage the ongoing negotiations between the Governments of the United Kingdom and Spain within the Brussels process, aimed at achieving a solution to the question of Gibraltar in accordance with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations. 31. The participants reiterate also that the Special Committee should continue to encourage the resumption of negotiations between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom with the aim of finding a solution to the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), taking into consideration the interests of the population of the Territory, in accordance with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations. Administering Powers and Other States Members of the United Nations 32. The participants welcome the presence at the Seminar of a senior-level representative from the Government of the United Kingdom, one of the administering Powers in the Caribbean region, and look forward to further engagement and cooperation between the Special Committee and the United Kingdom. They regret, however, the absence of the other administering Power in the region, the United States of America. 33. The Seminar expresses its appreciation to Argentina and Spain for their active participation and encourages other Member States to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee. Role of the regional seminars 34. As activities of the Plan of Action of the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, the regional seminars serve as an effective forum for focused discussion on matters of concern to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and afford opportunities for representatives of the peoples of the Territories to present their views and recommendations to the Special Committee. 35. The regional nature of the seminars, alternating between the Caribbean and the Pacific, remains a crucial element in their success. The administering Powers should be urged to facilitate the participation of the elected representatives of the Territories in the seminars and in sessions of the Special Committee and the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in conformity with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations. 36. The participants welcome the innovative format of the 2003 Seminar, as it allowed for a focused and detailed discussion on the particular conditions in the British Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories and Bermuda, and facilitated the formulation of specific steps to advance self-determination in this region. 37. The participants note with satisfaction that the holding of the 2003 Caribbean Regional Seminar in the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Anguilla, including a town hall meeting with people of the Territory, was a success. They therefore emphasize the desirability of continuing to hold the future seminars in the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean and Pacific regions alternately with a view to educating the respective peoples in those Territories regarding the aims and objective of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. Furthermore, they emphasize that such seminars reflect in a more precise way the feelings and aspirations of the peoples of those Territories. The administering Powers are called upon to facilitate the holding of future seminars in their Non-Self-Governing Territories. 38. The Seminar recommends that the Special Committee integrate, to the extent possible, the recommendations of the regional Seminar into its relevant resolutions on decolonization, as those recommendations are important expressions of the will of the people of the Territories. 39. The Special Committee should adopt the report of the Caribbean Regional Seminar and include it in its report to the General Assembly, as it did with the reports of the previous regional seminars. 40. The Seminar reiterates the importance of the conclusions and recommendations at the previous regional seminars, held in Vanuatu (1990) and Barbados (1990), Grenada (1992), Papua New Guinea (1993 and 1996), Trinidad and Tobago (1995), Antigua and Barbuda (1997), Fiji (1998 and 2002), Saint Lucia (1999), Marshall Islands (2000) and Cuba (2001). 36. At the same meeting, the participants adopted a resolution expressing appreciation to the Government and people of Anguilla (see appendix V). Official delegation of the Special Committee Saint Lucia Earl Stephen Huntley Chairman of the Special Committee Antigua and Barbuda Patrick Albert Lewis Member of the Special Committee Bolivia Erwin Ortiz Gandarillas Côte d'Ivoire Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee Cuba Orlando Requeijo Gual Fiji Amenatave Yauvoli India Ruchira Kamboj Islamic Republic of Iran Mehdi Mollahoseini Russian Federation Yury Rudakov Sierra Leone Fode S. Kamara United Republic of Tanzania Liberata Mulamula States Members of the United Nations Argentina Mateo Estreme Chile* * Member of the Special Committee. Antonio Cousiño Indonesia* Jonny Sinaga Saint Lucia* Michelle Joseph Spain Santiago Chamorro Roman Oyarzun Administering Powers United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Roy Osborne Adrian Pisa Representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories Anguilla (Host Government) Osbourne Fleming Hubert Hughes Victor Banks David Carty Bernice Lake James Connor Damien Hughes Ijahnya Christian Olive Hodge John Q. Gumbs Susan Hodge Celestine John Lolita Davis-Richardson Cayman Islands W. McKeeva Bush Roy Bodden Charles Clifford Patricia Ebanks Montserrat John Osborne Reuben T. Mead Sarita Francis FLNKS Charles Wea Caroline Machoro Francis Smail Pitcairn Kevin B. Young Saint Helena William Drabble Turks and Caicos Islands Derek H. Taylor Irvin Hartley Coalbrooke United States Virgin Islands Carlyle Corbin Lehbib Breica Carlyle Corbin (United States Virgin Islands) Howard Fergus (Montserrat) Walton Brown (Bermuda) Sofia Harris (Cayman Islands) Programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United Nations Paula Ann Mohamed Regional organizations Organization of American States Cecily Norris Phyllis Fleming-Banks Alejandro Betts Roselyn Casell-Sealy Since I have already shared some of my Government's views on the issue before us, as a good host I will try and be as brief as possible in these remarks so as to ensure that my other colleagues from the Territories get a full opportunity to air their views. Some of you may be aware that we in Anguilla are in the process of conducting a constitutional and electoral reform review. The process is still in the awareness-raising phase and we are hoping that, when that is completed, as many of our citizens as possible will share their views on how constitutional reform here should proceed. The members of the Constitutional and Electoral Reform Committee have produced a series of extensive background papers on the various provisions of the existing Constitution, which we hope will serve as a backdrop to modernizing a new instrument. I wish here to place on record our appreciation to the United Nations Development Programme and to Her Majesty's Government Fund for Good Government for their assistance thus far in this initiative. As we enter the next phase of the review exercise, it is the view of my Government that in any event several key issues regarding our existing status will have to be seriously addressed if our relationship with Her Majesty's Government is to mature, become more democratic and achieve the level of democratic governance that we seek. In the first instance my Government is committed to the principle of localizing as many positions in the Executive Council as possible, consistent with a general devolution of power to the elected government. Presently, our Council consists of the Governor, along with the Chief Minister, three Ministers, a Deputy Governor and an Attorney-General. While we expect that, under the present arrangement, the Governor's position will remain essentially the same, we fully expect that many of the powers of the Governor should be devolved. In the same vein, we expect that the positions of Deputy Governor and Attorney-General will be filled by nationals in the foreseeable future. We are confident that, in the case of the Attorney-General, this transition will shortly be achieved, but the position of Deputy Governor has still not been resolved. Once again, this is essentially an issue of human resource development and depends both on the professional development of our people and on Her Majesty's Government's acceptance of the principle of localizing key positions. Secondly, I am sure that we all would agree that consultation is a key principle in the establishment of a more harmonious and productive relationship. To this end, the establishment of the Overseas Territories Consultative Council, which meets annually in London and which includes all Chief Ministers and Leaders of Government along with the Minister responsible for Overseas Territories, is certainly a step in the right direction. Although it may still be too early to judge the effectiveness of this initiative since it has only been in place for four years, we think it is certainly a step in the right direction, as it allows political leaders from the Territories to interact directly with political leadership in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which is the primary point of contact between our elected government and Her Majesty's Government. But while this initiative may be positive and is certainly a practical expression of the principle of partnership, it can only have long-term credibility if at some point the principle of partnership is constitutionalized. It is our view that the Secretary of State's right of disallowance and power of Orders in Council are too one-sided and subject to arbitrary decision. Indeed, they smack of all that is ugly about colonialism. In the spirit of partnership and building on the practical wisdom of the Consultative Council, it seems to us that concrete steps should be taken to constitutionalize a new process of ultimate decision-making in which careful and structured mutual consent would be the basis of a new political relationship. While we proceed along the path of political and constitutional advancement, it is important to emphasize that the people of Anguilla must be fully prepared to meet the challenges and responsibilities of self-government. Decolonization without preparation is not how we wish to proceed. Indeed, my government does not intend to lose the focus on economic and social development that all governments have had since Anguillans made the unilateral decision to build a new society in 1967. I will not delve into economic or social statistics at this time, since you all have copies of the working paper on Anguilla, which contains relevant information. However, I must say that we still have a considerable road to travel before we can feel confident that our economic base is dynamic enough and as diverse as it can possibly be in a small place. Although our tourism economy has grown well in the last 25 years and continues to grow in an orderly and controllable manner, we are still too dependent on this sector and are insufficiently diversified to be self-sustaining. We still have a long way to go before we can feel confident that our health and educational services are at a standard that will provide for sustainable human resource development and efficient health care. On that note, I must say that we are somewhat disappointed with the declining levels of assistance from Her Majesty's Government to the social sectors, and in particular, the health sector. So we challenge the United Nations and the United Kingdom to work with us in our preparation to assume the essential responsibilities of governance. We invite the Special Committee to visit with us, at your convenience, to discuss the political, socio-economic and constitutional development process in Anguilla. We trust that the United Nations and the United Kingdom will expand and accelerate what would appear to be a new spirit of cooperation in finding practical solutions to the issue of global decolonization. In understanding the role of the Special Committee in the process of decolonization, we must first return to and reiterate the starting point for the work of the Committee. It is that the United Nations adopted, in 1960, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples under resolution 1514 (XV) and under resolution 1541 (XV) further defined full self-government as being one of three options: independence; free association with an independent State; integration into an independent State. The Special Committee of 24 was established in 1961 to examine the application of the Declaration and to make recommendations on its implementation. The Special Committee was also empowered to recommend to the General Assembly the removal from the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories those Territories it was satisfied had exercised the right to self-determination and had achieved full self-government. Since its inception, the Special Committee has served as the primary vehicle of the United Nations in fostering the process of self-determination and subsequent decolonization of 60 former Territories since the adoption of the Decolonization Declaration in 1960. Accordingly, over 85 million people have achieved a self-governing existence since that time. The Special Committee on Decolonization is not here to persuade, force or otherwise influence the people of the Territories into immediately changing their present arrangements. It is certainly not here to force them into independence, as is the popular conception or misconception fed by some in the past who preferred the United Nations not to interfere in the Territories, and so the misinformation was useful in distancing the peoples from the Committee. The Committee is here to provide the people of the Territories with information on all the options of political equality open to them, and to assure you, the representatives of the peoples of the Territories, that, should you so choose, the Special Committee and the United Nations system in general stand ready to assist. The Committee is also here to work with administering Powers to fulfil a mandate to which they all agreed: to allow colonial peoples to exercise their right to self-determination, that is, choosing one of the three options to which I have referred. The Committee has been performing its role through four major activities: (a) Organizing these regional seminars, which are designed to heighten the awareness of United Nations Member States on the intricacies of the situation in the individual Territories. These sessions also serve to enhance the knowledge of the representatives of the Territories themselves about the statutory role of the United Nations in the process of self-determination and decolonization, consistent with Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter of the United Nations in reference to "respect for the principles of equal rights and self-determination of peoples," and consistent with the human rights conventions, which speak of the inalienable right to self-determination; (b) Conducting a week-long session beginning in June at United Nations Headquarters, during which the representatives of the territorial Governments and non-governmental organizations have the opportunity to address the Committee. I look forward to seeing more of the Caribbean Territories than in past years participating in our review process in New York so that the entire Special Committee can benefit from your knowledge; (c) Adopting resolutions on all the Non-Self-Governing Territories listed with it and that is generally done during the month of June; (d) Organizing visiting missions to the Territories. By 1991, there were 17 Territories left on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, the majority being small island Territories in the Caribbean, the Pacific and the Atlantic, and so the United Nations declared the first International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. The Special Committee is aware that the first Decade, covering the period from 1991 to 2000, did not end with the successful conclusion of full internal self-government in the remaining small island Territories, and the second Decade (2001-2010) devoted to this aim is filled with hope that we can succeed. We are therefore well into the third year of this new Decade, but as I have said before, we must not allow ourselves the declaration of a third or fourth decade to complete our task. It is unacceptable, for as I have also said before, colonialism has been on our agenda for too long; and as the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, himself has also said, we must bring an end to this chapter of history. To do this, however, the Special Committee must change its role, it must change its approach to its task. It must do more than merely inform and educate and pass resolutions on decolonization; it must agitate; it must be proactive; it must be the catalyst that pushes the process of decolonization along the path decreed by the United Nations. This is the role that I see for the Committee and this is where we are today. The Committee, in fact, began this more activist role with the adoption three years ago of a case-by-case work programme to achieve its objectives. This approach has yielded some small progress with its application to one of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Pacific: Tokelau; the Committee had its first visiting mission in eight years when it went to Tokelau last year. But we recognize that we need to do more with that case-by-case approach. At the opening of the session of the Special Committee in February 2003, I stated that we needed to put in place an action programme that would lead to an automatic process of decolonization of the remaining 16 Non-Self-Governing Territories within this decade. While at the time I did not elaborate on this action programme, except to say that the Committee should make use of working groups for each Territory, let me now do this and explain this new role for the Committee. What is envisaged is an action plan that will comprise four elements: (a) A series of activities based on the case-by-case approach developed by the Committee; (b) The adoption of a timetable for implementation of the activities. Target dates will be set for all the activities so that, once the programme commences, the thrust will be to achieve objectives by the dates prescribed; (c) Application of the programme to all the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the same time instead of one or two at a time on an ad hoc basis; (d) Use of the working groups of the Committee to implement aspects of the programme. The action plan The action plan is based on the work programme that had been devised for the case-by-case approach to the decolonization issue. That work programme comprises 10 activities: 1. Meeting with representatives of the administering Powers and/or representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territory concerned. 2. Briefing and exchange of views. 3. Discussions on the existing constitutional framework of the Territory. 4. Information dissemination and educational programmes. 5. Visiting missions. 6. Consultation mechanism(s). 7. Implementation of the act of self-determination. 8. Legislative and administrative action by the administering Power to transfer remaining powers and constitutional authority to the territory pursuant to resolution 1514 (XV). 9. Coordination. 10. A possible General Assembly resolution as recommended by the Special Committee. Jump-starting or operationalizing the plan involves collapsing some of the activities into four major clusters or steps, which will then be carried out by the Committee, through its Working Group, within a specified time frame. These stages are as follows: 1. Meetings with representatives of the Territories and the administering powers to discuss the current constitutional situation and to understand the aspirations of the Territories; 2. Exchanging views with the Territories and administering Powers on the options for self-determination and their implications on the basis of studies of these implications; 3. Devise with the Non-Self-Governing Territories and the administering Powers modalities for an act of self-determination; 4. Devise and implement with the Territories, the administering Powers, and the United Nations, public education programmes on options for self-determination and their implications. Stages 1, 2 and 3 will take place through regional seminars, meetings at Headquarters and visiting missions. The timetable for these stages is as follows: Dates Stages May 2003-May 2004 1 and 2 June 2004-December 2004 3 and 4 Continuation of Stage 4 leading to the conduct of the act of self-determination Implementation of the act of self-determination The 2003 Caribbean Regional Seminar This seminar falls within the first step or cluster. We are commencing the action plan with this seminar in Anguilla. What we have done here today is to bring together the elected representatives of the Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories, their administering Power, the United Kingdom, and the Committee to discuss the current constitutional situation in the Territories. The United Kingdom has embarked upon a programme of constitutional modernization in the Territories based on its 1999 White Paper for the Territories. What we need to find out is whether this policy is leading to self-government for the Territories. Are the Non-Self-Governing Territories satisfied with the constitutional modernization process? Does it meet their aspirations? As far as the Committee is concerned, the policy is not within the context of the United Nations mandate for decolonization as it does not offer to the Territories all the options for self-government which the United Nations set out in resolution 1541 (XV). It limits the Territories to either attaining independence or retaining their status quo, which is one of colonialism. What we need to do in this seminar, therefore, is to work out and agree upon how we can bring the present United Kingdom's policy on constitutional modernization of the Territories in line with the United Nations mandate on self-determination so that the Territories can attain self-government through our action programme within the time frame that the United Nations has set -- by the end of this decade. It gives me great pleasure to send my greetings to all who have gathered in Anguilla for this regional seminar on decolonization, the first time that such a seminar is being held in a Non-Self-Governing Territory. I would like to thank the Government of Anguilla for hosting this event, as well as the Government of the United Kingdom for the cooperation and assistance it has provided. Achieving self-government for the peoples of the world has been one of the cardinal goals of the United Nations since its inception. Under the Organization's auspices, more than 80 million people have exercised their right to self-determination, and decolonization can truly be considered a United Nations success story. Today, there are 16 Non-Self-Governing Territories remaining on the United Nations list. As an organ mandated to facilitate decolonization, the Special Committee organizes seminars such as this one to provide a forum for the two million people living in these Territories to air their views about the unique problems they face, and to promote direct communication between the Special Committee, the representatives of the Territories and the administering Powers. This year, the Committee decided to focus on the specific problems of the Territories in the Caribbean and on the practical steps that need to be taken to complete the decolonization process in the region. According to the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on Decolonization, a full measure of self-government can be achieved by a Non-Self-Governing Territory through free association or integration with another State, or through independence. Many of the Territories have made considerable progress in their political, constitutional, economic and social development, and have gone a long way towards self-government. I urge you all to continue working together to find the appropriate format and timing for the completion of decolonization in each Territory. And I wish you all a productive and successful seminar. The participants in the Caribbean Regional Seminar, Having met from 20 to 22 May 2003 at The Valley, Anguilla, for the purpose of assessing the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, with particular emphasis on the Caribbean region and Bermuda and the constitutional evolution of those Territories towards self-determination, in order to facilitate the development by the Special Committee of a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories, Having heard the important statement by the Honourable Osbourne Fleming, Chief Minister of Anguilla, Taking note of the important statement by the representative of the United Kingdom, an administering Power for the majority of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean region and Bermuda, Taking note also of the important statements by the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, 1. Express their gratitude to the Government of the United Kingdom for making it possible to hold the first regional seminar of the Special Committee in a Non-Self-Governing Territory; 2. Express their profound gratitude to the Government and people of Anguilla for providing the Special Committee with the necessary facilities for its seminar, for the outstanding contribution they have made to the success of the seminar and, in particular, for the very generous and kind hospitality and the warm and cordial reception accorded to the participants throughout their stay in Anguilla. 100. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of the dissemination of information on decolonization as a separate item and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 101. The Special Committee considered the item at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003. 102. In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, resolution 57/139 of 11 December 2002 on the dissemination of information on decolonization, and resolution 57/140 of the same date on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 103. The Special Committee held consultations with representatives of the Department of Public Information and of the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.3). 104. At the same meeting, the Chairman of the Special Committee drew attention to the report of the Secretary-General on the dissemination of information on decolonization (A/AC.109/2003/18) and a draft resolution on the item submitted by him (A/AC.109/2003/L.4). 105. At the same meeting, the representative of Chile introduced an oral amendment by which the words "in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization" would be added to the end of paragraph 1. 106. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.4, as orally amended, without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/19). 107. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/19 appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in part III of the present report (see chap. XII, sect. G). 108. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of sending visiting missions to Territories as appropriate. The Special Committee also decided that the item should be considered at its plenary meetings and, as appropriate, in connection with its examination of specific Territories. 109. The Special Committee considered the item at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003. 110. In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, the pertinent provisions of resolution 57/140 of 11 December 2002 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and resolutions 57/137 and 57/138 A and B of the same date relating to specific Territories. 111. In addition to the consideration of the item, the Special Committee considered the specific Territories referred to it, taking into account the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 57/139 and 57/140, as well as previous decisions of the Special Committee relating to the question. 112. At its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, the Chairman drew attention to a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2003/L.6). 113. At the same meeting, the representative of Chile introduced an oral amendment by which the words "in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization" would be added to the end of paragraphs 1 and 2. 114. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.6, as orally amended, without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/21). 115. By adopting at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, a resolution on Tokelau (A/AC.109/2003/26) and a consolidated resolution on 11 small Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/AC.109/2003/27), the Special Committee endorsed a number of conclusions and recommendations concerning the sending of visiting missions to Territories, as reflected in its recommendations to the General Assembly in chapters X and XI (see also chap. XII, sect. E relating to Tokelau and sect. F relating to American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands). 116. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/21, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, is reproduced below: Having considered the question of sending visiting missions to Territories, Recalling the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee requesting the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the United Nations by receiving visiting missions in the Territories under their administration, Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an effective means of assessing the situation in those Territories and of ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the peoples thereof regarding their future status, Conscious that United Nations visiting missions enhance the capacity of the United Nations to assist the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories in attaining the objectives set forth in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and in other relevant resolutions of the Assembly, Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand, as an administering Power, in the work of the Special Committee, and that, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, two visiting missions were dispatched to Tokelau, in July 199411 and in August 2002, Recalling the dispatch in 1979 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory of Guam, noting the recommendation of the 1996 Pacific Regional Seminar that a visiting mission be sent to Guam, and taking note of resolution No. 464 (LS), adopted by the twenty-third Guam legislature on 19 July 1996, in which it requested the dispatch of a United Nations visiting mission to that Territory, Welcoming the continuing informal dialogue between the Special Committee and some administering Powers, 1. Stresses the need to dispatch periodic visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories in order to facilitate the full, speedy and effective implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to those Territories in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization; 2. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate or continue to cooperate with the United Nations by receiving United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under their administration in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization; 3. Requests the administering Powers to consider new approaches in the work of the Special Committee, and urges them to cooperate with the Special Committee in its efforts; 11 See A/AC.109/2009. 4. Requests its Chairman to continue consultations with the administering Powers concerned and to report thereon to the Special Committee as appropriate; 5. Also requests its Chairman to enter into consultations with the administering Power of Guam with a view to facilitating the dispatch of a United Nations visiting mission to that Territory. 117. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 118. The Special Committee considered the item at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003. 119. In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, including, in particular, resolution 57/132 of 11 December 2002 on economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories. The Special Committee also took into account the relevant provisions of resolution 55/146 on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and resolution 57/140 on the implementation of the Declaration. Additionally, the Special Committee took into consideration the relevant documents of other intergovernmental bodies concerned, to which reference is made in the last preambular paragraph of resolution A/AC.109/2003/28, adopted on 23 June 2003. 120. In 1994, the Special Committee, in keeping with its consistent goal of limiting documentation and streamlining its report to the General Assembly, recommended to the Assembly that, in preparing the general working papers on the Territories, the Secretariat should, where applicable, incorporate under separate headings those sections relating to economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and those on military activities and arrangements in those Territories. By adopting resolution 49/89 of 16 December 1994, the Assembly approved, inter alia, that recommendation. 121. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it working papers prepared by the Secretariat containing, inter alia, information on economic conditions, with particular reference to foreign economic activities, in the following Territories: American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands (A/AC.109/2003/1-2, 5, 8-9, 11-12). 122. At the 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, the Chairman drew attention to the various working papers prepared by the Secretariat and containing references to economic and other activities that affected the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2003/L.8). 123. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.8 without a vote (A/AC.109/2003/28). 124. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/28, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in part III of the present report (see chap. XII, sect. B). Chapter VI 125. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 126. The Special Committee considered the item at its 9th meeting, on 18 June 2003. 127. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/133 of 11 December 2002 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations, in paragraph 20 of which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. The Special Committee also took into account all other resolutions adopted by the Assembly on the subject, including resolution 55/146 declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the Second Decade containing the updated plan of action for the Second Decade (A/56/61, annex). 128. The Special Committee also took into account the relevant documents of other intergovernmental bodies concerned, to which reference is made in the fourth preambular paragraph of resolution A/AC.109/2003/25, adopted on 18 June 2003. 129. At the 9th meeting, on 18 June 2003, the Chairman drew attention to the report of the Secretary-General on the item (A/58/66) and to the information submitted by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system on their activities with regard to the implementation of the Declaration (see E/2003/47), as well as to the draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2003/L.9). 130. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.9 without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/25). 131. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/25, adopted by the Special Committee at its 9th meeting, on 18 June 2003, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, sect. C. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the 132. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 133. The Special Committee considered the item at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003. 134. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the resolutions of the General Assembly concerning information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter and related questions, in particular resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, by which the Assembly decided, inter alia, to dissolve the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and to transfer certain of its functions to the Special Committee, and resolution 57/131 of 11 December 2002, in paragraph 4 of which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. Furthermore, the Special Committee took into account the relevant provisions of Assembly resolutions 57/140 of 11 December 2002, on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as 55/146 of 8 December 2000, relating to the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. 135. At the 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, the Chairman drew attention to the report of the Secretary-General on the item (A/58/69), which reflected the dates of transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations by the administering Powers in regard to Territories under their respective administration, as well as to a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2003/L.5). 136. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.5 without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/20). 137. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/20, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, sect. A. Gibraltar, New Caledonia and Western Sahara 138. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of Gibraltar, New Caledonia and Western Sahara as separate items and to consider them at its plenary meetings. 139. In its consideration of the items, the Special Committee took into account General Assembly resolutions 57/135 and 57/136 of 11 December 2002 and decision 57/526 of the same date, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions. 140. The Special Committee considered the question of Gibraltar at its 4th meeting, on 4 June 2003. 141. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2003/3). 142. At the 4th meeting, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegation of Spain had requested to participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the question. The Special Committee decided to accede to the request. 143. At the same meeting, with the consent of the Special Committee, Keith Azopardi, Deputy Chief Minister of Gibraltar, made a statement on behalf of the Chief Minister of Gibraltar and replied to questions posed to him by the representatives of Papua New Guinea, the United Republic of Tanzania, and Bolivia as well as the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.4). 144. At the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at the outset of the meeting, a statement was made by Joseph Bossano, Leader of the Opposition in Gibraltar (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.4). 145. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Cuba and Papua New Guinea (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.4). 146. At the same meeting, the representative of Spain made a statement (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.4). 147. On the proposal of the Chairman, the Committee decided to continue consideration of the question at its next session, subject to any directives that the General Assembly might give in that connection at its fifty-eighth session and, in order to facilitate consideration of the question by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), to transmit the relevant documentation to the Assembly. 148. The Special Committee considered the question of New Caledonia at its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003. 149. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2003/7). 150. At the 7th meeting, on 12 June, the Chairman drew the attention of the members of the Committee to the working paper and to the text of a draft resolution contained in document A/AC.109/2003/L.10 (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 151. At the same meeting, the representative of Papua New Guinea introduced draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.10 (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 152. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.10, without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/23). 153. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/23, adopted by the Special Committee at its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, sect. D. 154. The Special Committee considered the question of Western Sahara at its 5th meeting, on 9 June 2003. 155. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2003/14). 156. At its 5th meeting, on 9 June 2003, in accordance with a decision taken at its 3rd meeting, the Special Committee granted a request for hearing to Boukhari Ahmed of the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y del Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO), who made a statement at the same meeting (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.5). 157. At the same meeting, on the proposal of the Chairman, the Special Committee decided, subject to any directives that the General Assembly might give in that connection at its fifty-eighth session and in order to facilitate consideration of the question by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), to transmit the relevant documentation to the Assembly. American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, Turks and Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands 158. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands and to consider them at its plenary meetings. 159. In its consideration of the items, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of General Assembly resolution 57/140 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. In paragraph 8 (c) of that resolution, the Assembly requested the Special Committee, inter alia, to continue to pay special attention to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to recommend to the Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination. The Special Committee also took into account relevant resolutions and decisions on the Territories adopted by the Assembly. 160. The delegations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, the administering Powers concerned, did not participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the Territories under their administration.12 However, as a result of informal consultations with the Special Committee held during its substantive session in 2003, both administering Powers reaffirmed their desire to continue an informal dialogue with the Special Committee on the questions. 161. The Special Committee considered the 11 Territories at its 4th, 7th and 10th meetings, on 4, 12 and 23 June 2003. 162. During its consideration of the items, the Special Committee had before it the working papers prepared by the secretariat on the Territories (A/AC.109/2003/1-2, 4-5, 8-9, 11-13 and 15-16). 163. At its 4th meeting, on 4 June 2003, with the consent of the Special Committee, the Honourable McKeeva Bush, Leader of Government Business of the Cayman Islands, made a statement (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.4). 12 For the explanation of their non-participation, see documents A/47/86, A/42/651, annex, and Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/41/23), chap. I, paras. 76 and 77. 164. At its 7th meeting, on 12 June 2003, with the consent of the Special Committee, Carlyle Corbin, representative of the Government of the United States Virgin Islands, made a statement (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 165. At the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at the outset of the meeting, Phylis Fleming-Banks, on behalf of the Anguilla National Trust, made a statement and replied to questions posed to her by the representatives of Papua New Guinea, Côte d'Ivoire and Bolivia as well as the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 166. At the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at the outset of the meeting, statements were made by Sophia Ann Harris, on behalf of the Cayman Islands Chamber of Commerce, Alice May Coe, on behalf of The Concerned Citizens of the Cayman Islands, and Sandra Catron, on behalf of the People for Referendum. The petitioners replied to questions posed to them by the representatives of Côte d'Ivoire, Papua New Guinea, and Bolivia as well as the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 167. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representative of Cuba and the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 168. At the same meeting also, following a statement by the Chairman, the Committee decided to continue consideration of the item at a later meeting (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.7). 169. On 20 June 2003, the Committee had before it the consolidated draft resolution on the item submitted by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.13). 170. At the 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, with the Committee's consent, a statement was made by Kevin Brian Young on behalf of the Mayor of Pitcairn (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.10). 171. At the same meeting, the Chairman made a statement wherein he introduced the consolidated draft resolution (A/AC.109/2003/L.13) relating to the questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands and made some oral revisions. 172. The following revisions were made to part A of the draft resolution: (a) In paragraph 8, the words "Territories and the" would be inserted before the words "administering Powers" and the words "in consultation with the peoples of the Territories" would be deleted; (b) In the operative paragraph 12 the words "Calls upon" would be replaced by the word "Invites". 173. The following revisions were made to part B of the draft resolution: I. American Samoa (a) In operative paragraph 2, fifth line, the words "to assist" would be replaced by the words "welcomes the assistance from the administering Power to"; XI. United States Virgin Islands (b) A new third preambular paragraph would be inserted to read as follows: "Noting the expressed interest of the territorial Government to be included in regional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme,"; (c) In paragraph 1, the words "including assistance in the conduct of a political education programme to heighten the awareness of the people of their options for self-determination" would be deleted; (d) A new paragraph 3 would be inserted after the current operative paragraph 2 to read as follows: "3. Calls for the inclusion of the Territory in regional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme, consistent with the participation of other Non-Self-Governing Territories;"; (e) All subsequent operative paragraphs would be renumbered accordingly. 174. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.13, as orally revised, without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/27). 175. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/27, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, sect. F. 176. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of Tokelau as a separate item and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 177. The Special Committee considered the item at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003. 178. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (see A/AC.109/2003/10). 179. At the 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, with the consent of the Special Committee, the Ulu o Tokelau and the Administrator of Tokelau made statements (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.10). 180. At the same meeting, the Ulu o Tokelau and the Administrator of Tokelau replied to questions posed to them by the Chairman and the representatives of Papua New Guinea, Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, Côte d'Ivoire and Bolivia (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.10). 181. At the same meeting, the representative of Papua New Guinea made a statement wherein he introduced draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.11 and made the following oral revisions: (a) The second preambular paragraph would be replaced by the following text: "Recalling the solemn declaration on the future status of Tokelau in the 1994 `Voice of Tokelau', which stated that an act of self-determination in Tokelau was under active consideration, together with the constitution of a self-governing Tokelau, and that the then preference of Tokelau was for a status of free association with New Zealand,"; (b) The seventh and eighth preambular paragraphs would be merged into one paragraph to read as follows: "Recalling the dispatch in August 2002 of a United Nations Mission to Tokelau, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand and the representatives of Tokelau,"; (c) Paragraph 5 would be replaced with the following text: "5. Acknowledges also the progress made to that goal under the Modern House of Tokelau programme and welcomes the decision taken by the General Fono in June 2003 to set a target date of 30 June 2004 for the transfer to each Taupulega (Village Council) of full responsibility for the management of all its public services;" (d) In paragraph 7, after the words "a local public service employer" the remainder of the paragraph would be deleted; (e) Paragraph 13 would be replaced with the following text: "13. Acknowledges the desire of the partners to reaffirm their commitment to each other and welcomes the agreement reached in Wellington on 19 June 2003 on the text of an agreement on the principles underpinning the relationship for which the formal approval of the Government of New Zealand is being sought;"; (f) In paragraph 19, in the second line, the word "education" would be replaced by the word "information" and, in the fifth line, the words "decides to provide all available assistance in this regard" would be replaced by the words "welcomes the invitation extended to the Chairman of the Special Committee to attend the constitutional convention to be held in Tokelau in September 2003". 182. At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.11, as orally revised, without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/26). 183. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/26, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, sect. E. 184. At its 1st meeting, on 12 February 2003, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2003/L.2), the Special Committee decided, inter alia, to take up the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) as a separate item and to consider it at its plenary meetings. 185. The Special Committee considered the item at its 8th meeting, on 16 June 2003. 186. In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account General Assembly decision 57/511 of 11 November 2002, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions. 187. During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2003/17). 188. At the 8th meeting, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay had requested to participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the item. The Special Committee decided to accede to the requests. 189. At the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at its 6th meeting, statements were made by the Honourable Michael Summers and the Honourable John Birmingham of the Legislative Council of the Falkland Islands, and James Douglas Lewis and Alejandro Betts (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.8). 190. At the same meeting, the representative of Chile introduced, also on behalf of Bolivia, Cuba and Venezuela, a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2003/L.12). 191. At the same meeting, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship of Argentina made a statement (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.8). 192. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Peru (on behalf of the Rio Group), Paraguay (on behalf of the MERCOSUR countries, plus Bolivia and Chile), Brazil, China, Venezuela, the Dominican Republic (on behalf of the host country of the Ibero-American Summit), Uruguay, Indonesia, Cuba, Côte d'Ivoire, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the Russian Federation, Bolivia, Congo, Ethiopia and the United Republic of Tanzania (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.8). 193. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.12 without a vote (see A/AC.109/2003/24). 194. The representatives of Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada and Papua New Guinea made statements in explanation of their position (see A/AC.109/2003/SR.8). 195. The text of resolution A/AC.109/2003/24, adopted by the Special Committee at its 8th meeting, on 16 June 2003, is reproduced below: Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Aware that the maintenance of colonial situations is incompatible with the United Nations ideal of universal peace, Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 3160 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 31/49 of 1 December 1976, 37/9 of 4 November 1982, 38/12 of 16 November 1983, 39/6 of 1 November 1984, 40/21 of 27 November 1985, 41/40 of 25 November 1986, 42/19 of 17 November 1987 and 43/25 of 17 November 1988, Special Committee resolutions A/AC.109/756 of 1 September 1983, A/AC.109/793 of 21 August 1984, A/AC.109/842 of 9 August 1985, A/AC.109/885 of 14 August 1986, A/AC.109/930 of 14 August 1987, A/AC.109/972 of 11 August 1988, A/AC.109/1008 of 15 August 1989, A/AC.109/1050 of 14 August 1990, A/AC.109/1087 of 14 August 1991, A/AC.109/1132 of 29 July 1992, A/AC.109/1169 of 14 July 1993, A/AC.109/2003 of 12 July 1994, A/AC.109/2033 of 13 July 1995, A/AC.109/2062 of 22 July 1996, A/AC.109/2096 of 16 June 1997, A/AC.109/2122 of 6 July 1998, A/AC.109/1999/23 of 1 July 1999, A/AC.109/2000/23 of 11 July 2000, A/AC.109/2001/25 of 29 June 2001 and A/AC.109/2002/25 of 19 June 2002 and Security Council resolutions 502 (1982) of 3 April 1982 and 505 (1982) of 26 May 1982, Distressed that, notwithstanding the time that has elapsed since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX), this prolonged dispute has not yet been settled, Aware of the interest of the international community in the resumption by the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of their negotiations in order to find as soon as possible a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the sovereignty dispute relating to the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Expressing its preoccupation over the fact that the good level of relations between Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has not yet led to negotiations on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Considering that this situation should facilitate the resumption of the negotiations in order to find a peaceful solution to the dispute over sovereignty, Reaffirming the principles of the Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations and the peaceful settlement of international disputes, Calling attention to the importance of the Secretary-General continuing his efforts to give full effect to the mission entrusted to him by the General Assembly in the resolutions on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Reaffirming the need for the parties to take due account of the interests of the population of the islands in accordance with the provisions of the General Assembly resolutions on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), 1. Reiterates that the way to put an end to the special and particular colonial situation in the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) is the peaceful and negotiated settlement of the dispute over sovereignty between the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; 2. Takes note of the views expressed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship of the Argentine Republic on the occasion of the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly; 3. Regrets that, in spite of the widespread international support for a negotiation between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom that includes all aspects on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), the implementation of the General Assembly resolutions on this question has not yet started; 4. Requests the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom to consolidate the current process of dialogue and cooperation through the resumption of negotiations in order to find as soon as possible a peaceful solution to the sovereignty dispute relating to the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolutions 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49, 37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21, 41/40, 42/19 and 43/25; 5. Reiterates its firm support for the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General in order to assist the parties in complying with the request made by the General Assembly in its resolutions on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas); 6. Decides to keep under review the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) subject to the directives that the General Assembly has issued and may issue in that regard. Recommendations Recommendation of the Special Committee 196. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2003/20), adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 3 June 2003, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution I The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, Recalling also its resolution 57/131 of 11 December 2002, in which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the Territories concerned, Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,13 13 A/58/69. 1. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory; 2. Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories; 3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned; 4. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures. 197. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2003/28) adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution II Having considered the item entitled "Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories", Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item,14 14 A/58/23 (Part II), chap. V. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23. Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as all other relevant Assembly resolutions including, in particular, resolutions 46/181 of 19 December 1991 and 55/146 of 8 December 2000, Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their administration and to protect the human and natural resources of those Territories against abuses, Reaffirming also that any economic or other activity that has a negative impact on the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and on the exercise of their right to self-determination in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter, Reaffirming further that the natural resources are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations, Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location, size and economic conditions of each Territory, and bearing in mind the need to promote the economic stability, diversification and strengthening of the economy of each Territory, Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the small Territories to natural disasters and environmental degradation, Conscious also that foreign economic investment, when undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes, could make a valid contribution to the socio-economic development of the Territories and also to the exercise of their right to self-determination, Concerned about any activities aimed at exploiting the natural and human resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community, 1. Reaffirms the right of peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as their right to the enjoyment of their natural resources and their right to dispose of those resources in their best interest; 2. Affirms the value of foreign economic investment undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes in order to make a valid contribution to the socio-economic development of the Territories; 3. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and reaffirms the legitimate rights of their peoples over their natural resources; 4. Reaffirms its concern about any activities aimed at the exploitation of the natural resources that are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations, in the Caribbean, the Pacific and other regions, and of their human resources, to the detriment of their interests, and in such a way as to deprive them of their right to dispose of those resources; 5. Affirms the need to avoid any economic and other activities that adversely affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories; 6. Calls once again upon all Governments that have not yet done so to take, in accordance with the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, legislative, administrative or other measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate enterprises in the Non-Self-Governing Territories that are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises; 7. Reiterates that the damaging exploitation and plundering of the marine and other natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, are a threat to the integrity and prosperity of those Territories; 8. Invites all Governments and organizations of the United Nations system to take all possible measures to ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories over their natural resources is fully respected and safeguarded in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization; 9. Urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the administering Powers to take all necessary steps to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization; 10. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to ensure that no discriminatory working conditions prevail in the Territories under their administration and to promote in each Territory a fair system of wages applicable to all the inhabitants without any discrimination; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through all means at his disposal, to inform world public opinion of any activity that affects the exercise of the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV); 12. Appeals to the mass media, trade unions and non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, to continue their efforts to promote the economic well-being of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories; 13. Decides to follow the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensure that all economic activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interest of their peoples, including the indigenous populations, and at promoting the economic and financial viability of those Territories; 14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 198. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2003/26) adopted by the Special Committee at its 9th meeting, on 18 June 2003, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution III Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations", Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General on the item,15 Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item,16 Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and the resolutions of the Special Committee, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions, including in particular Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/30 of 25 July 2002, Conscious of the need to facilitate the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in resolution 1514 (XV), 15 A/58/66. 16 A/58/23 (Part III), chap. XII. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23. Noting that the large majority of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories are small island Territories, Welcoming the assistance extended to Non-Self-Governing Territories by certain specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, Also welcoming the current participation in the capacity of observers of those Non-Self-Governing Territories that are associate members of regional commissions in the world conferences in the economic and social sphere, subject to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions, including resolutions and decisions of the Assembly and the Special Committee on specific Territories, Noting that only some specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system have been involved in providing assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories, Stressing that, because the development options of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories are limited, there are special challenges to planning for and implementing sustainable development and that those Territories will be constrained in meeting the challenges without the continuing cooperation and assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, Stressing also the importance of securing the necessary resources for funding expanded programmes of assistance for the peoples concerned and the need to enlist the support of all major funding institutions within the United Nations system in that regard, Reaffirming the mandates of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to take all appropriate measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions, Expressing its appreciation to the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean Community and other regional organizations for the continued cooperation and assistance they have extended to the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in this regard, Expressing its conviction that closer contacts and consultations between and among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and regional organizations help to facilitate the effective formulation of programmes of assistance to the peoples concerned, Mindful of the imperative need to keep under continuous review the activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various United Nations decisions relating to decolonization, Bearing in mind the extremely fragile economies of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories and their vulnerability to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, cyclones and sea-level rise, and recalling the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, Recalling General Assembly resolution 57/133 of 11 December 2002 on the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;15 2. Recommends that all States intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations; 3. Reaffirms that the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system should continue to be guided by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations in their efforts to contribute to the implementation of the Declaration and all other relevant General Assembly resolutions; 4. Reaffirms also that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the aspirations of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise their right to self-determination entails, as a corollary, the extension of all appropriate assistance to those peoples; 5. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system that have continued to cooperate with the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and requests all the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to implement the relevant provisions of those resolutions; 6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international and regional organizations to examine and review conditions in each Territory so as to take appropriate measures to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of the Territories; 7. Urges those specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system that have not yet provided assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories to do so as soon as possible; 8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system and regional organizations to strengthen existing measures of support and formulate appropriate programmes of assistance to the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, within the framework of their respective mandates, in order to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of those Territories; 9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system concerned to provide information on: (a) Environmental problems facing the Non-Self-Governing Territories; (b) The impact of natural disasters, such as hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, and other environmental problems, such as beach and coastal erosion and droughts, on those Territories; (c) Ways and means to assist the Territories to fight drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal and criminal activities; (d) The illegal exploitation of the marine resources of the Territories and the need to utilize those resources for the benefit of the peoples of the Territories; 10. Recommends that the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system formulate, with the active cooperation of the regional organizations concerned, concrete proposals for the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and submit the proposals to their governing and legislative organs; 11. Also recommends that the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system continue to review at the regular meetings of their governing bodies the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations; 12. Welcomes the continuing initiative exercised by the United Nations Development Programme in maintaining close liaison among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and in providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories; 13. Encourages Non-Self-Governing Territories to take steps to establish and/or strengthen disaster preparedness and management institutions and policies; 14. Requests the administering Powers concerned to facilitate, when appropriate, the participation of appointed and elected representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the relevant meetings and conferences of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions, including resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples on specific Territories, so that the Territories may benefit from the related activities of those agencies and organizations; 15. Recommends that all Governments intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system of which they are members to accord priority to the question of providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories; 16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and organizations, a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present resolution, since the circulation of his previous report; 17. Commends the Economic and Social Council for its debate and resolution on this question, and requests it to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; 18. Requests the specialized agencies to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the implementation of the present resolution; 19. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the governing bodies of the appropriate specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations so that those bodies may take the necessary measures to implement the resolution, and also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution; 20. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 199. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2003/23) adopted by the Special Committee at its 7th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution IV Having considered the question of New Caledonia, Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to New Caledonia, Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960, Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the population, to promote political, economic and social development in the Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with respect to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful progress to self-determination, Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved in New Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New Caledonia, Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region, 1. Welcomes the significant developments that have taken place in New Caledonia as exemplified by the signing of the Nouméa Accord of 5 May 1998 between the representatives of New Caledonia and the Government of France; 2. Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New Caledonia, to maintain, in the framework of the Nouméa Accord, their dialogue in a spirit of harmony; 3. Notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord aimed at taking more broadly into account the Kanak identity in the political and social organization of New Caledonia, and also those provisions of the Accord relating to control of immigration and protection of local employment; 4. Also notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect that New Caledonia may become a member or associate member of certain international organizations, such as international organizations in the Pacific region, the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International Labour Organization, according to their regulations; 5. Further notes the agreement between the signatories of the Nouméa Accord that the progress made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of the United Nations; 6. Welcomes the fact that the administering Power invited to New Caledonia, at the time the new institutions were established, a mission of information which comprised representatives of countries of the Pacific region; 7. Calls upon the administering Power to transmit information regarding the political, economic and social situation of New Caledonia to the Secretary-General; 8. Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all New Caledonians according to the letter and the spirit of the Nouméa Accord, which is based on the principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control their destiny; 9. Welcomes measures that have been taken to strengthen and diversify the New Caledonian economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures in accordance with the spirit of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords; 10. Also welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the Matignon and Nouméa Accords to greater progress in housing, employment, training, education and health care in New Caledonia; 11. Acknowledges the contribution of the Melanesian Cultural Centre to the protection of the indigenous culture of New Caledonia; 12. Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment of New Caledonia, notably the "Zonéco" operation designed to map and evaluate marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia; 13. Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples of the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French and territorial authorities to facilitate the further development of those links, including the development of closer relations with the countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum; 14. Welcomes, in this regard, the accession by New Caledonia to the status of observer in the Pacific Islands Forum, continuing high-level visits to New Caledonia by delegations from countries of the Pacific region and high-level visits by delegations from New Caledonia to countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum; 15. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New Caledonia as a result of the signing of the Nouméa Accord; 16. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory of New Caledonia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 200. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2003/26) adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution V Having considered the question of Tokelau, Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Tokelau, Recalling the solemn declaration on the future status of Tokelau, contained in the 1994 "Voice of Tokelau", which stated that an act of self-determination in Tokelau was under active consideration, together with the constitution of a self-governing Tokelau, and that the then preference of Tokelau was for a status of free association with New Zealand, Recalling also its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to Non-Self-Governing Territories, in particular General Assembly resolution 57/137 of 11 December 2002, Recalling further the emphasis placed in the solemn declaration on the terms of Tokelau's special relationship with New Zealand, including the expectation that the form of help that Tokelau could continue to expect from New Zealand in promoting the well-being of its people, besides its external interests, would be clearly established within the framework of that relationship, Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand as the administering Power with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United Nations visiting missions to the Territory, Noting also with appreciation the collaborative contribution to the development of Tokelau by New Zealand and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme and the World Health Organization, Recalling the dispatch in August 2002 of a United Nations Mission to Tokelau, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand and the representatives of Tokelau, Recalling the report of the United Nations Mission to Tokelau, 2002, Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of most remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, Noting also that, as a case study pointing to successful cooperation for decolonization, Tokelau has wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in decolonization, 1. Notes that Tokelau remains firmly committed to the development of self-government and to an act of self-determination that would result in Tokelau assuming a status in accordance with the options on future status for Non-Self-Governing Territories contained in principle VI of the annex to General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960; 2. Also notes the desire of Tokelau to move at its own pace towards an act of self-determination; 3. Further notes the inauguration in 1999 of a national Government based on village elections by universal adult suffrage; 4. Acknowledges Tokelau's goal to return authority to its traditional leadership, and its wish to provide that leadership with the necessary support to carry out its functions in the contemporary world; 5. Acknowledges also the progress made to that goal under the Modern House of Tokelau programme and welcomes the decision taken by the General Fono in June 2003 to set a target date of 30 June 2004 for the transfer to each Taupulega (Village Council) of full responsibility for the management of all its public services; 6. Further acknowledges Tokelau's initiative in devising a strategic economic development plan for the period 2002-2004 to advance its capacity for self-government; 7. Notes that, consistent with the expressed desires of past traditional leaders and the principles of the Modern House of Tokelau, Tokelau has established a local public service employer; 8. Welcomes the continuing dialogue with the administering Power and the Territory with a view to the development of a programme of work for Tokelau in accordance with General Assembly resolution 55/147 of 8 December 2000; 9. Acknowledges the continuing support that New Zealand has committed to the Modern House of Tokelau project in 2002-2003, and the cooperation of the United Nations Development Programme in aligning its programmes under the project; 10. Notes that the Constitution of a self-governing Tokelau will continue to develop as a part and as a consequence of the building of the Modern House of Tokelau, and that both have national and international importance for Tokelau; 11. Acknowledges Tokelau's need for continued reassurance, given the cultural adjustments that are taking place with the strengthening of its capacity for self-government and, since local resources cannot adequately cover the material side of self-determination, the ongoing responsibility of Tokelau's external partners to assist Tokelau in balancing its desire to be self-reliant to the greatest extent possible with its need for external assistance; 12. Notes the special challenge inherent in the situation of Tokelau, among the smallest of the small Territories, and that a Territory's exercise of its inalienable right to self-determination may be brought closer, as in the case of Tokelau, by the meeting of that challenge in innovative ways; 13. Acknowledges the desire of the partners to reaffirm their commitment to each other and welcomes the agreement reached in Wellington on 19 June 2003 on the text of an agreement on the principles underpinning the relationship for which the formal approval of the Government of New Zealand is being sought; 14. Welcomes the assurance of the Government of New Zealand that it will meet its obligations to the United Nations with respect to Tokelau and abide by the freely expressed wishes of the people of Tokelau with regard to their future status; 15. Also welcomes the cooperative attitude of the other States and Territories in the region towards Tokelau, its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international affairs; 16. Further welcomes Tokelau's associate membership in the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and its recent accession to associate membership in the Forum Fisheries Agency; 17. Notes the approval by the General Assembly of the report of the United Nations Mission to Tokelau, 2002; 18. Notes also that a study to review the options for Tokelau's future self-determination is recommended in the report, and further notes the willingness expressed by the United Nations Development Programme to assist in this regard upon request from Tokelau; 19. Calls upon New Zealand and Tokelau to consider developing an information programme to inform the population of Tokelau about the nature of self-determination, including the three options of integration, free association and independence, so that it may be better prepared to face a future decision on this matter, and welcomes the invitation extended to the Chairman of the Special Committee to attend the constitutional convention to be held in Tokelau in September 2003; 20. Calls upon the administering Power and United Nations agencies to continue to provide assistance to Tokelau as it further develops its economy and governance structures in the context of its ongoing constitutional evolution; 21. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Tokelau and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. Recommendations of the Special Committee 201. The text of the consolidated resolution (A/AC.109/2003/27) adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 23 June 2003, appears below in the form of recommendations of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution VI A General Having considered the questions of the Non-Self-Governing Territories of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, hereinafter referred to as "the Territories", Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 15 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to those Territories, including, in particular, the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on the individual Territories covered by the present resolution, Recognizing that in the decolonization process there is no alternative to the principle of self-determination as enunciated by the General Assembly in its resolutions 1514 (XV), 1541 (XV) and other resolutions, Recognizing also that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined principles contained in resolutions 1514 (XV), 1541 (XV) and other resolutions of the General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960, containing the principles that should guide Member States in determining whether or not an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, Expressing its concern that more than forty years after the adoption of the Declaration there still remains a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories, Conscious of the importance of continuing effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2010 and the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the sentiments of the peoples of the Territories require flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options of self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources, Welcoming the stated position of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland that it continues to take seriously its obligations under the Charter to develop self-government in the dependent Territories and, in cooperation with the locally elected Governments, to ensure that their constitutional frameworks continue to meet the wishes of the people, and the emphasis that it is ultimately for the peoples of the Territories to decide their future status, Welcoming also the stated position of the Government of the United States of America that it supports fully the principles of decolonization and takes seriously its obligations under the Charter to promote to the utmost the well-being of the inhabitants of the Territories under United States administration, Noting the constitutional developments in some Non-Self-Governing Territories about which the Special Committee has received information, Aware of the usefulness both to the Territories and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and appointed representatives of the Territories in the work of the Special Committee, Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories should continue to guide the development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people, Convinced also that any negotiations to determine the status of a Territory must take place with the active involvement and participation of the people of that Territory, and that the views of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained under the supervision of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories, that some Territories have not received a United Nations visiting mission for a long time and that no visiting missions have been sent to some of the Territories, and considering the possibility of sending further visiting missions to the Territories at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Powers, Mindful also that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the peoples of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the representatives of the Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories, Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to embark actively on a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining an understanding of the options of self-determination, Mindful, in this connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at Headquarters and other venues, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate, and that the regional nature of the seminars, which alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in their success, while recognizing the need for reviewing the role of those seminars in the context of a United Nations programme for ascertaining the political status of the Territories, Mindful also that, by holding a Caribbean regional seminar at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003, it was able to hear the views of the representatives of the Territories and Member States as well as organizations and experts in the region, in order to review the political, economic and social conditions in the Territories, Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of each Territory, and bearing in mind the necessity of promoting economic stability and diversifying and strengthening further the economies of the respective Territories as a matter of priority, Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the Territories to natural disasters and environmental degradation and, in this connection, bearing in mind the programmes of action of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the International Conference on Population and Development, the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), the World Summit on Sustainable Development and other relevant world conferences, Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, and regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific, Noting that some territorial Governments have made efforts towards achieving the highest standards of financial supervision, Concerned that in 2002 economic growth slowed in many Non-Self-Governing Territories, in particular in the tourism and construction sectors, Recalling the ongoing efforts of the Special Committee in carrying out a critical review of its work with the aim of making appropriate and constructive recommendations and decisions to attain its objectives in accordance with its mandate, 1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of the Territories to self-determination, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples; 2. Reaffirms also that, in the process of decolonization, there is no alternative to the principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right; 3. Reaffirms further that it is ultimately for the peoples of the Territories themselves to determine freely their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Powers, in cooperation with the territorial Governments, to facilitate programmes of political education in the Territories in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV); 4. Requests the administering Powers to transmit to the Secretary-General information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter and other updated information and reports, including reports on the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories regarding their future political status as expressed in fair and free referendums and other forms of popular consultation, as well as the results of any informed and democratic processes consistent with practice under the Charter that indicate the clear and freely expressed wish of the people to change the existing status of the Territories; 5. Stresses the importance for it to be apprised of the views and wishes of the peoples of the Territories and to enhance its understanding of their conditions; 6. Reaffirms that United Nations visiting missions to the Territories at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Powers are an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories, and requests the administering Powers and the elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories to facilitate the work of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in this regard; 7. Reaffirms also the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the economic and social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territories, and recommends that priority continue to be given, in consultation with the territorial Governments concerned, to the strengthening and diversification of their respective economies; 8. Requests the Territories and the administering Powers to take all necessary measures to protect and conserve the environment of the Territories under their administration against any environmental degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned to continue to monitor environmental conditions in those Territories; 9. Calls upon the administering Powers, in cooperation with the respective territorial Governments, to continue to take all necessary measures to counter problems related to drug trafficking, money-laundering and other offences; 10. Notes the cooperative efforts of some Non-Self-Governing Territories to address the problem of illegal drugs, with a focus on demand reduction, education, treatment and legal issues; 11. Notes with concern that the plan of action for the first International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism was not fully implemented by 2000, and stresses the importance of implementing the plan of action for the Second Decade, in particular by expediting the application of the work programme for the decolonization of each Non-Self-Governing Territory, on a case-by-case basis; 12. Invites the administering Powers to participate fully in the work of the Special Committee and to enter into constructive dialogue with the Committee before the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for the period 2001-2010; 13. Urges Member States to contribute to the efforts of the United Nations to usher in a world free of colonialism within the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and calls upon them to continue to give their full support to the Special Committee in its endeavours towards that noble goal; 14. Urges also the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to initiate or to continue to take all necessary measures to accelerate progress in the economic and social life of the Territories, and calls for closer cooperation between the Special Committee and the Economic and Social Council in furtherance of the provision of assistance to the Territories; 15. Notes that some Non-Self-Governing Territories have expressed concern at the procedure followed by one administering Power, contrary to the wishes of the Territories themselves, namely, of amending or enacting legislation for the Territories through Orders in Council, in order to apply to the Territories the international treaty obligations of the administering Power; 16. Takes note of statements made by the elected representatives of the Territories concerned and other appropriate authorities emphasizing their willingness to cooperate with all international efforts aimed at preventing abuse of the international financial system and to promote regulatory environments with highly selective licensing procedures, robust supervisory practices and well-established anti-money-laundering regimes; 17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on the implementation of decolonization resolutions since the declaration of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism; 18. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the small Territories and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session with recommendations on appropriate ways to assist the peoples of the Territories in exercising their right to self-determination. B Individual Territories Referring to resolution A above, Taking note of the report by the administering Power that most American Samoan leaders express satisfaction with the Territory's present relationship with the United States of America, as reflected in statements made by those leaders in the regional seminars held in Havana, Cuba and Nadi, Fiji, in 2001 and 2002, respectively, Noting that the Government of the Territory continues to have financial, budgetary and internal control problems, but that it has recently taken steps to increase revenues and decrease government expenditures, Noting also that the Territory, similar to isolated communities with limited funds, continues to experience a lack of adequate medical and other infrastructural facilities, Aware of the efforts of the Government of the Territory to control and reduce expenditures, while continuing its programme of expanding and diversifying the local economy, Concerned that massive flooding and mudslides in May 2003 resulted in loss of life and damage initially estimated by the territorial Government at more than $50 million, and taking note of the official request by the Territory for recovery assistance from the administering Power, 1. Notes that the Department of the Interior of the United States of America provides that the Secretary of the Interior has administrative jurisdiction over American Samoa; 2. Calls upon the administering Power to continue to assist the territorial Government in the economic and social development of the Territory, including measures to rebuild financial management capabilities and strengthen other governmental functions of the Government of the Territory, and welcomes the assistance from the administering Power to the Territory in its recovery efforts following the recent floods; 3. Welcomes the invitation extended to the Special Committee by the Governor of American Samoa to send a visiting mission to the Territory and calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a mission; II. Anguilla Noting the continuation of the conduct of the constitutional and electoral reform review process in the Territory, Welcoming the holding of the 2003 Caribbean regional seminar in Anguilla, the first time that the seminar has been held in a Non-Self-Governing Territory, Noting the desire of the territorial Government and the people of Anguilla for a visiting mission by the Special Committee, Aware of the efforts of the Government of Anguilla to continue to develop the Territory as a viable offshore centre and well-regulated financial centre for investors, by enacting modern company and trust laws, as well as partnership and insurance legislation, and computerizing the company registry system, Noting the need for continued cooperation between the administering Power and the territorial Government in tackling the problems of drug trafficking and money-laundering, 1. Welcomes the emphasis placed in the initial stages of the constitutional and electoral reform review process on participation, information and education and the support provided by the United Nations Development Programme and the United Kingdom Government fund for good government; 2. Welcomes the cooperation of the territorial Government of Anguilla and the United Kingdom in holding the 2003 Caribbean regional seminar in Anguilla and notes that the staging of the seminar in a Non-Self-Governing Territory for the first time as well as a town hall meeting between the people of Anguilla and the Special Committee during the seminar contributed to its success; 3. Calls upon the administering Power and all States, organizations and United Nations agencies to continue to assist the Territory in social and economic development; III. Bermuda Noting the results of the independence referendum held on 16 August 1995, and conscious of the different viewpoints of the political parties of the Territory on the future status of the Territory, 1. Calls upon the administering Power to continue to work with the Territory for its socio-economic development; 2. Welcomes the agreement reached in June 2002 between the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Territory formally transferring the former military base lands to the territorial Government, and the provision of financial resources to address some of the environmental problems; 3. Welcomes the convening in the Territory in March 2003 of an international conference on conservation in overseas territories and other small island States, which included governmental and non-governmental organizations to address issues of common concern; IV. British Virgin Islands Taking note of the steps currently being taken to review the Constitution with the aim of modernizing it, Noting that the Territory continues to emerge as one of the world's leading offshore financial centres, and that the financial services sector is becoming the cornerstone of the Government's recurrent budget, Noting also the need for continued cooperation between the administering Power and the territorial Government in countering drug trafficking and money-laundering, Noting further that the Territory commemorated its annual British Virgin Islands-United States Virgin Islands Friendship Day on 31 May 2003 in Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas, 1. Requests the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and all financial institutions to continue to provide the Territory with assistance for socio-economic development and the development of human resources, bearing in mind the vulnerability of the Territory to external factors; V. Cayman Islands Noting the formation for the first time of a political party in the Territory and the subsequent emergence of a party system in the Territory, Taking note of the constitutional review process being undertaken by the territorial Government in consultation with the administering Power, Noting the actions taken by the territorial Government to promote increased participation by the local population in the decision-making process in the economic and social sectors in the Cayman Islands, Aware that the Territory has one of the highest per capita incomes in the region, a stable political climate and has emerged as one of the world's leading offshore financial centres with virtually no unemployment, Noting with concern the vulnerability of the Territory to drug trafficking, money-laundering and related activities, and noting the measures taken by the authorities to deal with those problems, Noting further the approval by the Cayman Islands Legislative Assembly of the Territory's Vision 2008 Development Plan, which aims to promote development that is consistent with the aims and values of Caymanian society, 1. Welcomes the completion of the report of the Constitutional Review Commission, which conducted an extensive review of the current Constitution, and the recommended changes, following public discussions with community groups and individuals, pursuant to the recommendations of the administering Power as stated in its White Paper entitled "Partnership for Progress and Prosperity: Britain and the Overseas Territories"; 2. Requests the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to continue to provide the territorial Government with all required expertise to enable it to achieve its socio-economic aims; 3. Requests the administering Power, in consultation with the territorial Government, to continue to facilitate the expansion of the current programme of securing employment for the local population, in particular at the decision-making level; VI. Guam Recalling that, in a referendum held in 1987, the registered and eligible voters of Guam endorsed a draft Guam Commonwealth Act that would establish a new framework for relations between the Territory and the administering Power, providing for a greater measure of internal self-government for Guam and recognition of the right of the Chamorro people of Guam to self-determination for the Territory, Recalling further the requests by the elected representatives and non-governmental organizations of the Territory that Guam not be removed from the list of the Non-Self-Governing Territories with which the Special Committee is concerned, pending the self-determination of the Chamorro people and taking into account their legitimate rights and interests, Aware that negotiations between the administering Power and the territorial Government on the draft Guam Commonwealth Act are no longer continuing and that Guam has established the process for a self-determination vote by the eligible Chamorro voters, Cognizant that the administering Power continues to implement its programme of transferring surplus federal land to the Government of Guam, Noting that the people of the Territory have called for reform in the programme of the administering Power with respect to the thorough, unconditional and expeditious transfer of land property to the people of Guam, Conscious that immigration into Guam has resulted in the indigenous Chamorros becoming a minority in their homeland, Aware of the potential for diversifying and developing the economy of Guam through commercial fishing and agriculture and other viable activities, Recalling the dispatch in 1979 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory, and noting the recommendation of the 1996 Pacific regional seminar for sending a visiting mission to Guam, Taking note with interest of the statements made and the information on the political and economic situation in Guam provided by the representatives of the Territory to the meeting of the Fourth Committee in October 2002, Concerned that the 2001 census figures in the Territory show that 23 per cent of the population lives in poverty, 1. Calls upon the administering Power to take into consideration the expressed will of the Chamorro people as supported by Guam voters in the plebiscite of 1987 and as provided for in Guam law, encourages the administering Power and the territorial Government of Guam to enter into negotiations on the matter, and requests the administering Power to inform the Secretary-General of progress to that end; 2. Requests the administering Power to continue to assist the elected territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and social goals; 3. Also requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to transfer land to the original landowners of the Territory; 4. Further requests the administering Power to continue to recognize and respect the political rights and the cultural and ethnic identity of the Chamorro people of Guam, and to take all necessary measures to respond to the concerns of the territorial Government with regard to the question of immigration; 5. Requests the administering Power to cooperate in establishing programmes specifically intended to promote the sustainable development of economic activities and enterprises, noting the special role of the Chamorro people in the development of Guam; 6. Also requests the administering Power to continue to support appropriate measures by the territorial Government aimed at promoting growth in commercial fishing and agricultural and other viable activities; 7. Calls upon the administering Power to facilitate a visiting mission to Guam as requested by the territorial Government; VII. Montserrat Taking note with interest of the statements made and the information on the political and economic situation in Montserrat provided by the Chief Minister of the Territory to the Caribbean regional seminar, held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003, Noting with concern the dire consequences of a volcanic eruption, which led to the evacuation of three quarters of the Territory's population to safe areas of the island and to areas outside the Territory, in particular Antigua and Barbuda and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and which continues to have enduring consequences upon the economy of the island, Welcoming the continued assistance provided to the Territory by States members of the Caribbean Community, in particular Antigua and Barbuda, which has offered safe refuge and access to educational and health facilities, as well as employment for thousands who have left the Territory, Noting the continuing efforts of the administering Power to deal with the consequences of the volcanic eruption, Noting with concern that a number of the inhabitants of the Territory continue to live in shelters because of volcanic activity, Noting that the Chief Minister of Montserrat assumed the chairmanship of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States in May 2003, 1. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system as well as regional and other organizations to continue to provide assistance to the Territory in alleviating the consequences of the volcanic eruption; 2. Takes note of the completion of the report of the Constitutional Review Commission prepared after extensive consultations with Montserratians both in the Territory and abroad and the consensus that, while Montserratians reserve the right to future self-determination, independence is not a priority given the present socio-economic status of the Territory; VIII. Pitcairn Taking into account the unique nature of Pitcairn in terms of population and area, Welcoming the participation of a representative of the Mayor of Pitcairn in the Caribbean regional seminar at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003 and taking note of the concerns expressed by him with regard to the ongoing court case in the Territory, 1. Requests the administering Power to continue its assistance for the improvement of the economic, social, educational and other conditions of the population of the Territory and to continue its discussions with the representatives of Pitcairn on how best to support their economic security; IX. Saint Helena Taking into account the unique character of Saint Helena, its population and its natural resources, Also aware of the efforts of the administering Power and the territorial authorities to improve the socio-economic conditions of the population of Saint Helena, in particular in the sphere of food production, continuing high unemployment and limited transport and communications, Noting with concern the problem of unemployment on the island and the joint action of the administering Power and the territorial Government to deal with it, 1. Welcomes the acceptance by the administering Power of the majority of the proposals for constitutional change made by the territorial Government; 2. Requests the administering Power and relevant international organizations to continue to support the efforts of the territorial Government to address the socio-economic development challenges, including the high unemployment and the limited transport and communications problems; X. Turks and Caicos Islands Noting that the People's Democratic Movement was elected to a third consecutive term in the Legislative Council elections held in March 2003, Also noting the efforts by the Government of the Territory to strengthen financial management in the public sector, including efforts to increase revenue, Noting with concern the vulnerability of the Territory to drug trafficking and related activities, as well as its problems caused by illegal immigration and the need for continued cooperation between the administering Power and the territorial Government in countering drug trafficking and money-laundering, Noting that the Chief Minister was elected as the chairman of the newly established Overseas Countries and Territories Association of Europe, 1. Welcomes the establishment of the Constitutional Review Commission, which embarked on a public education programme on the Constitution, ascertained the views of the population and made recommendations to the administering Power on changes which may be envisaged, pursuant to the recommendations as stated in its White Paper entitled "Partnership for Progress and Prosperity: Britain and the Overseas Territories"; 2. Calls upon the administering Power and the relevant regional and international organizations to continue to provide assistance for the improvement of the economic, social, educational and other conditions of the population of the Territory; 3. Also calls upon the administering Power and the territorial Government to continue to cooperate to counter problems related to money-laundering, smuggling of funds and other related crimes, as well as drug trafficking; Taking note with interest of the statements made and the information provided by the representative of the Governor of the Territory to the Caribbean regional seminar, held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003, Noting the continuing interest of the territorial Government in seeking associate membership in the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and observer status in the Caribbean Community and the current request by the Territory to the administering Power for the delegation of authority to proceed, Noting the expressed interest of the territorial Government to be included in regional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme, Noting also the necessity of further diversifying the economy of the Territory, Noting further the efforts of the Government of the Territory to promote the Territory as an offshore financial services centre, Recalling that the Territory has not received a United Nations visiting mission since 1977 and bearing in mind the formal request of the Territory for such a mission in 1993 to assist the Territory in its political education process and to observe the Territory's only referendum on political status options in its history, Further noting that the Territory commemorated its annual British Virgin Islands-United States Virgin Islands Friendship Day on 31 May 2003 in Charlotte Amalie, Saint Thomas, 1. Requests the administering Power to continue to assist the territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and social goals; 2. Once again requests the administering Power to facilitate the participation of the Territory, as appropriate, in various organizations, in particular the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community and the Association of Caribbean States; 3. Calls for the inclusion of the Territory in regional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme, consistent with the participation of other Non-Self-Governing Territories; 4. Notes the economic difficulties being experienced by the territorial Government and the fiscal austerity measures being implemented, and others proposed, to relieve the Territory's cash flow shortage and calls upon the administering Power to continue to provide every assistance required by the Territory to further alleviate the difficult economic situation, including, inter alia, the provision of debt relief and loans; 5. Notes with interest the entering into force in 2001 of the joint memorandum of cooperation on the exchange of artefacts between the Territory and Denmark, the Territory's former administering Power, as a companion agreement to the 1999 memorandum for the repatriation of archival material from the Danish colonial period, consistent with the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, and once again requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, under its records and archives management programme, to assist the Territory in carrying out its archival and artefacts initiative; 6. Notes the position of the territorial Government, including its articulation in Resolution 1609 of 9 April 2001 of the 24th Legislature of the United States Virgin Islands, opposing the assumption by the administering Power of submerged land in territorial waters, having regard to relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on the ownership and control of natural resources, including marine resources, by the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and its calls for the return of those marine resources to the people of the Territory; 7. Notes with concern that the 2000 census figures for the Territory indicate that 32.5 per cent of the population is living in poverty. 202. The text of the resolution (A/AC.109/2003/19) adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 2 June 2003, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly. Draft resolution VII Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 57/139 of 11 December 2002, Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options of self-determination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to achieving the goals of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims of the Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to achieve self-determination, Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the Secretary-General in accordance with the terms of Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization, 1. Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization; 2. Considers it important to continue its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options of self-determination available for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories; 3. Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Public Information to take into account the suggestions of the Special Committee to continue their efforts to take measures through all the media available, including publications, radio and television, as well as the Internet, to give publicity to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia: (a) To continue to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories; (b) To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred to above; (c) To maintain a working relationship with the appropriate regional and intergovernmental organizations, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, by holding periodic consultations and exchanging information; (d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization; (e) To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present resolution; 4. Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to continue to extend their cooperation in the dissemination of information referred to in paragraph 2 above; 5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 04-27209 (E) 010404 