%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SUPPORT ACCOUNTS|STAFFING|RECRUITMENT|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION|STAFF COMPOSITION|DATA ANALYSIS|

Fifty-eighth session Agenda tem 134 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Criteria used for recruitment to support account posts * The submission of the report was delayed due to a number of factors, including the difficulty of integrating post and personnel data from various departments and the inclusion of these data into workable simulation scenarios for the development of recruitment criteria. Report of the Secretary-General* Summary Pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 56/293 and 57/318, the present report provides details on the current selection criteria for support account posts and outlines the current criteria used for the selection of staff for posts subject to geographical distribution in the system of desirable ranges. The report also analyses possible criteria for recruitment against peacekeeping support account posts, taking into account the situation of troop-contributing Member States. The methodology provides a number of options in conjunction with the system of desirable ranges for recruitment against positions financed by the support account. Paragraphs Page Introduction Current selection criteria for support account posts Criteria used for selection Measures taken by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in recruitment to support account posts Analysis of options Definition of a system of desirable ranges Basis and factors that may be applied to peacekeeping support account posts Options for the system of desirable ranges for peacekeeping support account posts Conclusion Annex Analysis of six options 1. The present report of the Secretary-General on the criteria used for recruitment to support accounts posts, in particular those in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, is submitted in accordance with requests made by the General Assembly in its resolutions 56/293 of 27 June 2002 and 57/318 of 18 June 2003. The report presents details on the current selection criteria for support account posts, outlines the current criteria used for the selection of staff for posts subject to geographical distribution and analyses possible future criteria for consideration in recruitment against peacekeeping support account posts. The report introduces a methodology based on that of the system of desirable ranges, which includes, in addition to the three traditional factors used -- membership of the United Nations, population and contribution to the budget -- a new troop contribution factor and analyses this in relation to the present situation. 2. The principles governing the recruitment and employment of staff are derived from Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which states: "The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible." II. Current selection criteria for support account posts A. Criteria used for selection 3. As reaffirmed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/305 of 15 April 2003, the primary consideration governing the recruitment and employment of staff derives from Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter. In considering applicants against the approved evaluation criteria, the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity remain the primary factors in the selection of all staff for posts financed under the peacekeeping support account. 4. Posts funded from the peacekeeping support account are not governed by the system of desirable ranges set out in General Assembly resolutions 42/220 A of 21 December 1987, 51/226 of 3 April 1997 and 53/221 of 7 April 1999. In recruitment against support account posts, due regard is given to the principle of equitable geographical representation and gender balance in the Secretariat. In addition, fullest regard is given to candidates with the requisite qualifications and experience already in the service of the United Nations, as reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001. Finally, in its resolution 55/238 of 23 December 2000 the Assembly accepted the recommendation of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that troop-contributing countries be properly represented in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, reflecting their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping operations. 5. Since posts under the peacekeeping support account are not subject to the system of desirable ranges, numerical targets do not exist. Taking the various criteria set out by the General Assembly into consideration during the review and selection process is complicated, as they may be conflicting in the context of individual cases. For example, a number of major troop- and police-contributing countries are considered overrepresented within the Secretariat with regard to posts covered by the system of desirable ranges. B. Measures taken by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in recruitment to support account posts 6. After consideration of the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see A/55/305-S/2000/809), significant additional staffing resources were approved for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as well as for other offices and departments. In the filling of these posts, primary consideration was given to identifying the most qualified and suitable candidates. In the review process managers were provided with information on the representation status of Member States and current troop and police contributors. They were directed to take these elements, together with gender goals, into consideration when making recommendations for selection. Senior managers also reviewed both individual cases and the overall pattern of recommendations in the context of legislative mandates with regard to gender parity, geographical diversity and proper representation of troop- and police-contributing countries. 7. The candidates selected for Department of Peacekeeping Operations positions funded against the support account were those whose qualifications and skills were considered most suitable for the positions concerned. The report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the policies and procedures for recruiting Department of Peacekeeping Operations staff in 20011 found that the selections made were generally equitable and balanced. The similar report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on recruitment in 20022 found that the selections made were similarly well dispersed and reflective of significant progress in regard to the recruitment of female candidates. In both reports the Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended that the Department continue its ongoing efforts to make further improvements in these areas. 8. In the period from January 2003 to the end of February 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations selected 78 candidates for positions at the Professional level. Sixteen of those selected were already serving in the Department, and, thus, their selection did not affect the profile of the Department in terms of gender and geography. Sixty-two of those selected were considered external candidates, coming from other areas of the Secretariat or from outside the Organization. In terms of geographical diversity, it is noted that those 62 candidates came from 45 different Member States. With regard to the representation of troop- and police-contributing countries, 15 of the individuals selected were from the top 20 troop-contributing countries. During the period, candidates from two of the largest troop contributors were appointed to two of the Department's Director-level positions, Director of Change Management and Civilian Police Adviser. With respect to gender goals, the Department made further progress in 2003, particularly at senior levels. Overall, the percentage of female staff at the Professional level increased from 29 to 32 per cent. For positions at the D-1 level and above, female representation increased significantly, from 16 to 32 per cent. III. Analysis of options 9. The system of desirable ranges for staff in posts subject to geographical distribution under the regular budget has been the system approved by the General Assembly since 1960. With a view to developing realistic and operational options for staff in posts under the support account, it is proposed to use the system of desirable ranges as a workable hypothesis and to mirror its application under various options for posts under the support account budget. A. Definition of a system of desirable ranges 1. What is the system of desirable ranges? 10. The criteria governing the system of desirable ranges are set out in section III of the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat, dated 11 September 1998 (A/53/375 and Corr.1 and 3). As a benchmark, the history of the system of desirable ranges for posts subject to geographical distribution is set out below. 2. Basis and history of the system of desirable ranges for posts subject to geographical distribution 11. Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which governs the selection of staff, specifies that due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. This concept has become known as the principle of equitable geographical distribution. The application of this principle is designed to improve the geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat through the formulation of recruitment policies. It has no effect on their assignment or promotion or other administrative actions. In 1948, an effort was made to put this principle into effect through the introduction of the system of desirable ranges of representation for Member States. Under this system specific posts would not be distributed to Member States, but, rather, a range of posts was established within which each Member State would be adequately represented as a guideline for recruitment priorities. The concept of desirable ranges in relation to staff in posts subject to geographical distribution was approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 1559 (XV) of 18 December 1960. 12. Until 1962, only one factor was used to determine the desirable ranges: the contribution of each Member State to the Organization's regular budget. The General Assembly, in its resolution 1852 (XVII) of 19 December 1962, added two other factors: membership in the United Nations and the population of the Member State. From 1962 until 1988, the importance, or "weight", of each factor has varied according to Assembly resolutions. However, preference was always given to the contribution factor, the weight of which varied between 56 and 86.4 per cent, while the membership factor from 7.7 to 36.8 per cent and the population factor from 6.7 to 8.9 per cent. In its resolution 42/220 A, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to base the desirable ranges, with effect from 1 January 1988, on the following six criteria: (a) The base figure for calculations would initially be 2,700; (b) The weight of the membership factor would be 40 per cent of the base figure; (c) The population factor would be allotted a weight of 5 per cent and would be directly related to the population of Member States; posts subject to that factor would be distributed among Member States in proportion to their population; (d) The contribution factor would be based on the distribution of the remaining posts among Member States in proportion to the approved scale of assessments; (e) The upper and lower limits of each range would be based on a flexibility of 15 per cent upward and downward from the midpoint of the desirable range, but not less than 4.8 posts up and down, the upper limit of the range being not less than 14 posts; (f) The base figure would be adjusted whenever the actual number of posts subject to geographical distribution increased or decreased by 100, the weights of the three factors being maintained. 13. Since 1988, the system of basic criteria for the definition of desirable ranges has remained unchanged. This system includes a base figure used for the calculation of all ranges. It also redefined the weight of each factor (currently: contribution, 55 per cent; membership, 40 per cent; and population, 5 per cent). Base figure 14. The current base figure used for the calculation of all ranges is 2,700 posts. The base figure depends on the number of posts subject to geographical distribution but is not equal to it. The base figure is adjusted whenever the actual number of posts subject to geographical distribution increases or decreases by 100. Factors 15. The membership factor is defined by the number of States Members of the United Nations. It is equal for each Member State and corresponds to the total number of posts for this factor (40 per cent of 2,700 = 1,080 posts) divided by the number of Member States (1,080/191 = 5.65 for each Member State). 16. The population factor is based on the proportion of each Member State's population relative to the total population of all Member States combined. The figures are based on United Nations statistics (Population and Vital Statistics Report). For each country this factor is equal to the total number of posts for the population factor (5 per cent of 2,700 = 135 posts) divided by the total population of all Member States and multiplied by the population of the relevant Member State. 17. The contribution factor is based on the latest scale of assessments agreed upon by the General Assembly; the number of posts allotted to each Member State varies proportionally. The contribution factor is different for each Member State, as it represents the total number of posts for the factor (55 per cent of 2,700 = 1,485 posts) divided by 100 (14.85) and multiplied by the Member State's latest assessment percentage under the regular budget. 18. The posts allotted to each Member State, as its share of the contribution, membership and population factors, are added up to establish the midpoint of each Member State's desirable range. As explained above, a flexibility factor of plus and minus 15 per cent is then calculated to determine the upper and lower limits of the particular desirable range. If the figure resulting from the application of 15 per cent flexibility is less than 4.8 posts, the latter figure is applied. The minimum upper limit has to be at least 14 posts. B. Basis and factors that may be applied to peacekeeping support account posts 19. The current base figure used for the calculation of desirable ranges under the system for peacekeeping support account posts is 450, i.e., the number of peacekeeping Professional posts under the support account. This figure will vary with the number of professional posts approved in the peacekeeping budget. 20. The membership factor is calculated on the basis of the number of States Members of the United Nations. It is the same for each Member State and corresponds to the total number of posts for this factor (40 per cent of 450 = 180 posts) divided by the number of Member States (191). This yields the figure of 0.94 posts for each Member State. In order to make the membership factor a meaningful measure, it is advisable that the number of posts reserved for this factor be, at the minimum, equal to the number of Member States. This will allow each Member State to be allocated one post under this factor. Taking into consideration the number of posts available, the weight of the membership factor should therefore be set at a minimum of 43 per cent. 21. The population factor is based on the proportion of each Member State's population relative to the total population of all Member States combined. For each country this factor is equal to the total number of posts for the population factor (5 per cent of 450 = 22.5 posts) divided by the total population of all Member States and multiplied by the population of the relevant Member State. 22. The contribution factor is based on the latest scale of assessments agreed upon by the General Assembly; the number of posts allotted to each Member State varies proportionally. The contribution factor is different for each Member State, as it represents the total number of posts for the factor (55 per cent of 450 = 247.5 posts) divided by 100 and multiplied by the Member State's latest assessment percentage. 23. A new troop contribution factor is introduced, based on the proportion of troops each Member State provides relative to the total number of troops involved in peacekeeping operations as at 31 December 2003. It is proposed, under the various options developed, to have this proportion vary between 0 and 15 per cent. C. Options for the system of desirable ranges for peacekeeping support account posts 24. To illustrate the ramifications of changing the relative weights of the population, membership and contribution factors and introducing the new troop contribution factor, a series of alternative desirable ranges has been considered. These alternative ranges include six options, A to F, allowing for various shifts in the relative weight of all factors: membership, population, contribution, troop contribution and flexibility. 25. The flexibility factor varies between 15 and 35 per cent of each range, fixing the upper and lower limits in the various options described below. Progressively increased flexibility with decreasing contribution avoids affecting adversely the Member States with large assessments. Analysis 26. Of the 450 posts that could be subject to certain criteria derived from a system similar to those used for posts subject to the system of desirable ranges, 120 posts (27 per cent) are currently encumbered by staff who were subject to the system of geographical distribution under the regular budget prior to their assignment or selection to posts and functions funded by the support account. As a result, 88 Member States are represented by at least one staff member against those posts. Taking into consideration the minimum ranges used in establishing the criteria for posts subject to the system of desirable ranges, a minimum range of 1 to 3 seems to be appropriate for geography, and flexibility of 15 per cent is basically irrelevant in all options and should be revised upward or eliminated. Under the proposed options, the weight of the membership factor is set invariably at 43 per cent, allowing one post for each of the 191 Member States (see table). 27. Variations in the contribution factor (as well as the population factor, to a lesser degree) allow for variations in the troop contribution factor. The weight of the contribution factor varies from its current 55 per cent maximum to 40 per cent minimum. These variations represent a maximum of 67.5 posts. The weight of the population factor is set at 2 per cent, which represents a total of 9 posts. The troop contribution factor varies from its current minimum of 0 per cent to a maximum of 15 per cent, which represents 67.5 posts (see table). Table Weight of factors (percentages) Option Membership Contribution Population Troop contribution Flexibility A B C D E F 28. Under option A, the weight of factors and the range of flexibility are those in effect in the determination of posts subject to the system of desirable ranges under the regular budget (membership, 40 per cent; contribution, 55 per cent; population, 5 per cent; flexibility, 15 per cent). Under this option, and taking account of the situation as at 31 December 2003, 13 out of the 88 Member States represented are overrepresented (Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark, Ghana, India, Ireland, Jamaica, Kenya, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines and the Russian Federation) and 7 are underrepresented (China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain and the United States of America). 29. Under option B and the other remaining options, the weight of the membership factor is established at a percentage that allows each Member State to be the recipient of one post. Therefore, the weight of the membership factor should be at least 40 per cent of the total number of posts or 191 posts, whichever is higher. Of 450 posts, 191 represents 43 per cent. The weight of the population factor is set at 2 per cent and flexibility at 25 per cent. Under option B and the others, a troop contribution factor weight of 3 per cent (13.5 posts) is introduced, while the weight of the contribution factor is reduced by 3 per cent, to 52 per cent, and flexibility is set at 15 per cent. Using option B, the same 13 Member States as under option A are overrepresented, and 6 are underrepresented (France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain and the United States of America). Variations between the contribution and troop contribution factors under option B allow China to be brought within range. 30. Under option C, the weight of the contribution factor is set at 49 per cent and that of the troop contribution factor at 6 per cent (27 posts), while flexibility stands at 20 per cent. Under this option, the same 13 Member States are overrepresented as under options A and B, and 5 are underrepresented (France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Spain). Variations between the contribution and troop contribution factors under option C maintain China within range and also bring the United States of America within range. 31. Under option D, the weight of the contribution factor is set at 46 per cent and that of the troop contribution factor is 9 per cent (40.5 posts); flexibility stands at 25 per cent. The same 13 Member States as under options A, B and C remain overrepresented, while the same 5 Member States as under option C are underrepresented. China and the United States of America are within range. 32. Under option E, the weight of the contribution factor is set at 43 per cent, that of the troop contribution factor at 12 per cent (54 posts) and flexibility at 30 per cent. The same 13 Member States as under options A, B, C and D are overrepresented, and 2 Member States are underrepresented (Japan and Spain). In option E, variations between the contribution and troop contribution factors maintain China and the United States of America within range, and also bring France, Germany and Italy within range. 33. Under option F, the contribution factor is set at 40 per cent and the troop contribution factor at 15 per cent (67.5 posts), while flexibility is set at 35 per cent. The same 13 Member States as under options A, B, C, D and E are overrepresented, and the same 2 Member States as under option E are underrepresented. China, France, Germany, Italy and the United States of America are within range. IV. Conclusion 34. If one excludes from the total number of available posts (450) the number of posts required to make the membership factor meaningful for all Member States (i.e., 191, one post for each Member State), only 259 posts in the Professional and higher categories remain subject to the recruitment criteria for support account posts in relation to three factors: population, contribution and troop contribution. 35. Considering that the margins for variation, especially for contribution, can hardly exceed 15 per cent (67.5 posts) without endangering too much the accepted balance between all factors, the differences between the options are small. 36. The number of overrepresented Member States remains at 13 (Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark, Ghana, India, Ireland, Jamaica, Kenya, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines and the Russian Federation) for all options. 37. Changing the margins of troop contribution from 0 to 15 per cent (67.5 posts) reduces the number of underrepresented Member States from seven to two. Member States that stand to benefit from these changes are China (troop contribution at 3 per cent, 13.5 posts), the United States of America (troop contribution at 6 per cent, 27 posts) and France, Germany and Italy (troop contribution at 12 per cent, 54 posts). Japan and Spain remain underrepresented under all the options. 38. In conclusion, it is possible to state that variations up to 15 per cent in the weight of the contribution factor in favour of the new troop contribution factor have only a marginal impact on Member States' representation status. The number of overrepresented Member States remains unchanged. Five Member States that stand to benefit (China, the United States of America, France, Germany, and Italy) are among major troop-contributing countries. These countries would move from their current status of underrepresentation to within range. The proposed options would not change the status of two underrepresented Member States (Japan and Spain). Notes 1 See A//57/224. 2 See A/58/704. Posts Number of posts Membership factor Contribution factor Population factor Troop contribution factor World population Member States Percentage flexibility Options for posts funded from support account Option A Option B Option C Option D Option E Option F Staff Member State Peacekeeping assessment percentage as of July 2003 Troops Population (thousands) Midpoint Range Support Account Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Timor-Leste Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Monaco Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia and Montenegro Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Total 