%%%MAPS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TIMOR-LESTE|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|COSTS|APPROPRIATIONS|STAFFING|MILITARY PERSONNEL|POLICE|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|

Fifty-eighth session Agenda item 140 Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor Interim budget for the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Paragraphs Page Mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor Support outputs for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004 Resource requirements Analysis of resource requirements Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Annex Interim organization chart Map 1. The mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1410 (2002) of 17 May 2002. In resolution 1480 (2003) of 19 May 2003, the Council extended UNMISET for a further 12-month period until 20 May 2004. Subsequently, in its resolution 1543 (2004) of 14 May 2004, the Security Council welcomed the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend UNMISET for a further, one-year consolidation phase and decided to extended the Mission for a period of six months, with a view to subsequently extending the mandate for a further and final period of six months, until 20 May 2005. The Council also decided to reduce the size of UNMISET and revise its tasks. 2. UNMISET is mandated to help the Security Council to achieve an overall objective, namely, security, stability and self-sufficiency in Timor-Leste. Pending finalization of the Mission's results-based frameworks, UNMISET plans to deliver during the budget period a number of support outputs as shown in section II of the present report, to enable continuity of the Mission's operations. 3. During its consolidation phase, UNMISET would be headed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General at the Assistant Secretary-General level, assisted by a Deputy Special Representative at the D-2 level. Military operations would be headed by a Force Commander at the D-2 level. 4. The headquarters of the Mission would be maintained in Dili. UNMISET would include 42 military liaison officers, 310 formed troops and a 125-person International Response Unit; 157 police advisers led by a Senior Police Adviser; 58 civilian advisers and civilian personnel comprising 278 international staff, 614 national staff including 21 national officers and 144 United Nations Volunteers. The Mission would utilize assets acquired during prior financial periods and would continue disposal of assets no longer required to support its reduced operations. II. Support outputs for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004 Military and civilian police :: Verified and monitored contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment in respect of 310 contingent personnel and a 125-person International Response Unit :: Supplied 310 contingent personnel and a 125-person International Response Unit with catering services and bottled water Civilian personnel :: Administered 1,094 civilian personnel (includes 278 international staff, 21 national officers, 593 national staff, 144 United Nations Volunteers and 58 civilian advisers in the Civilian Support Group) :: Checked out 250 civilian staff Facilities and infrastructure :: Maintained 128 buildings and provided electrical power generation through the use of 46 generators :: Closed and returned 15 properties to the Government of Timor-Leste Ground transportation :: Maintained and operated 365 United Nations-owned vehicles :: Provided fuel and lubricants for 365 United Nations-owned vehicles and approximately 100 contingent-owned vehicles Air transportation :: Managed and inspected 2 military and 4 commercially contracted rotary-wing aircraft Communications :: Maintained a communications network consisting of 4 earth stations and a country-wide VHF and microwave telephone network servicing all components of the Mission, including police, throughout Timor-Leste Information technology :: Maintained local and wide-area networks consisting of 764 workstations Medical :: Established, operated and maintained a level-1 plus medical facility in Dili, consisting of a five-bed clinic, and established and operated a level-1 medical facility in Moleana Other supplies, services and equipment :: Disposed of 14,300 items of United Nations-owned equipment :: Reconciled and closed 5 major contracts and 250 purchase orders :: Made five major shipments of United Nations-owned and contingent-owned equipment A. Overall resources Overall (Thousands of United States dollars) 1 July to Category Cost estimates Military and police personnel Military observers Military contingents Civilian police Formed police units Subtotal International staff National staff United Nations Volunteers Operational costs General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Naval transportation Special equipment Quick-impact projects Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted)a Total requirements a Inclusive of a contribution valued at $30,000 from the Government of the Northern Territory of Australia. B. Human resources 1. Military and police personnela Authorized International Response Unit a Represents highest level of authorized strength. 2. Civilian personnel Proposed interim staffing establishment USG -ASG D-2 -D-1 P-5 -P-4 P-3 -P-1 Field Service General Service Security Service Total Inter- national National Officers Executive direction and management Substantive offices Division of Administrationa a Includes 25 international staff, 50 national staff and 35 United Nations Volunteers in the Administrative Liquidation Group as detailed in section (c) below. (a) Executive direction and management Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Inter-national Proposed 5. Overall mission direction and management would be provided by the immediate Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General at the Assistant Secretary-General level assists the Secretary-General in the implementation of the mandate of UNMISET and would be responsible for the overall management of the Mission. The Special Representative would be supported by a Deputy Special Representative at the D-2 level. The Force Commander, the Senior Police Adviser and the heads of the Serious Crimes Unit, Political Affairs Office, Human Rights Office, Legal Affairs Office, Public Information Office and the Civilian Support Group Liaison Office, as well as the Chief Administrative Officer, would all report directly to the Special Representative. (b) Substantive offices 6. The proposed substantive staffing establishment of UNMISET summarized above includes the Offices of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Force Commander and the Senior Police Adviser and would comprise the Serious Crimes Unit, Political Affairs Office, Human Rights Office, Legal Affairs Office, Public Information Office and the Civilian Support Group Liaison Office as detailed in the organizational chart in the annex to the present report. (c) Support Division of Administration Mission Liquidation 7. The Division of Administration would be headed by a Chief Administrative Officer (D-1), reporting directly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and would comprise the Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, Administrative and Integrated Support Services as detailed in the organizational chart in the annex to the present report. The Division would be responsible for providing security, administrative, logistical and technical support to the military, civilian police and substantive staff of UNMISET in the implementation of the Mission's mandate. 8. In connection with activities related to the downsizing of the Mission and disposal of its assets, the proposed staffing establishment for the budget period also provides for the retention of an Administrative Liquidation Group for up to three months (July-September 2004), comprising 25 international staff, 35 United Nations Volunteers and 50 national staff. Each of the incumbents of the proposed posts in the Administrative Liquidation Group would be assigned a specific task with a fixed end-date, with the Director of Administration (D-2) and the Chief of Integrated Support Services (D-1) completing their assignments at the end of July and August 2004, respectively. 9. Provision of $807,200 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to the mission subsistence and clothing allowances, travel costs and death and disability compensation for 42 military liaison officers deployed from 1 July 2004, whose entitlements would be identical to those of military observers. The estimated requirements are based on the full authorized strength during the budget period. 10. Provision of $6,186,500 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to troop costs, contingent-owned equipment reimbursement, emplacement and rotation of contingent personnel, daily and recreational leave allowances, death and disability compensation, rations and freight costs related to the deployment of contingent-owned equipment for both military contingents and the International Response Unit. The estimated requirements are based on the full authorized strength of these units during the budget period. 11. Provision of $3,017,300 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to mission subsistence allowance, travel costs, clothing allowance and death and disability compensation for 157 civilian police. The estimated requirements are based on the full authorized strength of civilian police during the budget period. 12. Provision of $15,297,800 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to international staff salaries, staff assessment, common staff costs and mission subsistence allowance. It is based on the retention of 278 international staff during the period July to September 2004 and the proposed staffing establishment of 253 personnel thereafter. The cost estimates have been adjusted by the application of a 10 per cent turnover factor. 13. International staff costs have been computed based on the New York standard salary scale in respect of 10 per cent of the proposed posts. Staff costs for the remaining 90 per cent of posts are based on salary scales for appointments of limited duration. 14. Provision of $1,402,800 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to national staff salaries, staff assessment and common staff costs. It is based on the proposed establishment of 21 national officers posts, all in substantive areas, and the retention of 593 national staff during the period July to September 2004, with the proposed reduced staffing establishment of 564 personnel, including 21 national officers thereafter. The requirements for national staff costs take into account a 10 per cent turnover factor and are based on the revised salary scales for national officers and national staff effective 1 October 2003. 15. Provision of $2,220,600 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to costs related to the retention of 144 United Nations Volunteers during July to September 2004 and the deployment of 109 volunteers thereafter. 16. Provision of $4,003,600 under this heading reflects requirements for 58 civilian advisers to the Government of Timor-Leste and includes temporary assistance funding for sickness and maternity leave replacements for national staff. The cost estimate is based on the international staff salary scale (15 P-5, 31 P-4, 11 P-3, and 1 P-2) and takes into account a 10 per cent vacancy rate. 17. Provision of $82,100 under this heading reflects requirements for the engagement of consultants in the areas of border discussions; counter-terrorism; evaluation of the Civilian Support Group; human trafficking; governmental transparency and accountability; and justice sector enhancement. 18. Provision of $262,100 under this heading reflects requirements for official travel costs, including travel of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and senior staff for consultations and meetings and travel of New York Headquarters staff to Timor-Leste for providing support on various aspects of the peace process, as well as logistical and administrative assistance to the Mission and training-related travel (communications and information technology technical support, general management, procurement). 19. Provision of $3,540,600 under this heading reflects requirements for the rental of premises, acquisition of supplies and provision of maintenance and construction services including the improvements to the Mission's security infrastructure, as well as the estimated requirements in the amount of $575,700 for the reimbursement of troop-contributing countries for self-sustainment costs. 20. Provision of $1,170,600 under this heading reflects requirements for the operation of the Mission's fleet of 365 United Nations-owned vehicles and 100 contingent-owned vehicles and represents estimated costs related to vehicles' repairs and maintenance, liability insurance, spare parts and diesel fuel, oil and lubricants. 21. During the budget period, the Mission would maintain a fleet of six rotary-wing aircraft comprising two military and four commercially contracted helicopters, as well as contract one fixed-wing aircraft for 120 round-trip journeys between Dili and Darwin (including emergency aero-medical evacuation lights). 22. Provision of $4,976,600 under this heading reflects requirements for the rental and operating costs of six rotary-wing aircraft (aviation fuel, oil and lubricants, liability insurance, and aircrew subsistence allowance), all-inclusive fixed-wing aircraft charter costs, as well as supplies and landing fees and ground handling charges for all aircraft. 23. Provision of $1,126,500 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to the maintenance and operation of the Mission's communications network (satellite, VHF and HF radio, microwave and rural telephone links) and represents estimated costs of communications equipment repair and spare parts, as well as commercial communications. The estimate also provides for the reimbursement of troop-contributing countries for self-sustainment costs in the amount of $198,500. 24. Provision of $272,600 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to the maintenance and operation of the Mission's information technology networks and estimated costs of data-processing equipment repair and spare parts. 25. Provision of $179,500 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to the maintenance and operation of a level-1 plus medical facility in Dili, a level-1 medical facility in Moleana, medical services including external consultations, hospitalization as well as medical supplies (vaccines, malaria prophylaxis, HIV protection for military personnel). The estimate also provides for the estimated cost of the reimbursement of troop-contributing countries for self-sustainment in the amount of $66,000. 26. Provision of $81,100 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to the reimbursement of troop-contributing countries for self-sustainment (explosive ordnance disposal and observation). 27. Provision of $1,100,900 under this heading reflects requirements with respect to freight and related costs in connection with the shipment of vehicles and various items of equipment to other missions and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, for temporary storage, as well as supplies, uniform items, flags and decals and bank charges, training fees and supplies. V. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 28. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNMISET are: (a) Appropriation of the amount of $45,728,400 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004; (b) Assessment of the amount of $35,566,520 for the period from 1 July to 20 November 2004; (c) Assessment of the amount of $10,161,880 at a monthly rate of $7,621,400 for the period from 21 November to 31 December 2004, should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the Mission. A. Substantive offices B. Administrative offices 