%%%MARITIME BOUNDARIES|CAMEROON|NIGERIA|GOOD OFFICES|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PROJECT EXPENDITURES|STAFFING|COSTS|

Fifty-eighth session Agenda item 121 Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives, authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report is submitted in compliance with resolution 58/294 of 18 June 2004, by which the General Assembly, inter alia, authorized the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in the amount of $6 million and requested him to submit to the Assembly a comprehensive financial report on the requirements for United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, including requirements to be provided from the regular budget and those elements being financed from other sources. The present report contains the proposed resource requirements of the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission for a seven-month period from 1 June to 31 December 2004, as revised. The total revised requirements are estimated at $5,419,300. The report also includes information on those elements which have been or are being funded from sources other than the regular budget. Paragraphs Page Introduction Special political mission emanating from the Security Council: United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission Estimated resource requirements Activities funded from voluntary contributions Action required from the General Assembly 1. The purpose of the present report is to provide to the General Assembly, in compliance with the request contained in resolution 58/294 of 18 June 2004, a comprehensive financial report on the requirements for the United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, including requirements to be provided from the regular budget and those elements being financed from other sources, and to seek necessary funding in the biennium 2004-2005 relating to the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission. 2. The Mixed Commission was established, at the request of the Presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria, following the tripartite summit held in Geneva on 15 November 2002 between the two Presidents and the Secretary-General, in order to move forward on the implementation of the decision of the International Court of Justice on the Cameroon-Nigeria land and maritime boundary dispute. The Mixed Commission is chaired by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa. 3. The United Nations support to the Mixed Commission was established to provide United Nations assistance in the implementation of the decision of the International Court of Justice. The initial resource requirements for the support to the Mixed Commission were met, under an ad hoc arrangement, from extrabudgetary resources. As that arrangement was not sustainable, on the basis of the request of the Secretary-General to the Security Council dated 17 March 2004 (see S/2004/298) and the Council's response of 15 April 2004 (S/2004/299), the requirements for the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission for the period 1 June through 31 December 2004 were submitted for funding under the regular budget. 4. Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on resource requirements for the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission (A/C.5/58/20/Add.1), the General Assembly, by its resolution 58/294, authorized the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in the amount of $6 million and requested him to submit, by the end of the fifty-eighth session, a comprehensive financial report on the requirements for the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission. The revised requirements for the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission under the regular budget for the period 1 June to 31 December 2004 amount to $5,419,300. The decrease in requirements of $580,700 reflects the actual pace of activities on the ground. Further details are provided in part III of the present report. Financial information on those elements of the Mixed Commission's mandate which are or will be funded from sources other than the regular budget is presented in part IV. The financing action requested of the General Assembly is set out in part V. II. Special political mission emanating from the Security Council: United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission Background, mandate and objective 5. In anticipation of the ruling of the International Court of Justice, and in an effort to secure the prior commitment of Cameroon and Nigeria to the implementation of the Court's expected decision on their boundary dispute, the Secretary-General invited the Presidents of the two countries to meet in Paris in his presence on 5 September 2002. At the end of the meeting, both heads of State agreed to respect and implement the Court's ruling and to establish an implementation mechanism, with the support of the United Nations. The two Presidents also agreed on the need for a number of confidence-building measures aimed at strengthening overall ties between their two countries. 6. Following the Court's announcement of its ruling on 10 October 2002, the Secretary-General invited the two Presidents to a second tripartite summit in Geneva on 15 November 2002. In a joint communiqué issued following the meeting, both Presidents renewed their commitment to renounce the use of force in their bilateral relations and to pursue peaceful ways for the settlement of their boundary differences. In order to move forward on the implementation of the Court's decision, both Presidents requested the Secretary-General to establish a Mixed Commission, to be chaired by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa. 7. The Mixed Commission was established to consider the implications of the Court's decision, including the demarcation of the land boundary between the two countries and to make recommendations on additional confidence-building measures, such as the development of projects to promote joint economic ventures and cross-border cooperation, troop withdrawal from relevant areas along the land boundary, eventual demilitarization of the Bakassi peninsula, with the possibility of deploying international personnel to observe the withdrawal, and reactivation of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, a five-nation structure of which Cameroon and Nigeria are leading members. 8. The Mixed Commission is composed of representatives from Cameroon and Nigeria. It has established two subcommissions which report to the Mixed Commission, one responsible for demarcation of the land boundary between the two countries and the other on affected populations with a mandate to assess the situation of these populations and to consider effective ways to ensure protection of their rights. The Mixed Commission has also established the following working groups which report to it: (i) Working Group on the withdrawal of civil administration and military and police forces and the transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area, which completed its work in January 2004; (ii) Working Group on withdrawal and transfers of authority in the land boundary; (iii) Working Group on withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Bakassi peninsula; and (iv) Working Group on the maritime boundary. 9. The Mixed Commission has held 11 meetings to date and visited all three main border areas. A working calendar of the Mixed Commission was negotiated and endorsed by both parties on 6 August 2003 and revised in early April 2004. Among the most important tasks carried out by the Mixed Commission was the successful completion of the withdrawals and transfers of authority of civil administration, military and police forces in the Lake Chad area, in December 2003, and along the land boundary, in July 2004. The third and final phase of withdrawals and transfers of authority in the Bakassi peninsula is scheduled to take place by mid-September 2004. 10. The subcommission on demarcation of the land boundary between the two countries reports on the progress of its work to the bimonthly meetings of the Mixed Commission. As mandated, the subcommission on demarcation has prepared a work programme for the demarcation exercise which was approved by the Mixed Commission at its second meeting, held in Abuja in February 2003. The responsibilities of the subcommission on affected populations are to identify the affected populations, to assess their situation on the ground, including identifying the specific rights that need to be protected, and to consider modalities to achieve this goal. To date, the subcommission has carried out a series of visits to the Lake Chad area, the land boundary and the Bakassi peninsula and its reports have been adopted by the Mixed Commission. In order to ensure stability following the withdrawals and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area and along the land boundary, a United Nations civilian observer team has been deployed. 11. The work of the Mixed Commission is expected to be completed by the end of 2005. III. Estimated resource requirements 12. The revised requirements for United Nations support to the Mixed Commission for a seven-month period from 1 June to 31 December 2004 would amount to $5,419,300. These requirements would provide for: (i) the costs of four military advisers/liaison officers ($189,700); (ii) civilian staffing costs, consisting of the salaries and common staff costs of 21 staff indicated in table 1 below ($1,210,400); (iii) the costs of the deployment of 32 civilian observers in the Lake Chad area, the land boundary and the Bakassi peninsula to ensure stability following the withdrawal of armed forces and police ($1,200,000); (iv) the costs of services of experts on specific issues, including the demarcation of the land boundary, the maritime boundary, environmental issues, economic issues, civil affairs, security issues and social affairs ($308,300); (v) contractual services ($246,000); (vi) official travel of staff ($675,300); and (vii) other related operational requirements ($1,589,600). Table 1 Support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission: proposed civilian staffing requirements for 2004 Professional category and above General Service and related category D-1 P-5 P-4 P3 P2 Total General Service Total international Local level IV. Activities funded from voluntary contributions 13. Activities carried out or to be carried out under the auspices of the Mixed Commission since its inception comprise: (i) United Nations support to the Mixed Commission; (ii) the boundary demarcation activities; and (iii) activities and joint projects as part of confidence-building measures between the two countries. In kind and financial contributions have been received in support of the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission and the boundary demarcation activities. There has been, however, no financial pledge or contribution for joint projects or for other confidence-building measures. 14. A number of fund-raising missions to donor countries and institutions to raise voluntary contributions for demarcation activities, development projects and the activities of the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission were undertaken, including to the United Kingdom, France and the United States, all of which indicated the possibility of directly contributing or assisting in securing contributions from other multilateral agencies and organizations. Missions were also undertaken to the World Bank and the African Development Bank. Further fund-raising missions are planned for 2004 to other potential donors, including Canada and the European Union countries. United Nations support to the Mixed Commission 15. While there has been no financial contribution or pledge in support of the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission, in kind support is being provided by the Government of Norway in the form of services of a legal expert on maritime boundary issues and by the Government of Senegal in the form of rent-free office space. Boundary demarcation activities 16. The boundary demarcation activities, which are estimated to cost approximately $12 million, are funded from extrabudgetary sources. To date, four contributors have pledged or contributed a total of nearly $8.3 million, which accounts for approximately two thirds of the estimated requirements for the boundary demarcation activities. In addition, in kind contributions in the form of logistical support, including accommodation and transportation, are being provided by Cameroon and Nigeria in connection with a number of field visits to the Lake Chad area, the land boundary and the Bakassi peninsula. Activities and joint projects as part of confidence-building measures between the two countries 17. The Mixed Commission is mandated to make recommendations on additional confidence-building measures between the two countries, to include joint projects and ventures to be financed by development partners and to promote cross-border cooperation. Accordingly, the Commission continues to establish and maintain contact with several multilateral financial and development organizations. A number of sources have indicated their interest to support joint projects as part of confidence-building measures. The World Bank has indicated that it would consider ways of supporting the work of the Mixed Commission and would discuss concrete ways of providing support for community-development-related activities in the border areas. Similarly, the African Development Bank has indicated its interest to support the transboundary Enugu-Mutengene road development project, as well as its preparedness to consider other projects, especially in the area of the environment. 18. A list of pledges and contributions received to date in support of the Mixed Commission and a matrix of components funded from the regular budget and other sources are presented, respectively, in tables 2 and 3 below. Table 2 List of voluntary contributions and pledges received as of 31 August 2004 for various elements of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission Contributors Amounts contributed or pledged (US dollars) A. United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission Norway In kind support being provided by the Government of Norway in the form of services of a legal expert on maritime boundary issues Senegal In kind support in the form of rent-free office space B. Boundary demarcation activities Cameroon Nigeria United Kingdom European Union C. Joint projects and other confidence-building measures World Bank No specific pledge or contribution except expression of interest to support joint activities and cooperation African Development Bank Matrix of components funded by assessed budgets and other sources Funded from the regular budget Funded from other sources (i) Initial phase of the United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission (since inception to May 2004), including all staffing and operational costs X (ii) United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission (since 1 June 2004), including all staffing and operational costs :: Inspection and positioning of all boundary turning points along the boundary :: Inspection and positioning of all boundary intermediate points along the boundary :: Field inspection and identification of the general line of the boundary where it is defined by catchments and general identification of pillar locations :: Direction and random checking of the establishment of the geodetic network to control the accurate positioning of the boundary pillars :: Positioning and placement of boundary pillars :: Undertaking random field inspections to check compliance with specifications :: Undertaking random field inspections of pillar emplacement :: Provision of final maps and records substantiating the authoritative implementation of the demarcation To be funded and implemented by partners, such as the World Bank and the African Development Bank 19. The General Assembly is requested to: (a) Recall its previous commitment authority approved in resolution 58/294 of 18 June 2004 in the amount of $6 million; (b) Note that the revised requirements for the United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for the period 1 June to 31 December 2004 amount to $5,419,300; (c) Decide to reduce the amount of commitment authority previously approved from $6 million to $5,419,300; (d) Decide also that the commitment of $5,419,300 would be considered for appropriation under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget, in the context of action to be taken on the first performance report for the biennium 2004-2005. 