%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|CONFERENCES|DOCUMENTATION|RULES OF PROCEDURE|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|TRANSNATIONAL CRIME|ORGANIZED CRIME|COUNTER-TERRORISM|CORRUPTION|STANDARDS|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

General Assembly Fifty-ninth session Item 99 of the preliminary list A/59/50 and Corr.1. Crime prevention and criminal justice Economic and Social Council Substantive session of 2004 Item 14 (c) of the provisional agenda** ** E/2004/100 and Corr.2. Social and human rights questions: crime prevention and criminal justice Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report has been prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/138 of 22 December 2003, entitled "Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice", in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to ensure the proper follow-up to the resolution and to report thereon to the Assembly through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its thirteenth session. It includes information received from Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerning their preparations for the Eleventh Congress. It also includes a summary of recommendations adopted by the regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress, a summary of proceedings of the Commission and action taken by the Commission at its thirteenth session on preparations for the Congress and the draft programme of work for the Congress. Paragraphs Page Introduction Background Venue and dates Theme of the Eleventh Congress Provisional agenda Workshops Organizational arrangements and outcome of the Eleventh Congress Documentation Rules of procedure Resource allocation Regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress Appointment of the Secretary-General and Executive Secretary of the Eleventh Congress Information received from Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerning their preparations for the Eleventh Congress Information received from Governments Information received from the Division for the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat Information received from other intergovernmental organizations Information received from non-governmental organizations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its thirteenth session Annex. Draft programme of work for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/138 of 22 December 2003. It should be read in conjunction with the previous report of the Secretary-General on the preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and Criminal Justice (A/58/87-E/2003/82), as well as the discussion guide on substantive items included in the provisional agenda and workshop topics of the Eleventh Congress (A/CONF.203/PM.1) and the reports of the regional preparatory meetings for the Congress (A/CONF.203/RPM.1/1, A/CONF.203/RPM.2/1, A/CONF.203/RPM.3/1 and Corr.1 and A/CONF.203/RPM.4/1). II. Background 2. The General Assembly has taken a number of decisions on organizational and substantive matters related to the Eleventh Congress. In its resolution 58/138, the Assembly decided to hold the Eleventh Congress from 18 to 25 April 2005; and also decided that the high-level segment of the Eleventh Congress should be held during the last three days of the Congress in order to allow heads of State or Government or government ministers to focus on the main substantive agenda items of the Congress. 3. In its resolution 56/119 of 19 December 2001, the General Assembly decided that, beginning in 2005, the congresses, pursuant to paragraphs 29 and 30 of the statement of principles and programme of action of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme (resolution 46/152, annex), should be held in accordance with the following guidelines: (a) Each congress should discuss specific topics, including, where appropriate, a main topic, all of which shall be determined by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice; (b) Each congress should include one session of pre-congress consultations; (c) Each congress should include a high-level segment in which States will be represented at the highest possible level and will be given an opportunity to make statements on the topics of the congress; (d) As part of the high-level segment, the heads of delegation or their representatives should participate in a number of thematic interactive round tables in order to further the discussion on the topics of the congress through open dialogue; (e) Panels of experts, to be selected by the Commission with due regard for the principle of equitable geographical distribution, should hold workshops dealing with the topics of the congress, maintaining an open dialogue with the participants and avoiding the reading of statements; (f) Institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network should be invited to assist in the preparations for the workshops; (g) The Secretary-General should facilitate, within existing resources, the organization of ancillary meetings of non-governmental organizations and professional organizations at each congress; (h) Each congress should adopt a single declaration containing recommendations derived from the deliberations of the high-level segment, the round tables and the workshops, to be submitted to the Commission for its consideration; (i) Any action suggested to the Commission regarding its programme of work, contained in the declaration of the congress, should be undertaken through individual resolutions of the Commission; (j) The Commission, as the preparatory body for the congress, should request the Secretary-General to prepare only those background documents which were absolutely necessary for implementing the programme of work of the congress; (k) Each congress should be preceded by regional preparatory meetings, when necessary, and the costs of the regional preparatory meetings for each congress should be streamlined by holding them in conjunction with other regional meetings, shortening their duration and limiting the preparation of background documents. A. Venue and dates 4. Pursuant to the offer of the Government of Thailand to host the Eleventh Congress and to General Assembly resolution 58/138, the Congress is to be held in Bangkok from 18 to 25 April 2005. The Government of Thailand has proposed the Queen Sirikit National Convention Center in Bangkok as the venue for the Congress. 5. As follow-up to the offer of the Government of Thailand, a planning mission was undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime from 28 October to 2 November 2003 during which consultative meetings were held with government authorities in Bangkok in preparation for the Eleventh Congress. The purpose of the mission was: (a) to establish contact with the competent authorities of the host country and to exchange views on the most practical and cost-effective ways of ensuring efficient preparations (substantive and organizational) for the Eleventh Congress; (b) to assess the facilities of the Queen Sirikit National Convention Center -- the proposed venue -- and to ascertain how they could be used in an efficient manner to meet the requirements of the Congress; (c) to provide the host authorities with information on United Nations policy and practice in organizing conferences away from the established headquarters of United Nations entities; and (d) to review other arrangements required for the Congress. 6. Representatives of the Government of Thailand explained that the Queen Sirikit National Convention Center had been selected by the host country as the venue of the Congress as it was in a prime location in a central business district. The Center was surrounded by two-star to five-star hotels able to house up to 2,000 persons and was reachable by sky train and underground train. The representatives described in detail the conference, office, restaurant and other facilities at the Convention Center, which were later inspected by members of the planning mission. 7. The representatives informed the planning mission that the Subcommittee for Security and Traffic Control would be in charge of security at the Congress. The Subcommittee would be responsible for directing, planning and maintaining appropriate security for all participants, directing, planning and controlling the security of the venue of the Congress and the hotel accommodation, arranging for personal guards for visiting dignitaries and planning and controlling traffic to ensure the convenience and safety of all participants during the Congress, including the provision of escort police cars for dignitaries. 8. The planning mission was also informed that the same procedures as those in place for the recent Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting would be followed for the Eleventh Congress. Security measures already in place or planned included intelligence-gathering, setting up walk-through X-ray machines at the entrances to the Convention Center, conducting bomb sweep checks on cars entering the facility, establishment of a command post, protection of hotel accommodation and dignitaries and establishment of command posts at hotels housing participants. 9. Consultations with the Government of Thailand were also held during the Asian and Pacific Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Eleventh Congress, held in Bangkok from 29 to 31 March 2004, and during the thirteenth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, from 11 to 20 May 2004. The Secretariat and the Government of Thailand agreed that a second and final planning mission would take place between August and September 2004. 10. As part of its preparations for the Eleventh Congress, the Government of Thailand has created a web site on the Eleventh Congress (www.11uncongress.org), which has a link to the web site of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (www.unodc.org.). B. Theme of the Eleventh Congress 11. In its resolution 57/171 of 18 December 2002, the General Assembly decided that the main theme of the Eleventh Congress would be "Synergies and responses: strategic alliances in crime prevention and criminal justice". C. Provisional agenda 12. In its resolution 58/138, the General Assembly approved the following provisional agenda for the Eleventh Congress: 1. Opening of the Congress. 2. Organizational matters. 3. Effective measures to combat transnational organized crime. 4. International cooperation against terrorism and links between terrorism and other criminal activities in the context of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 5. Corruption: threats and trends in the twenty-first century. 6. Economic and financial crimes: challenges to sustainable development. 7. Making standards work: fifty years of standard-setting in crime prevention and criminal justice. 8. Adoption of the report of the Congress. D. Workshops 13. In its resolution 58/138, the General Assembly decided that the following issues would be considered by workshops within the framework of the Eleventh Congress: (a) Enhancing international law enforcement cooperation, including extradition measures; (b) Enhancing criminal justice reform, including restorative justice; (c) Strategies and best practices for crime prevention, in particular in relation to urban crime and youth at risk; (d) Measures to combat terrorism, with reference to the relevant international conventions and protocols; (e) Measures to combat economic crime, including money-laundering; (f) Measures to combat computer-related crime. 14. At the twelfth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, it was emphasized that the workshops were considered the main resource in terms of exchange of information and identification of new trends and best practices. It was recommended that adequate time be allocated to the workshops so as to allow for practical presentations and a focused and dynamic discussion as well as for exchange of information on precise and well-delineated issues. It was also recommended that the institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network be fully involved in the organization of the workshops, as they had the capability and the knowledge required. Accordingly, all the institutes of the Programme network are fully involved in the organization of the workshops. E. Organizational arrangements and outcome of the Eleventh Congress 15. The programme of the Eleventh Congress will start with pre-congress consultations, whose purpose is to reach agreement on the recommendations to be made on all procedural and organizational matters to be dealt with by the Eleventh Congress on the opening day, such as the election of officers, the appointment of the Credentials Committee and the arrangements for the preparation of the report of the Congress. In accordance with rule 6 of the rules of procedure for the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice (Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/32, annex), the Congress shall elect from among the representatives of participating States a President, 24 Vice-Presidents and a Rapporteur-General, as well as a Chairman for each of the committees provided for in rule 45 (in accordance with past practice, the Eleventh Congress will have two committees, in addition to the plenary). These 28 officers shall constitute the General Committee and shall be elected on the basis of equitable geographical distribution as follows: 7 from African States, 6 from Asian States, 3 from Eastern European States, 5 from Latin American and Caribbean States and 6 from Western European and other States. In accordance with standard practice, the head of delegation of the host country is elected President. He or she also acts as the Chairman of the high-level segment. 16. The morning of the first day of the Eleventh Congress will be devoted to the opening ceremony, followed by organizational matters. From the afternoon of the first day, the work of the Eleventh Congress will be undertaken in concurrent sessions of plenary and two committees. The plenary sessions will consist of the general debate on agenda items 3 and 4 and the meetings of the high-level segment during the last three days of the Congress, as well as consideration of the conclusions and recommendations of the Congress. Committee I will consider agenda items 6 and 7, while Committee II will consider agenda item 5. The discussions of the workshops are divided between the two committees (see the draft programme of work annexed to the present report). 17. It may be recalled that, at its twelfth session, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice recommended that a small number of plenary sessions on specific topics be held, with a slightly longer period of time allocated to the discussion of the high-level segment, so as to raise the profile of international criminal justice issues within the political arena. 18. In accordance with paragraph 2 (h) of General Assembly resolution 56/119, each congress should adopt a single declaration containing recommendations derived from the deliberations of the high-level segment, the round tables and the workshops, to be submitted to the Commission for its consideration. Thus, the Eleventh Congress will adopt a single declaration, as stipulated above, for consideration by the Commission at its fourteenth session, in 2005. F. Documentation 19. Pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 56/119, 57/171 and 58/138, the Eleventh Congress will have before it the following documentation: (a) Basic documents (i) Draft declaration submitted to the Eleventh Congress by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its thirteenth session; (ii) Reports of the four regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress (A/CONF.203/RPM.1/1, A/CONF.203/RPM.2/1, A/CONF.203/RPM.3/1 and Corr.1 and A/CONF.203/RPM.4/1; (iii) Discussion guide on substantive items included in the provisional agenda and workshop topics of the Eleventh Congress (A/CONF.203/PM.1); (iv) Working papers on each of the five substantive items of the provisional agenda for the Eleventh Congress; (v) Working papers on each of the topics of the six workshops to be held at the Eleventh Congress; (b) Background documents (i) National papers and reports submitted by Governments; (ii) Reports submitted by entities of the United Nations system, including specialized agencies, and by institutes for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, affiliated with the United Nations; (iii) Reports submitted by intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as contributions by individual experts on the roster of the Secretariat, dealing with specific questions in their areas of concern; (iv) Report on the world crime situation; (v) Report on the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century and the plans of action for its implementation. G. Rules of procedure 20. Rule 63 of the rules of procedure for United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders provides as follows: "After the completion of each Congress, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice shall make appropriate recommendations to the Economic and Social Council for such amendments to the present rules as it may deem necessary." The rules of procedure for the congresses were made available to the Commission at its twelfth session so that it could consider the need to amend them. In the absence of any amendments, the Eleventh Congress will be conducted in accordance with the current rules of procedure for the congresses, supplemented by the guidelines contained in paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 56/119. H. Resource allocation 21. In its resolution 58/138, the General Assembly reiterated its request to the Secretary-General to make available the necessary resources for the participation of the least developed countries in the regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress and at the Congress itself, in accordance with past practice; and also requested him to provide resources, as required, in accordance with established United Nations budgetary practice and within the overall appropriations of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, in order to ensure a wide and effective programme of public information relating to the preparations for the Eleventh Congress, to the Congress itself and to the follow-up to and implementation of its recommendations. Section 16 of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 includes a resource allocation for holding the regional preparatory meetings and provisions to cover the estimated basic costs for convening the Eleventh Congress, namely, the participation of one representative of each of the least developed countries, obtaining expert input for preparing the substantive documents, temporary assistance, hospitality and other conference-servicing costs, as well as the costs for a programme of public information (see A/58/16 (sect.16)). III. Regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress 22. In its resolution 58/138, the General Assembly, stressing the importance of undertaking all the preparatory activities for the Eleventh Congress in a timely and concerted manner, urged the regional preparatory meetings to examine the substantive items on the agenda and the workshop topics of the Eleventh Congress and to make action-oriented recommendations to serve as a basis for the draft recommendations and conclusions for consideration by the Congress. Pursuant to paragraph 6 of the resolution, the Secretary-General prepared a discussion guide for the regional preparatory meetings and the workshops, which was made available to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its thirteenth session. The discussion guide was perceived by participants as a very informative and stimulating substantive document, which served as a basis for the discussion of the various issues before the regional meetings. 23. Four regional preparatory meetings were held: (a) African Regional Preparatory Meeting, held in Addis Ababa from 1 to 3 March 2004 in cooperation with the Economic Commission for Africa; (b) Asian and Pacific Regional Preparatory Meeting, held in Bangkok from 29 to 31 March 2004 in cooperation with the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific; (c) Latin American and the Caribbean Regional Preparatory Meeting, held in San José from 19 to 21 April 2004 at the invitation of the Government of Costa Rica and in cooperation with the Latin American Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders; (d) Western Asian Regional Preparatory Meeting, held in Beirut from 28 to 30 April 2004 at the invitation of the Government of Lebanon and in cooperation with the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia. 24. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 56/119, each regional preparatory meeting lasted three days. In accordance with resolution 58/138, the preparatory meetings considered the five substantive items on the provisional agenda for the Eleventh Congress and the topics of each of the six workshops from a regional perspective. The regional meetings were attended by some 370 participants, comprising senior government officials and experts in various areas of crime prevention and criminal justice. Each meeting was followed by a two-day seminar to promote the ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (General Assembly resolution 55/25, annex I) and the Protocols thereto and the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Corruption (General Assembly resolution 58/4, annex). The seminars offered an opportunity for States to provide guidance to the Secretariat on the organization of the first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Recommendations 25. The regional meetings made recommendations to serve as a basis for the draft declaration to be prepared by the Commission for consideration by the Eleventh Congress. Their recommendations are summarized below: Substantive items Effective measures to combat transnational organized crime; international cooperation against terrorism; and effective measures against corruption 1. All States that have not yet done so should become parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, at the earliest opportunity, to the twelve instruments against terrorism and to the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 2. Adequate funding should be provided for advice to States and specialized training for magistrates, judges, prosecutors, customs officials and other law enforcement personnel. 3. Technical assistance programmes for strengthening the rule of law and for the establishment or reinforcement of criminal justice institutions should be provided. 4. A comprehensive analysis of the links between organized crime, terrorism and regional conflicts should be carried out, including how to develop a more effective response to organized crime in peacekeeping operations and post-conflict situations. 5. In order to enhance the capacity of States to implement the international instruments against terrorism, States should be provided with technical assistance in reviewing their domestic legislation and procedures, including relevant bilateral agreements, and in formulating effective measures for their application, and that counter-terrorism measures be in accordance with human rights instruments. 6. In order to facilitate exchange of reliable information on organized crime and international terrorism, the capacity of Member States to collect and analyse information on organized crime and international terrorism should be strengthened and a more effective system of information-sharing on significant trends in the development of terrorist and organized criminal groups should be developed at the regional and international levels. 7. The Eleventh Congress should consider proposing the negotiation of a convention against cybercrime. 8. States should give high priority to action against corruption, including through the establishment or reinforcement of appropriate institutions of good governance, with emphasis on the incorporation of the prevention measures outlined in the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 9. States should set up, if necessary through the provision of technical assistance, programmes for training government officials and financial managers in the public and private sectors in, inter alia, the use of effective measures to prevent, detect, investigate, punish and control corruption, including the use of evidence-gathering and investigative methods and capacity-building in the development and planning of strategic anti-corruption policies. 10. Anti-corruption modules in national education systems at all levels should be designed and implemented. 11. Technical assistance should be based on international and, where relevant, region-specific best practices. 12. A legislative guide on the United Nations Convention against Corruption should be developed. Economic and financial crimes: challenges to sustainable development 13. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should collect and disseminate information on economic and financial crimes by undertaking a study on the incidences and consequences of such crimes, with a view to developing more effective strategies to prevent and control them. 14. With the active participation and contribution of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, assistance programmes should be developed and made available to developing countries, countries with economies in transition and countries emerging from conflict to enable them to prevent and control economic crimes. 15. Measures should be taken to enhance corporate social responsibility, in line with the Global Compact Initiative, and the United Nations should play an active role in the development of such measures. 16. A study should be carried out to develop reliable indicators of economic and financial crimes and a system for comparing their incidences and harm with other types of criminal behaviour in order to establish the level of resources required to address the problem of economic and financial crimes. 17. The Eleventh Congress should consider the possibility of initiating negotiations on a draft United Nations convention against economic and financial crimes. Making standards work: fifty years of standard-setting in crime prevention and criminal justice 18. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should provide requesting States with technical assistance and/or advisory services for their criminal justice reform programmes, including assistance in amending their criminal justice legislation and codes of criminal procedure. 19. The Eleventh Congress should explore the possibility of developing an action plan for juvenile justice that would set targets for reducing the number of children arrested, detained or imprisoned, including: (a) The feasibility of the action plan being aimed at reducing the number of such children by 25 per cent within 5 years and by 50 per cent within 10 years; (b) The possibility of the action plan being focused on the collection and analysis of national data on children deprived of their liberty, with a view to promoting the prevention of juvenile delinquency and the use of alternatives to imprisonment and improving the conditions of children deprived of their liberty. 20. The Eleventh Congress should pay particular attention to the need to protect victims of crime, including victims of organized crime. Topics of the workshops Workshop 1. Enhancing International Law Enforcement Cooperation, including Extradition Measures 21. Workshop 1 should be used as an opportunity to exchange information and experiences at the national and international levels and to explore the most conducive ways of promoting research and structuring training and education programmes for law enforcement personnel. 22. Workshop 1 should explore the possibility of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime providing a forum for the negotiation of bilateral agreements or arrangements in the area of law enforcement cooperation. Workshop 2. Enhancing Criminal Justice Reform, including Restorative Justice 23. Workshop 2 should examine the need to undertake accurate assessments and methodological studies of the effects of imprisonment on vulnerable groups, in particular women and juveniles, and on ways to raise their awareness of the functioning of the criminal justice system and the rights afforded to them by the system. 24. Workshop 2 should focus its attention on alternatives to imprisonment, prison overcrowding, best practices in criminal justice reform, United Nations standards and norms applicable to children in conflict with the law, and restorative justice. Workshop 3. Strategies and Best Practices for Crime Prevention, in particular in relation to Urban Crime and Youth at Risk 25. Workshop 3 should be used as an opportunity to share information and experiences on the most promising approaches to and strategies for the prevention of crime, in particular urban crime, as well as measures to protect youth at risk. 26. Workshop 3 should focus on the most appropriate practical ways to make use of relevant United Nations standards and norms, including those applicable to children in conflict with the law in order to avoid a situation in which deprivation of liberty would be the predominant social response to youth crime. 27. Workshop 3 should examine ways and means of fostering community participation in crime prevention, in particular, ways to increase the confidence and trust of the community in law enforcement, in order to promote cooperation among members of civil society and the police. Workshop 4. Measures to Combat Terrorism, with Reference to the Relevant International Conventions and Protocols 28. Workshop 4 should explore ways and means of strengthening the capacity of the judiciary, prosecution and the police to counter terrorist organizations and activities, in addition to examining various types of technical assistance that could be provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to ensure the full application of existing international instruments against terrorism, including the provision of legislative guides and specialized training for criminal justice officials. 29. In adopting and implementing national laws against terrorism, Workshop 4 should emphasize the fact that the principle of due process of law be maintained, thus striking an appropriate balance with the need to prevent and control that most serious form of crime. 30. Workshop 4 should examine the most effective ways to ensure the expeditious exchange of criminal intelligence and other information at the national and international levels in order to enhance cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of terrorist crimes. Workshop 5. Measures to Combat Economic Crime, including MoneyLaundering 31. Workshop 5 should examine ways to apply information technology to law enforcement operations against economic crime and money-laundering, including data collection and analysis, especially in case management. 32. Workshop 5 should serve as a forum in which to explore the development of educational and training programmes for capacity-building in compliance with relevant international legal instruments. Workshop 6. Measures to Combat Computer-related Crime 33. Workshop 6 should examine current experience and existing national legal frameworks and arrangements for cooperation between States to combat computer-related crime, with a view to assessing the effectiveness of such frameworks and arrangements. 34. Workshop 6 should examine the most appropriate ways to promote cooperative arrangements between Governments and the private sector oriented towards ensuring the security of computer networks and communication systems and the existence of appropriate response mechanisms. 35. Workshop 6 should explore ways and means of enhancing the capacity of Governments to develop and apply adequate special investigative techniques and prosecutorial capabilities. 36. Workshop 6 should deal with the use of modern technology in exploiting women and children, especially in relation to pornography and paedophilia. IV. Appointment of the Secretary-General and Executive Secretary of the Eleventh Congress 26. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/138 and rule 13 of the rules of procedure for United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, on 20 February 2004 the Secretary-General of the United Nations appointed the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Secretary-General of the Eleventh Congress and the Director of the Division for Treaty Affairs of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Secretary. V. Information received from Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerning their preparations for the Eleventh Congress 27. In its resolution 58/138, the General Assembly invited Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant entities to provide financial, organizational and technical support to the Centre for International Crime Prevention of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to the institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network for the preparations for the workshops, including the preparation and circulation of relevant background material; invited donor countries to cooperate with the developing countries to ensure their full participation in the workshops; encouraged Governments to undertake preparations for the Eleventh Congress at an early stage by all appropriate means, including, where appropriate, the establishment of national preparatory committees, with a view to contributing to a focused and productive discussion on the topics of the Congress and to participating actively in the organization and follow-up to the workshops; and reiterated its invitation to Member States to be represented at the Eleventh Congress at the highest possible level, for example, by heads of State or Government or government ministers and attorneys general, to make statements on the theme and topics of the Congress and to participate in the thematic interactive round tables. 28. In addition to the information summarized in the previous report of the Secretary-General on the preparations for the Eleventh Congress (A/58/87-E/2003/82), information has been received from the Governments of Finland, Slovakia, Turkey and Ukraine on their preparations for the Congress. That additional information from Governments, together with information received from the Division for the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat and from a number of other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, is summarized below. A. Information received from Governments 29. Finland considered the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice to be very useful forums for the exchange of information and experience on crime prevention and control and supported attempts by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to streamline the congresses, to make them more focused and to base the debates on careful preparations. Finland expressed continued concern with what it considered an imbalance in the amount of time allocated to the Eleventh Congress, since, even with careful preparations, insufficient time had been allotted for full debate on issues that were of considerable importance. Concerning the preparations for the Eleventh Congress, Finland noted that it was the host country of the European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control, affiliated with the United Nations, which was assisting in the preparations for the workshops. The Institute had played a key role in the preparations for the congress workshops ever since the holding of the first workshop on youth and crime at the Seventh Congress, in 1985. In accordance with past practice, in the delegation of Finland, a broad range of ministries and expertise in crime prevention and criminal justice would be represented and the members of the delegation would participate actively in the proceedings of the Congress. Representatives of the entities concerned would make careful preparations to ensure that Finland's submissions contributed as fully as possible to maintaining a high level of debate. 30. Slovakia stated that its Ministry of Justice had initiated various legislative amendments to the Slovak Penal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure, to education within the justice system, including prisons, and to the training of judges and trainee judges within the context of its Crime Prevention Strategy. 31. Turkey was considering attending the Congress at a high level and planned to participate actively in the organization of and follow-up to the workshops. 32. Ukraine reported that it had made legislative changes and institutional arrangements in the areas of measures to counter trafficking in persons and international cooperation in fighting organized crime, money-laundering and drug trafficking. B. Information received from the Division for the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat 33. The Division for the Advancement of Women reported that several of the resolutions adopted by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twelfth session, as well as the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Commission, in particular Assembly resolution 58/138 on the preparations for the Eleventh Congress, were of special interest to the Division. The Division had provided substantive and technical support to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the treaty body in charge of monitoring the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Assembly resolution 34/180, annex), which regularly addressed the issue of trafficking in persons when considering reports of States parties to the Convention. 34. In collaboration with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Division was preparing a guide to human rights and legislative practices to combat trafficking in persons, especially women and children. The guide was intended to provide guidance to policy makers and practitioners on how to use the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking (E/2002/68/Add.1) and article 6 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, in their efforts to combat trafficking in persons. C. Information received from other intergovernmental organizations 35. The International Centre for Migration Policy Development, an intergovernmental organization with a European focus and global interests, reported that it had implemented many activities relevant to the resolutions adopted by the Economic and Social Council and that it supported States in the facilitation of legal migration and in measures against illegal migration. It provided forums in which States discussed policies related to both approaches and, in so doing, facilitated regional coordination and cooperation. The Centre also reported that it supported Governments in their efforts to implement measures against irregular migration through capacity-building, research and consultancy services in the areas of visa and border management and trafficking in persons. D. Information received from non-governmental organizations 36. The American Society of Criminology reported that its Division of International Criminology, at its annual meeting in November 2003, had discussed the activities of the Eleventh Congress and had distributed background documents. The Society also reported that its Division on Women and Crime had expressed interest in attending the Congress and that it had briefed the Division on Corrections and Sentencing on that issue. The Society planned to convene a session of deans or heads of higher education programmes in criminology and criminal justice from throughout the world as an ancillary meeting of the Congress with a view to harmonizing efforts of various stakeholders in education and training. The Society reported that the importance of the Eleventh Congress had been highlighted in the report of the Division of International Criminology to the Executive Board of the Society on the deliberations of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twelfth session. In November 2003, a full report of the work of the Commission had appeared in a special newsletter of the Society's Division of International Criminology. In December 2003, its newsletter, The Criminologist, had featured a full article on the Commission and the Congress, including information on how to participate in the Congress. 37. The International League for Human Rights reported that it was working with the Alliance of Non-Governmental Organizations on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice with a view to collaboration in the ancillary meetings of the Eleventh Congress. The League stated that it was in the process of organizing at least one session on the Model Treaty on the Transfer of Supervision of Offenders Conditionally Sentenced or Conditionally Released (General Assembly resolution 45/119, annex). It also stated that, during a meeting of the International Scientific and Professional Advisory Council, held in Courmayeur, Italy, in November 2003, representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council attending the meeting had met briefly to plan ancillary meetings at the Congress. It had also been working closely with the American Society of Criminology and, in a supportive role, with the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences in determining where the academic and research community could be most involved before and during the Congress. VI. Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its thirteenth session 38. At its thirteenth session, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice considered an item of its agenda on the preparations for the Eleventh Congress. For its consideration of the item, the Commission had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the preparations for the Eleventh Congress (E/CN.15/2004/11), the discussion guide for the Eleventh Congress (A/CONF.203/PM.1) and the reports of the regional preparatory meetings for the Eleventh Congress (A/CONF.203/RPM.1/1, A/CONF.203/RPM.2/1, A/CONF.203/RPM.3/1 and Corr.1 and A/CONF.203/RPM.4/1). 39. During the thirteenth session of the Commission, Governments, non-governmental organizations and the institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network contributed to the discussion on the preparations for the Eleventh Congress. 40. The representative of Thailand expressed the host country's appreciation for the spirit of the international community in recognizing the significance of crime prevention and criminal justice and for the efforts and contributions made for the regional preparatory meetings. He welcomed their successful outcome, providing action-oriented recommendations and guidelines for consideration by the Congress. He stressed the appropriateness of the theme of the Congress, "Synergies and responses: strategic alliances in crime prevention and criminal justice", as well as the relevance of the substantive items and the workshop topics. He proposed that the Eleventh Congress pay special attention to developing appropriate policies and measures, including the possibility of negotiating an international legal instrument to counter cybercrime. The representative of Thailand made a video presentation to the Commission on the background, objectives and preparations for the Eleventh Congress. 41. Speakers welcomed the preparations being made for the Congress and endorsed the draft programme of work contained in the report of the Secretary-General. They expressed deep appreciation to the Government of Thailand for its invaluable efforts as host country for the Congress. Appreciation was also expressed for the important contribution being made by the institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network.2 42. Many speakers stressed the importance of the recommendations made by the regional preparatory meetings, especially concerning the proposals to negotiate international legal instruments to counter cybercrime and on extradition and mutual legal assistance, as well as the need to pay attention to the theft of and trafficking in cultural property. Several speakers also emphasized the significance of the substantive items to be considered at the Eleventh Congress, in particular the item "Making standards work: fifty years of standard-setting in crime prevention and criminal justice". It was stated that, considering that nearly 50 years had passed since the adoption of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, it might be appropriate for the Congress to conduct an in-depth examination of the issues related to the treatment of prisoners, including female prisoners, in the light of new developments within the criminal justice systems in the various regions of the world.2 43. Several speakers suggested that the draft declaration to be adopted by the Congress should be prepared as soon as possible after the conclusion of the current session, through the intersessional meetings of the Commission, taking into account the recommendations made by the regional preparatory meetings. One speaker stressed that the declaration should be comprehensive and action-oriented. Another speaker proposed that it contain a detailed plan of action.2 44. The Commission at its thirteenth session recommended to the Economic and Social Council the approval of a revised draft resolution for adoption by the General Assembly entitled "Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice", in which the Assembly would request the Commission at intersessional meetings to begin preparation of a draft declaration for submission to the Congress. Member States should take advantage of that opportunity to prepare a draft declaration that would address current and emerging issues and concerns in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice. The fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly is the last session of the Assembly prior to the holding of the Congress in Bangkok; thus it provides a unique occasion for Member States, United Nations entities, institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute to that endeavour. 