%%%DRUG CONTROL|DRUG PRODUCTION|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|DRUG DEMAND|DRUG ABUSE|AIDS|LAW ENFORCEMENT|DRUG TRAFFIC|LAUNDERING OF FUNDS|CROP ERADICATION|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|

Fifty-ninth session Item 99 of the provisional agenda* * A/59/150. International drug control International cooperation against the world drug problem Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report has been prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/141 of 22 December 2003, entitled "International cooperation against the world drug problem," in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of that resolution. The report provides an overview of the implementation of mandates relating to international drug control, in particular the outcome of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to countering the world drug problem together, held from 8 to 10 June 1998. Paragraphs Page Introduction International cooperation to counter the world drug problem and follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly Follow-up by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs Demand reduction Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors Judicial and law enforcement cooperation Countering money-laundering Illicit crop eradication and alternative development Action by the United Nations system Conclusions and recommendations Figures Global trends in drug abuse, 2002 Global trends in the abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants, according to national experts, 1991-2002 Proportion of seizure cases accounted for by different drug categories, 1990-2002 Global drug seizures in billions of unit equivalents, 1985-2002 Global opium poppy cultivation, 1990-2003 Global opium production, 1990-2003 Global coca bush cultivation, 1990-2003 Global cocaine manufacture, 1990-2003 In its resolution 58/141 of 22 December 2003, entitled "International cooperation against the world drug problem", the General Assembly reaffirmed its commitment to the outcome of its twentieth special session, devoted to countering the world drug problem together, held in New York from 8 to 10 June 1998; and reaffirmed the importance of the commitments of Member States in meeting the objectives targeted for 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the Assembly at the twentieth special session (Assembly resolution S-20/2, annex). In section II of the same resolution, the Assembly reaffirmed the Joint Ministerial Statement and further measures to implement the action plans emanating from the twentieth special session of the Assembly, adopted during the ministerial segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (A/58/124, sect. II. A); called upon all relevant actors to continue their close cooperation with Governments in promoting and implementing the outcome of the twentieth special session and of the ministerial segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission; and stressed that, in order to further develop sound, evidence-based drug control policies, data collection and analysis and evaluation of the results of ongoing policies were essential tools. In the area of demand reduction, the General Assembly, in section II of its resolution 58/141, urged all Member States to implement the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction (Assembly resolution 54/132, annex) and to strengthen their national efforts to counter the abuse of illicit drugs in their population, in particular among children and young people; and, in order to achieve a significant reduction of drug abuse by 2008, urged States to further implement comprehensive demand reduction policies and programmes. Also in section II of its resolution 58/141, the General Assembly urged States to renew their efforts to implement the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors (Assembly resolution S-20/4 A), to make special efforts to counter the abuse and recreational use of amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS), especially by young people, and to disseminate information on the adverse health, social and economic consequences of such abuse. In the area of precursor control, the Assembly, in section II of that resolution, encouraged States to establish or strengthen mechanisms for making the most effective use of existing systems and for ensuring strict control of chemical precursors used to manufacture illicit drugs. In the area of judicial cooperation, the General Assembly, in section II of its resolution 58/141, called upon all States to strengthen international cooperation among judicial and law enforcement authorities at all levels in order to prevent and combat illicit drug trafficking and to share best operational practices, in particular in the areas of air, maritime and port control. In the area of countering money- laundering, the Assembly, in section II of that resolution, urged States to strengthen action, in particular international cooperation and technical assistance aimed at preventing and combating the laundering of proceeds derived from drug trafficking and related criminal activities. Also in section II of its resolution 58/141, the General Assembly called upon States: to enhance support for alternative development and elimination programmes undertaken by countries affected by the illicit cultivation of cannabis, of opium poppy and of coca bush, in particular national programmes that seek to reduce social marginalization and promote sustainable economic development; to encourage international cooperation, including preventive alternative development, to prevent illicit crop cultivation from emerging in or being relocated to other areas; and to provide greater access to their markets for products of alternative development programmes. In section III of its resolution 58/141, the General Assembly encouraged the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the global coordinating body in international drug control and as the governing body of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme, and the International Narcotics Control Board to continue their work on the control of precursors and other chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances; and requested the Programme to continue to strengthen dialogue with Member States and to ensure continued improvement in management, inter alia, through the full implementation of Commission resolutions 44/16 and 45/17, to strengthen cooperation with Member States and relevant entities and to provide, on request, assistance in implementing the outcome of the twentieth special session. II. International cooperation to counter the world drug problem and follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly A. Follow-up by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs The Commission on Narcotic Drugs is mandated to oversee the implementation of the action plans and measures adopted at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, through replies submitted by Governments to the biennial reports questionnaire on their efforts to meet the relevant goals and targets. At its forty-seventh session, in 2004, the Commission continued to review the progress achieved by Governments in meeting those goals and targets. Governments are to submit their replies to the biennial questionnaire for the third reporting cycle, covering the period from June 2002 to June 2004. The information will be used to prepare the third biennial report of the Executive Director, to be considered by the Commission at its forty-eighth session, in 2005. B. Demand reduction Global trends The total number of drug users in the world is estimated to be about 185 million people, equivalent to 3 per cent of the world population or 4.7 per cent of the population aged 15-64. The latest estimates confirm that the most widely abused substance is cannabis (close to 150 million users), followed by ATS (about 30 million people use amphetamines, primarily methamphetamine and amphetamine, and 8 million use Ecstasy). Slightly more than 13 million people use cocaine, and 15 million use opiates (such as heroin (9 million), morphine, opium, synthetic opiates). Because of their impact on health, measured in terms of demand for treatment services, opiates remain the most serious problem drug in the world. They account for 67 per cent of drug treatment in Asia, 61 per cent in Europe and 47 per cent in Oceania. In South-East Asia, however, methamphetamine has become the main problem drug in the last decade. Cocaine still comes first in the Americas as a whole, but in the United States of America the number of persons admitted to drug treatment centres is now higher for heroin than for cocaine. In Africa, cannabis continues to dominate treatment demand (65 per cent). Since 1998, the global drug abuse trends have been as follows (see figure I): (a) Abuse of cannabis has been increasing in most countries. In countries with high prevalence and long-term prevention efforts, it seems that prevalence is stabilizing, or even declining (as in Australia, for example), even if it is still at a relatively high level; (b) Abuse of opioids has been increasing in most regions, with the exception of Oceania. Within the various regions, there are significant differences. In the European region, the major increases have been in Eastern Europe, while the situation is stable or declining in Western Europe; (c) Abuse of ATS has increased in all regions since 1998. The increases are of different intensity and may refer to different substances within the ATS group, but ATS have become a major drug of choice in all regions; (d) Cocaine abuse has been increasing slightly in the main region of consumption (the Americas) and its rising level of use is causing concern across Europe. In Africa, the increasing abuse of cocaine reported in the late 1990s has ceased; in Asia, very small increases in the abuse of that substance have been reported; and in Oceania the situation is stable. Crack cocaine remains a serious problem in some areas. The impact of drug abuse on crime and violence at the community level was the main focus of the Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2003. The Board called on Governments to implement comprehensive, community-based drug demand reduction policies, paying special attention to drug abuse prevention in combination with a range of social, economic and law enforcement measures, which should include: creating an environment that is not conducive to drug dealing and micro-trafficking; supporting local efforts at employment and licit income generation; educational programmes targeting socially marginalized groups; and intervention work with groups at risk. The Board also noted that programmes needed to be sustainable in the long term in order to generate the desired impact. Source: Information provided by 95 Governments on their replies to the annual reports questionnaire. Key indicators The ability of the international community to monitor trends in the area of drug abuse depends upon the identification and application of key indicators, which are incorporated into information-gathering instruments. At its forty-seventh session, in 2004, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs agreed on the need to establish key indicators to be used as a reference to measure progress in the reduction of drug abuse. There was a consensus on the key indicators proposed by the Secretariat in its report on the world situation with regard to drug abuse (E/CN.7/2004/2) and the idea of developing a drug abuse index based on those indicators was welcomed. The key indicators identified at an expert meeting on the principles, structures and indicators for drug information systems, held in Lisbon in January 2000, were as follows (E/CN.17/2004/2, para. 83): (a) Drug use among the general population (estimates of prevalence and incidence); (b) Drug use among the youth population (estimates of prevalence and incidence); (c) High-risk drug abuse (estimates of the number of injecting drug users and the proportion engaged in high-risk behaviour, estimates of the number of daily drug users); (d) Use of services for drug problems; (f) Drug related mortality (death directly attributable to drug use). In this connection, many countries are working towards improving their data collection systems, with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime within the framework of the Global Assessment Programme on Drug Abuse and other programmes. HIV/AIDS The Commission on Narcotic Drugs is giving priority to HIV/AIDS prevention in the context of drug abuse, because the sharing of contaminated needles and syringes and other injection equipment among injecting drug users remains a significant route of HIV transmission in virtually all subregions except sub-Saharan Africa (E/CN.7/2004/3 and Corr.1, para. 4). There are approximately 13.2 million injecting drug users in the world, and in some areas more than 50 per cent of them are HIV-positive. In its resolution 47/2, the Commission encouraged the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in collaboration with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the World Health Organization (WHO) and other relevant organizations, to pursue its efforts in studying the effectiveness of drug-related HIV/AIDS prevention programmes. In addition, the Commission selected for the thematic debate on drug abuse prevention, treatment and rehabilitation to be held during its forty-eighth session, in 2005, the themes "Community capacity-building" and "Preventing HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne diseases in the context of drug abuse prevention". From 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will chair the Committee of Co-Sponsoring Organizations of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is the convening agency for all matters pertaining to injecting drug use as it relates to HIV/AIDS. The main partners of the Office in that area include the UNAIDS secretariat, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and WHO. The Office has organized a series of meetings of the inter-agency task team on injecting drug use. Together with the UNAIDS secretariat, the Office maintains the United Nations Reference Group on HIV/AIDS Prevention and Care among IDU in Developing and Transitional Countries. Furthermore, the Office has established an HIV/AIDS Unit within the Division for Operations to oversee the implementation of the strategy of the Office pertaining to all aspects of HIV/AIDS and other health and social consequences of drug abuse. C. Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors In paragraph 13 of the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, Member States decided to devote particular attention to illicit manufacturing, trafficking and consumption of synthetic drugs and called for action to give effect to the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors. In September 2003, to support the priority given by Member States to combating the threat posed by ATS, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime released its first global survey on synthetic drugs, entitled Ecstasy and Amphetamines: Global Survey 2003. The survey revealed a striking increase in the manufacture of, trafficking in and abuse of synthetic drugs worldwide, affecting all countries, both producers and consumers. The survey documented an alarming increase in the number and size of manufacturing sites around the world, which ranged from small kitchen laboratories to sophisticated clandestine operations capable of manufacturing 1 ton of synthetic drugs per week (the equivalent of 1 million Ecstasy tablets). The survey underlined the global nature of the ATS problem. Unlike cocaine and heroin, whose manufacture is limited by geography and climate, ATS can be produced anywhere. Clandestine manufacturers were taking increasing advantage of the easy access to production information available through the Internet. Laboratories with access to the necessary precursor chemicals were being set up to fuel a growing demand. About 38 million people used ATS in the past year. In the period 1998-2002, the abuse of ATS increased in all regions of the world, despite some recent signs of stabilization in the main consumption areas (see figure II). Methamphetamine continues to be the most widely available ATS, although methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, commonly known as Ecstasy) is the substance with the largest increases over the past few years. The majority of methamphetamine interdictions have taken place in East and South-East Asia and North America. Europe has accounted for the bulk of global seizures of amphetamine and Ecstasy, with most countries registering increased seizures. The clandestine manufacture of Ecstasy-type substances, measured by the number of clandestine laboratories detected, appears to be concentrated in Western Europe and North America. In the last few years, detections have also been reported in countries in East and South-East Asia. The widespread abuse of and trafficking in synthetic drugs, especially ATS, underlines the need for Governments in countries where most illicit manufacture is taking place to take effective action against that illicit activity, including by implementing more stringent controls to prevent the diversion of precursor chemicals from licit channels to be used in the illicit manufacture of ATS (E/CN.7/2004, paras. 89 and 112). At its forty-seventh session, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs held a thematic debate on synthetic drugs and control of precursors: production of, trafficking in and abuse of synthetic drugs, including methaqualone (Mandrax); and strengthening systems for the control of precursor chemicals to prevent diversion of and trafficking in such chemicals. It was noted that the efforts of some national authorities in those areas were increasingly being frustrated by lack of capacity to deal with hazardous crime scenes and to dispose of precursor chemicals safely. Pre-export notifications had proved to be a valuable means of combating the diversion of legitimate consignments, and backtracking investigations had made it possible to detect the origin of seized chemicals and to identify the modus operandi used in cases involving diversion. Illicit trafficking by sea continued to be one of the main means used to transport illicitly manufactured drugs and their precursor chemicals in all regions. Reference was made to Operation Purple, Operation Topaz and Project Prism, the international precursor control initiatives undertaken by Governments in cooperation with the International Narcotics Control Board. It was noted that, although those initiatives had proved their effectiveness, they required the continued support and commitment of all participating States. The Commission recommended that the Economic and Social Council approve for adoption by the General Assembly a draft resolution entitled "Follow-up on strengthening the systems of control over chemical precursors and preventing their diversion and trafficking". In that draft resolution, the Assembly would urge all Member States to put in place systems to ensure that the details of any interdiction, seizure, diversion or attempted diversion of precursors are communicated expeditiously to all Governments concerned and the International Narcotics Control Board and, insofar as possible, share relevant information so that methods frequently used for trafficking in chemicals may be identified, pursuant to article 12 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988. Figure II Source: World Drug Report 2004 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E04.XI.16). The International Narcotics Control Board, in its annual report for 2003, called upon all Governments concerned to join forces in combating the problem of ATS abuse through Project Prism, a worldwide operation to prevent diversions of precursor chemicals used in the manufacture of ATS. Project Prism aims to prevent the illicit manufacture of the chemical precursors by stopping traffickers obtaining the chemicals they need, and identifying and dismantling the laboratories where such manufacture took place, using a variety of law enforcement investigative techniques, such as controlled delivery. D. Judicial and law enforcement cooperation The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,9 which have been ratified by nearly all Member States, provide the legal framework for international drug control, including for judicial cooperation. There are 180 States parties to the 1961 Convention and that Convention as amended by the 1972 Protocol, 175 States parties to the 1971 Convention and 170 parties to the 1988 Convention. The overall number of drug seizures has consistently increased since the early 1990s, but there were signs of stabilization and decline in 2002. Global seizure data for the period 1990-2000 show a decline in the relative importance of cannabis, the rapid emergence of ATS, an increase in seizures of opiates and an increase, followed by stabilization, in cocaine seizures (see figures III and IV). The quantity of the illicit drugs seized has also increased, with Ecstasy, depressants and ATS showing the strongest increases. In terms of the quantity seized, cannabis figures most prominently; it is followed by cocaine, opiates and ATS, in that order. The global heroin market remained largely stable in 2002, but there were slight indications of expansion in 2003, and a larger expansion has been forecast for 2004. As opium poppy cultivation is increasingly concentrated in Afghanistan, which has produced three quarters of the world's illicit opium in recent years, the market will largely depend on what happens in that country. The overall decline in coca bush cultivation and cocaine manufacture has continued for the fourth year in a row, and vigilant supply reduction efforts have continued in Bolivia, Colombia and Peru. However, the cannabis market has continued to be buoyant and to expand in many regions, as has the market for ATS. Figure III Proportion of seizure cases accounted for by different drug categories, Source: World Drug Report 2004 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.04.XI.16). Figure IV Member States have expressed continuing concern regarding serious challenges and threats posed by the links between drug trafficking, terrorism and national and transnational organized crime. At the forty-seventh session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, participants called for strong international cooperation, in particular among judicial and law enforcement authorities at all levels, to prevent and combat drug trafficking. Representatives referred to increased problems involving drug trafficking by sea and the transit traffic in illicit drugs in their countries, to the critical role of international cooperation and to successes facilitated by bilateral and regional agreements and arrangements, in particular regarding mutual legal assistance, extradition and law enforcement cooperation. It was noted that the European arrest warrant had become a cornerstone of judicial cooperation within the European Union, in particular in efforts to implement the principle of mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters. The subsidiary bodies of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs reviewed trends in drug trafficking and regional and subregional cooperation, as well as addressing priority drug law enforcement issues in their respective regions. Four meetings were held in 2003: the thirty-eighth session of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East, held in Amman from 23 to 27 June; the Thirteenth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Africa, held in Port Louis from 8 to 12 September; the Thirteenth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Salvador, Brazil, from 20 to 24 October; and the Twenty-seventh Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Asia and the Pacific, held in Bangkok from 8 to 12 December. The recommendations made by the subsidiary bodies addressed issues such as countering opiate and cannabis trafficking, identifying drug traffickers through effective document control, law enforcement cooperation against the illicit manufacture and distribution of stimulants, training of law enforcement officials, mobilizing community support for law enforcement anti-drug strategies, effective controlled delivery operations and strengthening information exchange and operational cooperation at the inter-agency, cross-border and regional levels. E. Countering money-laundering The Commission on Narcotic Drugs noted that measures to combat money-laundering associated with serious crime, including the financing of terrorist assets, should take into account various aspects of the revised recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering. In that context, cooperation at the regional level could be enhanced through mechanisms such as the Eastern and Southern African Anti-Money Laundering Group. The new legal framework for action against the crime of money-laundering had allowed easier access to bank information and the successful functioning of financial intelligence units which had resulted in an increase in cases identified and confiscated. In 2003, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, working in close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council, supported the ratification and implementation of the 12 universal instruments on terrorism, as well as compliance with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001. The Global Programme against Money-Laundering has contributed to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1456 (2003) of 20 January 2003, providing assistance in such areas as drafting legislation and building capacity for investigators, prosecutors and operators in the financial sector, as well as establishing and strengthening financial intelligence units. F. Illicit crop eradication and alternative development At the Millennium Assembly of the United Nations, world leaders identified global poverty as one of the greatest challenges. They adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration, in which they resolved to halve extreme poverty by 2015 (General Assembly resolution 55/2, annex, para. 19). Over the past year, the Office has assisted Governments in reducing the cultivation of illicit drug crops, particularly opium poppy and coca bush. Progress has been undeniable, though uneven. Over recent years, there has been sustained crop reduction in Bolivia and Colombia. In Afghanistan, however, unabated opium poppy cultivation has resulted in that country becoming the source of three quarters of the world's illicit opium production (see figures V and VI). Most Governments in the Andean subregion and South-East and South-West Asia have initiated alternative development plans aimed at curbing illicit crop cultivation. Those plans include the promotion of commercially viable agro-industry and agro-forestry products, as well as the rational use of woodland resources and soil conservation. The programmes of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, of which some are run independently and some are co-managed with other agencies and international financial institutions, have focused on the reduction of poverty, the empowerment of women, the creation of new sources of livelihood and the protection of the environment. Figure V Figure VI The Illicit Crop Monitoring Programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has helped Governments to establish monitoring systems and conduct annual surveys in all the main illicit coca and opium production areas. In 2003, a similar system was established in Morocco, the leading source of illicit cannabis resin, and a first national survey was conducted. In June 2004, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime launched its coca surveys for the Andean subregion. In the five-year period following the holding of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, in 1998, the total area under coca bush cultivation in the Andean subregion -- Bolivia, Colombia and Peru -- declined by 20 per cent, reaching a 14-year low of 153,800 hectares in 2003 (see figures VII and VIII). The area under coca bush cultivation in Colombia was reduced to 86,000 hectares in 2003, representing a decline of 16 per cent with respect to the previous year, that was the third consecutive annual decrease since 2000, resulting in the total area under coca bush cultivation in Colombia being reduced by 7 per cent. The trend in recent years in Colombia has followed the reduction in coca bush cultivation in Peru and Bolivia since the mid-1990s. The area under coca bush cultivation in Peru stood at 44,200 hectares in 2003, representing a reduction of 13 per cent since 1998. In Bolivia, the area under coca bush cultivation totalled 23,600 hectares, only half the level estimated in the early and mid-1990s but a slight increase compared with the level in 2002. Figure VII The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime assisted the Governments of Afghanistan, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and Myanmar with annual surveys of opium poppy cultivation. In Myanmar, such cultivation declined by 24 per cent in 2003, resulting in a cumulative decline of 62 per cent since 1996. By contrast, such cultivation increased again in Afghanistan by 8 per cent in 2003. The results of the 2004 surveys for Afghanistan and Myanmar will be released in late 2004. The 2004 opium poppy survey for the Lao People's Democratic Republic was conducted jointly by the Government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime from January to March based on fieldwork and satellite imagery. In the Lao People's Democratic Republic, opium poppy cultivation showed a decline of 45 per cent, from 12,000 hectares in 2003 to 6,600 hectares in 2004. That resulted in a cumulative decline of 75 per cent since 1998. To sustain that decrease, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continues to support the Government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic through a programme facilitation unit that is coordinating, supporting and monitoring the national programme strategy, entitled "The Balanced Approach to Opium Elimination in the Lao PDR". The programme facilitation unit has been specially designed to perform this task with the help of a combination of both international and national personnel with extensive expertise and experience in alternative development and drug demand reduction. III. Action by the United Nations system The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to assist States in complying with the provisions of the international drug control conventions and supported the International Narcotics Control Board in monitoring their implementation. It assisted Member States in establishing new law enforcement mechanisms and promoting joint international operations. Training of front-line law enforcement officials, investigators, prosecutors and judges has been a high priority. The Office provided specialized training in modern investigative techniques (such as covert intelligence and off-site evidence gathering) and in the use of advanced intelligence software. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has directly promoted, or has helped to incorporate into the national poverty alleviation strategies, best practices in alternative development in Afghanistan, Bolivia, Colombia, the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Peru and Viet Nam. In South-East Asia, the Office has supported projects that have helped to secure food security of former opium- growing communities through increasing rice production and other sources of income. In Latin America, pilot projects reached tens of thousands of farming families, organized under agro-businesses and producer associations. In addition to generating legal employment for young people and women, alternative livelihood schemes contributed to the production of legal exports and food crops, combining micro- and macroeconomic benefits for the countries. In the area of drug demand reduction and promoting public health, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has assisted Member States in establishing national drug abuse information systems, promoting best practices and implementing projects leading to reduced drug dependence. The Office continues to support Member States through projects to prevent drug abuse among youth in general, as well as at-risk youth and specific populations. Moreover, through the Global Initiative on Primary Prevention of Substance Abuse, implemented jointly with the World Health Organization and the Global Youth Network, the Office has identified good practices and disseminated them through a series of "hands-on guides" on how to plan a drug abuse prevention response and on how to use performance, sports, youth events, peer-to-peer activities and the Internet to prevent drug abuse. The Office also developed a methodological resource known as the toolkit on drug abuse epidemiology to support the development of an integrated drug information system, the implementation of school surveys on drug abuse; prevalence estimation; data management and interpretation; and qualitative research and focused assessment studies. With regard to treatment and rehabilitation, the Office launched a number of regional projects in Eastern Europe and the Central Asian States aimed at the diversification of services available to injecting drug users, including treatment and prevention of HIV/AIDS. Four publications have been produced under the Drug Abuse Treatment Toolkit series to address different issues in this field. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime issued World Drug Report 2004 in connection with the International Day against Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking on 26 June 2004, under the theme "Drugs: treatment works". The Office introduced its first two-volume edition of the World Drug Report, which merges the former Global Illicit Drug Trends with the World Drug Report. The two publications were combined to increase the breadth of analytical coverage, while maintaining annual statistical output. World Drug Report 2004 covers market trends and provides in-depth long-term trend analysis, as well as detailed statistics on all illicit drug markets. The report was based on data obtained primarily from the annual reports questionnaire sent by Governments to the Office in 2003, supplemented by other sources, when necessary. In its resolution 46/8, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, reaffirming its resolutions 44/16 and 45/17, in which it had called for continued improvement in management and a strengthened dialogue with Member States so as to contribute to enhanced and sustainable programme delivery. Several initiatives have been taken to strengthen dialogue with Member States, as well as between Member States, concerning the priorities and management of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In 2003, management reforms streamlined the functions of the Office, reprofiling the field office network, securing a more stable income base and strengthening human resource management, financial controls and information technology. In March 2004, the Secretary-General established the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to implement the Organization's integrated drug and crime programmes, addressing the interrelated issues of drug control, crime prevention and international terrorism in the context of sustainable development, peace and security (ST/SGB/2004/6). In addition to initiatives to maximize the income from its traditional donors, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has sought to expand co-financing through cost-sharing and government cash counterpart contributions from assisted countries. Great importance has also been attached to mobilizing additional resources from foundations and the corporate sector and to forging innovative partnerships with non-governmental organizations, volunteers and mentors. The Office continued to reach out to international financial institutions, specialized agencies of the United Nations system and bilateral development organizations to build strategic alliances at the planning and operational levels. The Office has continued to promote the mainstreaming of drug control matters into the work of United Nations organizations. The Office is a member of the Millennium Project Task Force 1 on Poverty and Economic Development, which addresses cross-cutting issues such as human rights, good governance, drugs and crime. At the session of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, held in Vienna on 2 and 3 April 2004, the Board approved a policy document on the relation between crime and development, which laid the foundation for strong partnerships with Member States and within the United Nations system, to fight crime so as to remove a major obstacle to development. IV. Conclusions and recommendations In the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, devoted to countering the world drug problem together, in 1998, Governments decided to achieve significant progress in the reduction of illicit drug supply and demand by the year 2008. Since the results achieved so far have been mixed, Member States should strengthen their efforts to implement the outcome of the twentieth special session, in order to make greater progress towards the goals and targets to be attained by all States by 2008. Member States should continue to show their commitment to the implementation of the outcome of the twentieth special session by submitting their replies to the biennial reports questionnaire in a complete and timely manner. Relevant United Nations entities, other international organizations and international financial institutions, including regional development banks, should mainstream drug control issues into their programmes, with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continuing to maintain its catalytic role in mainstreaming the issues by providing relevant data and developing appropriate tools. 