%%%MINE CLEARANCE|LANDMINES|GUIDELINES|INTERNATIONAL LAW|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|INFORMATION MANAGEMENT|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|CAPACITY BUILDING|STANDARDS|FUND-RAISING|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|

Fifty-ninth session * A/59/150. Item 22 of the provisional agenda* Assistance in mine action Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Eliminating the threat of landmines and explosive remnants of war: United Nations advocacy strategy for 2004-2005 Summary Objective 6.7 of the United Nations mine action strategy for 2001-2005 calls for the development of a mine action advocacy strategy. United Nations mine action partners drafted the advocacy strategy, which was endorsed by the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action in April 2004. The new strategy, contained in the present report, will guide United Nations mine action partners in their advocacy work with national and regional mine action organizations, non-governmental organizations, non-State actors and the general public. 1. Long after conflict subsides, landmines and explosive remnants of war continue to kill and maim, to deny access to land, to preclude freedom of circulation and to obstruct achievement of the goals contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration (see General Assembly resolution 55/2). To help coordinate United Nations efforts to eliminate the threat of landmines and explosive remnants of war, a United Nations mine action strategy for 2001-2005 was developed in 2001 and revised in 2003. The Strategy reflects the input of mine-affected and donor Governments and international and non-governmental organizations. Objective 6.7 of the strategy commits the United Nations to develop an advocacy strategy to support mine action. The present report fulfils that objective and is guided by and fully compatible with the vision, mission statement, strategic goals and objectives established in the revised United Nations mine action strategy for 2001-2005. Particular attention will be paid to ensuring that the key principles underpinning the United Nations mine action strategy1 guide implementation of the United Nations advocacy strategy. 2. The United Nations advocacy strategy seeks to ensure that all relevant United Nations system partners are contributing, as appropriate and in accordance with their mandates and comparative advantages, to advocacy initiatives for and with persons affected by landmines and explosive remnants of war. Successful implementation of the United Nations advocacy strategy will depend in large measure on the involvement of United Nations actors in mine-affected countries, in particular those working in mine action programmes in over 30 mine-affected countries. 3. The seven goals reflect the outcomes to which United Nations mine action advocacy initiatives aim to contribute. The goals are intended to be complementary, rather than hierarchical. The objectives delineate the specific contributions to be made by the United Nations system, working under the coordination of the United Nations Mine Action Service, located in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat in partnership with Governments, international and non-governmental organizations, commercial operators, affected communities and concerned individuals. The United Nations intends to achieve all of the stated objectives by the end of 2005. 4. The Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action has established a joint implementation plan that identifies specific activities, time lines, anticipated outputs and the department, agency or office within the United Nations system with lead responsibility for each activity.2 A subcommittee of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group will meet biannually to review progress in achieving the objectives and to revise the implementation plan, as required. The Secretary-General's annual report to the General Assembly on assistance in mine action (A/59/284) will report on progress in the implementation of the advocacy strategy. II. Strategic goals and objectives Goal one. All States take legislative, political and financial steps to combat the effects of landmines and explosive remnants of war. Objective 1.1 To encourage and support all States to adhere to and comply with existing international instruments and commitments on landmines or explosive remnants of war, including the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction3 and relevant protocols to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.4 Objective 1.2 To encourage and support all States to adhere to and comply with international human rights or humanitarian law instruments or commitments that address the rights of individuals affected by landmines or explosive remnants of war, including persons with disabilities. Objective 1.3 To raise the awareness of all States to the potential of mine action as a confidence-building measure in peacemaking and peace-building processes, with particular reference to the relationship between mine action and the sustainable return of displaced persons and refugees. Objective 1.4 To ensure that efforts to strengthen or develop international law relevant to landmines or explosive remnants of war take United Nations mine action experience into account. Objective 1.5 To ensure that efforts to further develop international human rights and humanitarian law and to elicit commitments that address the rights of individuals affected by landmines and/or explosive remnants of war take United Nations experience into account. Objective 1.6 To help ensure that the First Review Conference of the States Parties to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, to be held in Nairobi from 29 November to 3 December 2004, produces clear and measurable goals for the next five years and political and financial commitments by States parties to support implementation of the Convention. Goal two. The general public is aware of all aspects of the landmine and explosive remnants of war problem and of strategies that have been developed to combat the problem. Objective 2.1 To make the Electronic Mine Information Network (E-MINE: www.mineaction.org) more user-friendly and to ensure that at least an additional 2,500 users log on each year. Objective 2.2 To broadcast at least one public service announcement a year to a wide audience that raises awareness of all aspects of mine action. Objective 2.3 To raise awareness of the United Nations position on relevant mine action-related issues through opinion papers, news articles and radio and television interviews. Objective 2.4 To use the First Review Conference of the States Parties to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention in 2004 to educate the public. Objective 2.5 To develop a new communications strategy to reinforce the objectives of the advocacy strategy by the end of 2004. Goal three. Donors are aware of funding requirements to combat the problem of landmines and explosive remnants of war and respond with adequate funding. Objective 3.1 To encourage the General Assembly and the Security Council to authorize appropriate mandates and adequate resources for mine action in United Nations-mandated peace operations. Objective 3.2 To provide donors with a comprehensive overview of mine action funding requirements in all countries in which the United Nations undertakes mine action. Objective 3.3 To provide donors with quarterly updates to ensure that they are aware of urgent priorities as well as under-funded components of mine action. Objective 3.4 To facilitate visits by donors to mine-affected countries to encourage increased funding. Objective 3.5 To regularly present funding requirements to country-based donor coordination mechanisms (in countries with United Nations-supported mine action programmes). Objective 3.6 To ensure that donors are aware of the need to support mine action in countries hosting displaced persons or refugees prior to their return to a mine-affected country. Goal four. Armed non-State actors adhere to and comply with commitments and obligations to halt immediately and unconditionally new deployments of anti-personnel mines and to comply with relevant international human rights and humanitarian norms and standards. Objective 4.1 To elicit commitments from armed non-State actors to comply with international norms regarding landmines or explosive remnants of war. Objective 4.2 To elicit commitments from armed non-State actors to comply with international norms regarding the rights of persons affected by landmines or explosive remnants of war. Objective 4.3 To monitor and report on relevant commitments by armed non-State actors in the appropriate forums. Objective 5.1 To incorporate the advocacy strategy into the plans of United Nations-supported mine action programmes. Objective 5.2 To reflect mine action concerns in all relevant reports of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, the Security Council or the Economic and Social Council on country-specific or thematic issues. Objective 5.3 To ensure that relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions and presidential statements reflect mine action concerns. Objective 5.4 To provide peacekeeping missions with guidelines and training materials that enable peacekeeping personnel to contribute to mine action as appropriate. Objective 5.5 To brief all United Nations officials involved in peacemaking processes or humanitarian negotiations on the incorporation of mine action into ceasefire and peace agreements. Objective 5.6 To systematically incorporate mine action requirements into consolidated appeals, common country assessments, United Nations development assistance frameworks, poverty reduction strategy papers and reconstruction appeals, where appropriate. Goal six. National mine action organizations incorporate the key principles of the United Nations mine action strategy into their own policies and programmes. Objective 6.1 To ensure that gender considerations are reflected in national mine action policies and programmes. Objective 6.2 To ensure that the principles underpinning the United Nations mine action strategy for 2001-2005 and the relevant aspects of the United Nations victim assistance policy are reflected in national mine action policies and programmes. Objective 6.3 To ensure that national mine action priorities are considered in the development of national development plans and budgets. Goal seven. Mine action is addressed on the agendas and in the programmes of relevant regional organizations. Objective 7.1 To develop a regional approach to encourage all States to adhere to and comply with existing international agreements and commitments on landmines. Objective 7.2 To encourage and assist relevant regional and subregional organizations to address mine action concerns. Notes 1 The six key principles of the United Nations mine action strategy for 2001-2005 are: (a) a community-centred approach; (b) a humanitarian imperative; (c) a development perspective; (d) national ownership; (e) cooperation and partnership; and (f) gender mainstreaming. 2 Several objectives in the advocacy strategy repeat advocacy-related objectives contained in the United Nations mine action strategy. The activities planned to implement those objectives are spelled out in the implementation plan. This includes objectives 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, 2.5, 3.2, 4.1 and 4.2. 3 See CD/1478. 4 See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII. 