%%%MARITIME BOUNDARIES|CAMEROON|NIGERIA|GOOD OFFICES|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|COSTS|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PROJECT EXPENDITURES|

Fifty-ninth session Agenda item 108 Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mrs. Denisa Hutanova (Slovakia) I. Introduction 1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2004, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-ninth session the item entitled "Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005" and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the question of the United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission under agenda item 108 at its 5th, and 9th meetings, on 11 and 15 October 2004. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the question are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.5/59/SR.5 and 9). 3. For its consideration of the question, the Committee had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives, authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council (A/58/886) and the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/59/411 and Corr.1). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.3 4. At its 9th meeting, on 15 October, the Committee had before it a draft resolution, entitled "Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council: United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission" (A/C.5/59/L.3), which was submitted by the Chairman on the basis of informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Austria. 5. At the same meeting, before the adoption of the draft resolution, the Director of the Programme Planning Budget Division provided the Committee with the Secretariat's understanding of operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution (see A/C.5/59/SR.9). 6. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.3 without a vote (see para. 7). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 7. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council: United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 58/294 of 18 June 2004, in which it authorized a commitment authority in the amount of 6 million United States dollars for the United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the revised requirements for the United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for the period from 1 June to 31 December 2004, which amount to 5,419,300 dollars; 2. Endorses the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and approves the charging of 5,419,300 dollars against the unallocated balance of funds appropriated under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, for special political missions; 3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that budget presentations for special political missions, to the extent possible, utilize the format of peacekeeping operations and contain information and justification for proposals for post and non-post requirements, subject to the considerations of timeliness and the need for expeditious financing action. 