%%%STATE IMMUNITIES|STATE PROPERTY|JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS|TREATIES (TEXT)|JURISDICTION|COURTS|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|

Fifty-ninth session Agenda item 142 Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Ms. Anna Sotaniemi (Finland) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property" was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 58/74 of 9 December 2003. 2. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2004, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Committee considered the item at its 13th, 14th, 21st and 25th meetings, on 25 and 26 October and on 5 and 9 November 2004. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.6/59/SR.13, 14, 21 and 25). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property. 5. At the 13th meeting, on 25 October, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property introduced the report of the Ad Hoc Committee and proposed some corrections to the text of the draft United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property (see A/C.6/59/SR.13). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/59/L.16 6. At the 21st meeting, on 5 November, the representative of Austria, on behalf of the Bureau, introduced draft resolution A/C.6/59/L.16, entitled "United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property", to which was annexed the text of the Convention. 7. At the 25th meeting, on 9 November, the Chairman made a statement concerning linguistic changes to be made to the text of the draft resolution (see A/C.6/59/SR.25). 8. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/59/L.16 without a vote (see para. 9). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 9. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property The General Assembly, Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations, Recalling its resolution 32/151 of 19 December 1977, in which it recommended that the International Law Commission take up the study of the law of jurisdictional immunities of States and their property with a view to its progressive development and codification, and its subsequent resolutions 46/55 of 9 December 1991, 49/61 of 9 December 1994, 52/151 of 15 December 1997, 54/101 of 9 December 1999, 55/150 of 12 December 2000, 56/78 of 12 December 2001, 57/16 of 19 November 2002 and 58/74 of 9 December 2003, Recalling also that the International Law Commission submitted a final set of draft articles, with commentaries, on the law of jurisdictional immunities of States and their property in chapter II of its report on the work of its forty-third session, Recalling further the reports of the open-ended Working Group of the Sixth Committee, as well as the report of the Working Group on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property of the International Law Commission, submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/98 of 8 December 1998, Recalling that, in its resolution 55/150, it decided to establish the Ad Hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property, open also to participation by States members of the specialized agencies, to further the work done, consolidate areas of agreement and resolve outstanding issues with a view to elaborating a generally acceptable instrument based on the draft articles on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property adopted by the International Law Commission and also on the discussions of the open-ended Working Group of the Sixth Committee, Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property, Stressing the importance of uniformity and clarity in the law of jurisdictional immunities of States and their property, and emphasizing the role of a convention in this regard, Noting the broad support for the conclusion of a convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property, Taking into account the statement of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee introducing the report of the Ad Hoc Committee, 1. Expresses its deep appreciation to the International Law Commission and the Ad Hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property for their valuable work on the law of jurisdictional immunities of States and their property; 2. Agrees with the general understanding reached in the Ad Hoc Committee that the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property does not cover criminal proceedings; 3. Adopts the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property, which is contained in the annex to the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General as depositary to open it for signature; 4. Invites States to become parties to the Convention. Annex The States Parties to the present Convention, Considering that the jurisdictional immunities of States and their property are generally accepted as a principle of customary international law, Having in mind the principles of international law embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, Believing that an international convention on the jurisdictional immunities of States and their property would enhance the rule of law and legal certainty, particularly in dealings of States with natural or juridical persons, and would contribute to the codification and development of international law and the harmonization of practice in this area, Taking into account developments in State practice with regard to the jurisdictional immunities of States and their property, Affirming that the rules of customary international law continue to govern matters not regulated by the provisions of the present Convention, Have agreed as follows: Part I Introduction Article 1 Scope of the present Convention The present Convention applies to the immunity of a State and its property from the jurisdiction of the courts of another State. Article 2 Use of terms 1. For the purposes of the present Convention: (a) "court" means any organ of a State, however named, entitled to exercise judicial functions; (b) "State" means: (i) the State and its various organs of government; (ii) constituent units of a federal State or political subdivisions of the State, which are entitled to perform acts in the exercise of sovereign authority, and are acting in that capacity; (iii) agencies or instrumentalities of the State or other entities, to the extent that they are entitled to perform and are actually performing acts in the exercise of sovereign authority of the State; (iv) representatives of the State acting in that capacity; (c) "commercial transaction" means: (i) any commercial contract or transaction for the sale of goods or supply of services; (ii) any contract for a loan or other transaction of a financial nature, including any obligation of guarantee or of indemnity in respect of any such loan or transaction; (iii) any other contract or transaction of a commercial, industrial, trading or professional nature, but not including a contract of employment of persons. 2. In determining whether a contract or transaction is a "commercial transaction" under paragraph 1 (c), reference should be made primarily to the nature of the contract or transaction, but its purpose should also be taken into account if the parties to the contract or transaction have so agreed, or if, in the practice of the State of the forum, that purpose is relevant to determining the non-commercial character of the contract or transaction. 3. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 regarding the use of terms in the present Convention are without prejudice to the use of those terms or to the meanings which may be given to them in other international instruments or in the internal law of any State. Article 3 Privileges and immunities not affected by the present Convention 1. The present Convention is without prejudice to the privileges and immunities enjoyed by a State under international law in relation to the exercise of the functions of: (a) its diplomatic missions, consular posts, special missions, missions to international organizations or delegations to organs of international organizations or to international conferences; and (b) persons connected with them. 2. The present Convention is without prejudice to privileges and immunities accorded under international law to heads of State ratione personae. 3. The present Convention is without prejudice to the immunities enjoyed by a State under international law with respect to aircraft or space objects owned or operated by a State. Article 4 Non-retroactivity of the present Convention Without prejudice to the application of any rules set forth in the present Convention to which jurisdictional immunities of States and their property are subject under international law independently of the present Convention, the present Convention shall not apply to any question of jurisdictional immunities of States or their property arising in a proceeding instituted against a State before a court of another State prior to the entry into force of the present Convention for the States concerned. Part II General principles Article 5 State immunity A State enjoys immunity, in respect of itself and its property, from the jurisdiction of the courts of another State subject to the provisions of the present Convention. Article 6 Modalities for giving effect to State immunity 1. A State shall give effect to State immunity under article 5 by refraining from exercising jurisdiction in a proceeding before its courts against another State and to that end shall ensure that its courts determine on their own initiative that the immunity of that other State under article 5 is respected. 2. A proceeding before a court of a State shall be considered to have been instituted against another State if that other State: (a) is named as a party to that proceeding; or (b) is not named as a party to the proceeding but the proceeding in effect seeks to affect the property, rights, interests or activities of that other State. Article 7 Express consent to exercise of jurisdiction 1. A State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction in a proceeding before a court of another State with regard to a matter or case if it has expressly consented to the exercise of jurisdiction by the court with regard to the matter or case: (a) by international agreement; (b) in a written contract; or (c) by a declaration before the court or by a written communication in a specific proceeding. 2. Agreement by a State for the application of the law of another State shall not be interpreted as consent to the exercise of jurisdiction by the courts of that other State. Article 8 Effect of participation in a proceeding before a court 1. A State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction in a proceeding before a court of another State if it has: (a) itself instituted the proceeding; or (b) intervened in the proceeding or taken any other step relating to the merits. However, if the State satisfies the court that it could not have acquired knowledge of facts on which a claim to immunity can be based until after it took such a step, it can claim immunity based on those facts, provided it does so at the earliest possible moment. 2. A State shall not be considered to have consented to the exercise of jurisdiction by a court of another State if it intervenes in a proceeding or takes any other step for the sole purpose of: (a) invoking immunity; or (b) asserting a right or interest in property at issue in the proceeding. 3. The appearance of a representative of a State before a court of another State as a witness shall not be interpreted as consent by the former State to the exercise of jurisdiction by the court. 4. Failure on the part of a State to enter an appearance in a proceeding before a court of another State shall not be interpreted as consent by the former State to the exercise of jurisdiction by the court. 1. A State instituting a proceeding before a court of another State cannot invoke immunity from the jurisdiction of the court in respect of any counterclaim arising out of the same legal relationship or facts as the principal claim. 2. A State intervening to present a claim in a proceeding before a court of another State cannot invoke immunity from the jurisdiction of the court in respect of any counterclaim arising out of the same legal relationship or facts as the claim presented by the State. 3. A State making a counterclaim in a proceeding instituted against it before a court of another State cannot invoke immunity from the jurisdiction of the court in respect of the principal claim. Part III Proceedings in which State immunity cannot be invoked Article 10 Commercial transactions 1. If a State engages in a commercial transaction with a foreign natural or juridical person and, by virtue of the applicable rules of private international law, differences relating to the commercial transaction fall within the jurisdiction of a court of another State, the State cannot invoke immunity from that jurisdiction in a proceeding arising out of that commercial transaction. 2. Paragraph 1 does not apply: (a) in the case of a commercial transaction between States; or (b) if the parties to the commercial transaction have expressly agreed otherwise. 3. Where a State enterprise or other entity established by a State which has an independent legal personality and is capable of: (a) suing or being sued; and (b) acquiring, owning or possessing and disposing of property, including property which that State has authorized it to operate or manage, is involved in a proceeding which relates to a commercial transaction in which that entity is engaged, the immunity from jurisdiction enjoyed by that State shall not be affected. Article 11 Contracts of employment 1. Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to a contract of employment between the State and an individual for work performed or to be performed, in whole or in part, in the territory of that other State. 2. Paragraph 1 does not apply if: (a) the employee has been recruited to perform particular functions in the exercise of governmental authority; (b) the employee is: (i) a diplomatic agent, as defined in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961; (ii) a consular officer, as defined in the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963; (iii) a member of the diplomatic staff of a permanent mission to an international organization or of a special mission, or is recruited to represent a State at an international conference; or (iv) any other person enjoying diplomatic immunity; (c) the subject-matter of the proceeding is the recruitment, renewal of employment or reinstatement of an individual; (d) the subject-matter of the proceeding is the dismissal or termination of employment of an individual and, as determined by the head of State, the head of Government or the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the employer State, such a proceeding would interfere with the security interests of that State; (e) the employee is a national of the employer State at the time when the proceeding is instituted, unless this person has the permanent residence in the State of the forum; or (f) the employer State and the employee have otherwise agreed in writing, subject to any considerations of public policy conferring on the courts of the State of the forum exclusive jurisdiction by reason of the subject-matter of the proceeding. Article 12 Personal injuries and damage to property Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to pecuniary compensation for death or injury to the person, or damage to or loss of tangible property, caused by an act or omission which is alleged to be attributable to the State, if the act or omission occurred in whole or in part in the territory of that other State and if the author of the act or omission was present in that territory at the time of the act or omission. Article 13 Ownership, possession and use of property Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to the determination of: (a) any right or interest of the State in, or its possession or use of, or any obligation of the State arising out of its interest in, or its possession or use of, immovable property situated in the State of the forum; (b) any right or interest of the State in movable or immovable property arising by way of succession, gift or bona vacantia; or (c) any right or interest of the State in the administration of property, such as trust property, the estate of a bankrupt or the property of a company in the event of its winding up. Article 14 Intellectual and industrial property Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to: (a) the determination of any right of the State in a patent, industrial design, trade name or business name, trademark, copyright or any other form of intellectual or industrial property which enjoys a measure of legal protection, even if provisional, in the State of the forum; or (b) an alleged infringement by the State, in the territory of the State of the forum, of a right of the nature mentioned in subparagraph (a) which belongs to a third person and is protected in the State of the forum. Article 15 Participation in companies or other collective bodies 1. A State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to its participation in a company or other collective body, whether incorporated or unincorporated, being a proceeding concerning the relationship between the State and the body or the other participants therein, provided that the body: (a) has participants other than States or international organizations; and (b) is incorporated or constituted under the law of the State of the forum or has its seat or principal place of business in that State. 2. A State can, however, invoke immunity from jurisdiction in such a proceeding if the States concerned have so agreed or if the parties to the dispute have so provided by an agreement in writing or if the instrument establishing or regulating the body in question contains provisions to that effect. Article 16 Ships owned or operated by a State 1. Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State which owns or operates a ship cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to the operation of that ship if, at the time the cause of action arose, the ship was used for other than government non-commercial purposes. 2. Paragraph 1 does not apply to warships, or naval auxiliaries, nor does it apply to other vessels owned or operated by a State and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service. 3. Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to the carriage of cargo on board a ship owned or operated by that State if, at the time the cause of action arose, the ship was used for other than government non-commercial purposes. 4. Paragraph 3 does not apply to any cargo carried on board the ships referred to in paragraph 2, nor does it apply to any cargo owned by a State and used or intended for use exclusively for government non-commercial purposes. 5. States may plead all measures of defence, prescription and limitation of liability which are available to private ships and cargoes and their owners. 6. If in a proceeding there arises a question relating to the government and non-commercial character of a ship owned or operated by a State or cargo owned by a State, a certificate signed by a diplomatic representative or other competent authority of that State and communicated to the court shall serve as evidence of the character of that ship or cargo. Article 17 Effect of an arbitration agreement If a State enters into an agreement in writing with a foreign natural or juridical person to submit to arbitration differences relating to a commercial transaction, that State cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to: (a) the validity, interpretation or application of the arbitration agreement; (b) the arbitration procedure; or (c) the confirmation or the setting aside of the award, unless the arbitration agreement otherwise provides. Part IV State immunity from measures of constraint in connection with proceedings before a court Article 18 State immunity from pre-judgment measures of constraint No pre-judgment measures of constraint, such as attachment or arrest, against property of a State may be taken in connection with a proceeding before a court of another State unless and except to the extent that: (a) the State has expressly consented to the taking of such measures as indicated: (i) by international agreement; (ii) by an arbitration agreement or in a written contract; or (iii) by a declaration before the court or by a written communication after a dispute between the parties has arisen; or (b) the State has allocated or earmarked property for the satisfaction of the claim which is the object of that proceeding. Article 19 State immunity from post-judgment measures of constraint No post-judgment measures of constraint, such as attachment, arrest or execution, against property of a State may be taken in connection with a proceeding before a court of another State unless and except to the extent that: (b) the State has allocated or earmarked property for the satisfaction of the claim which is the object of that proceeding; or (c) it has been established that the property is specifically in use or intended for use by the State for other than government non-commercial purposes and is in the territory of the State of the forum, provided that post-judgment measures of constraint may only be taken against property that has a connection with the entity against which the proceeding was directed. Article 20 Effect of consent to jurisdiction to measures of constraint Where consent to the measures of constraint is required under articles 18 and 19, consent to the exercise of jurisdiction under article 7 shall not imply consent to the taking of measures of constraint. Article 21 Specific categories of property 1. The following categories, in particular, of property of a State shall not be considered as property specifically in use or intended for use by the State for other than government non-commercial purposes under article 19, subparagraph (c): (a) property, including any bank account, which is used or intended for use in the performance of the functions of the diplomatic mission of the State or its consular posts, special missions, missions to international organizations or delegations to organs of international organizations or to international conferences; (b) property of a military character or used or intended for use in the performance of military functions; (c) property of the central bank or other monetary authority of the State; (d) property forming part of the cultural heritage of the State or part of its archives and not placed or intended to be placed on sale; (e) property forming part of an exhibition of objects of scientific, cultural or historical interest and not placed or intended to be placed on sale. 2. Paragraph 1 is without prejudice to article 18 and article 19, subparagraphs (a) and (b). Part V Miscellaneous provisions Article 22 Service of process 1. Service of process by writ or other document instituting a proceeding against a State shall be effected: (a) in accordance with any applicable international convention binding on the State of the forum and the State concerned; or (b) in accordance with any special arrangement for service between the claimant and the State concerned, if not precluded by the law of the State of the forum; or (c) in the absence of such a convention or special arrangement: (i) by transmission through diplomatic channels to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the State concerned; or (ii) by any other means accepted by the State concerned, if not precluded by the law of the State of the forum. 2. Service of process referred to in paragraph 1 (c) (i) is deemed to have been effected by receipt of the documents by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 3. These documents shall be accompanied, if necessary, by a translation into the official language, or one of the official languages, of the State concerned. 4. Any State that enters an appearance on the merits in a proceeding instituted against it may not thereafter assert that service of process did not comply with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 3. Article 23 Default judgment 1. A default judgment shall not be rendered against a State unless the court has found that: (a) the requirements laid down in article 22, paragraphs 1 and 3, have been complied with; (b) a period of not less than four months has expired from the date on which the service of the writ or other document instituting a proceeding has been effected or deemed to have been effected in accordance with article 22, paragraphs 1 and 2; and (c) the present Convention does not preclude it from exercising jurisdiction. 2. A copy of any default judgment rendered against a State, accompanied if necessary by a translation into the official language or one of the official languages of the State concerned, shall be transmitted to it through one of the means specified in article 22, paragraph 1, and in accordance with the provisions of that paragraph. 3. The time-limit for applying to have a default judgment set aside shall not be less than four months and shall begin to run from the date on which the copy of the judgment is received or is deemed to have been received by the State concerned. Article 24 Privileges and immunities during court proceedings 1. Any failure or refusal by a State to comply with an order of a court of another State enjoining it to perform or refrain from performing a specific act or to produce any document or disclose any other information for the purposes of a proceeding shall entail no consequences other than those which may result from such conduct in relation to the merits of the case. In particular, no fine or penalty shall be imposed on the State by reason of such failure or refusal. 2. A State shall not be required to provide any security, bond or deposit, however described, to guarantee the payment of judicial costs or expenses in any proceeding to which it is a respondent party before a court of another State. Part VI Final clauses Article 25 The annex to the present Convention forms an integral part of the Convention. Article 26 Other international agreements Nothing in the present Convention shall affect the rights and obligations of States Parties under existing international agreements which relate to matters dealt with in the present Convention as between the parties to those agreements. Article 27 Settlement of disputes 1. States Parties shall endeavour to settle disputes concerning the interpretation or application of the present Convention through negotiation. 2. Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the interpretation or application of the present Convention which cannot be settled through negotiation within six months shall, at the request of any of those States Parties, be submitted to arbitration. If, six months after the date of the request for arbitration, those States Parties are unable to agree on the organization of the arbitration, any of those States Parties may refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice by request in accordance with the Statute of the Court. 3. Each State Party may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the present Convention, declare that it does not consider itself bound by paragraph 2. The other States Parties shall not be bound by paragraph 2 with respect to any State Party which has made such a declaration. 4. Any State Party that has made a declaration in accordance with paragraph 3 may at any time withdraw that declaration by notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Article 28 Signature The present Convention shall be open for signature by all States until 17 January 2007, at United Nations Headquarters, New York. Article 29 Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession 1. The present Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. 2. The present Convention shall remain open for accession by any State. 3. The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Article 30 Entry into force 1. The present Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day following the date of deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 2. For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present Convention after the deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. Article 31 Denunciation 1. Any State Party may denounce the present Convention by written notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 2. Denunciation shall take effect one year following the date on which notification is received by the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The present Convention shall, however, continue to apply to any question of jurisdictional immunities of States or their property arising in a proceeding instituted against a State before a court of another State prior to the date on which the denunciation takes effect for any of the States concerned. 3. The denunciation shall not in any way affect the duty of any State Party to fulfil any obligation embodied in the present Convention to which it would be subject under international law independently of the present Convention. 1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations is designated the depositary of the present Convention. 2. As depositary of the present Convention, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all States of the following: (a) signatures of the present Convention and the deposit of instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession or notifications of denunciation, in accordance with articles 29 and 31; (b) the date on which the present Convention will enter into force, in accordance with article 30; (c) any acts, notifications or communications relating to the present Convention. Article 33 Authentic texts The Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts of the present Convention are equally authentic. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention opened for signature at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 17 January 2005. Understandings with respect to certain provisions of the Convention The present annex is for the purpose of setting out understandings relating to the provisions concerned. With respect to article 10 The term "immunity" in article 10 is to be understood in the context of the present Convention as a whole. Article 10, paragraph 3, does not prejudge the question of "piercing the corporate veil", questions relating to a situation where a State entity has deliberately misrepresented its financial position or subsequently reduced its assets to avoid satisfying a claim, or other related issues. With respect to article 11 The reference in article 11, paragraph 2 (d), to the "security interests" of the employer State is intended primarily to address matters of national security and the security of diplomatic missions and consular posts. Under article 41 of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and article 55 of the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, all persons referred to in those articles have the duty to respect the laws and regulations, including labour laws, of the host country. At the same time, under article 38 of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and article 71 of the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, the receiving State has a duty to exercise its jurisdiction in such a manner as not to interfere unduly with the performance of the functions of the mission or the consular post. With respect to articles 13 and 14 The expression "determination" is used to refer not only to the ascertainment or verification of the existence of the rights protected, but also to the evaluation or assessment of the substance, including content, scope and extent, of such rights. With respect to article 17 The expression "commercial transaction" includes investment matters. With respect to article 19 The expression "entity" in subparagraph (c) means the State as an independent legal personality, a constituent unit of a federal State, a subdivision of a State, an agency or instrumentality of a State or other entity, which enjoys independent legal personality. The words "property that has a connection with the entity" in subparagraph (c) are to be understood as broader than ownership or possession. Article 19 does not prejudge the question of "piercing the corporate veil", questions relating to a situation where a State entity has deliberately misrepresented its financial position or subsequently reduced its assets to avoid satisfying a claim, or other related issues. 