%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|GOOD OFFICES|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PREVENTIVE DIPLOMACY|PEACEBUILDING|PROJECT EXPENDITURES|STAFFING|COSTS|

Fifty-ninth session Fifth Committee Agenda item 108 Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Summary By its resolution 58/271 of 23 December 2003, the General Assembly appropriated $169,431,700 for special political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005. At the time of writing the present report a total of $166,429,100 had been charged against special political missions during the course of 2004. With the action to be taken by the Assembly on the funding of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for the 90-day period up to 10 December 2004 (see A/59/534), the remaining amount of $3,002,600 would also be allocated, thus exhausting in full the initial provision appropriated for political missions. Furthermore, in the context of funding the remaining requirements of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for the period up to 10 December 2004, the Assembly will have appropriated, under the provisions of its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986 an additional amount of $17,006,900 net ($17,788,200 gross). By its resolution 58/295 of 18 June 2004, the Assembly augmented the provision for special political missions when it provided $2.5 million for security-related requirements in special political missions. The three appropriation actions of the Assembly in December 2003, June 2004 and December 2004 would amount to a total appropriation provision of $188.9 million. The present report is submitted in the context of action taken or expected to be taken by the Security Council during the course of 2004-2005 regarding good offices, preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peacebuilding missions on the basis of requests from Governments and/or recommendations of the Secretary-General. The report contains the proposed resource requirements for the period up to 31 December 2005 of 25 special political missions authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council. Included in these requirements are resources for the liquidation of 2 of the 25 special political missions, the mandates of which are not expected to be extended. The total estimated requirements for the extension of these missions amount to $177,547,600 net ($189,680,100 gross). After taking into account the estimated balances expected to remain unencumbered for each of the missions at the end of their current mandate periods ($14,932,900), the additional amount being sought in the present report under the procedures provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to resolution 41/213 amounts to $162,614,700 net ($174,747,200 gross). The requirements for subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone will be submitted in a separate report. As such those requirements are not included in the present report. Paragraphs Page Abbreviations Introduction Special political missions emanating from the General Assembly Central American peace process Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Myanmar United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala Special political missions emanating from the Security Council United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities Monitoring Group on Somalia Panel of Experts on Liberia Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic United Nations Political Office for Somalia Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa Support to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) United Nations advance team in the Sudan Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General to the International Advisory and Monitoring Board Estimated resource requirements for special political missions emanating from the decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council Action required from the General Assembly Annex: Provisions for special political missions (2004-2005) BONUCA ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States EU European Union ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization IGAD Intergovernmental Authority on Development ILO International Labour Organization IMF International Monetary Fund MONUC United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo MINUGUA MINURCA United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic OHCHR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights UNAMA UNAMI UNAMSIL United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIFIL United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon UNMIL United Nations Mission in Liberia UNOCI United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire UNOGBIS UNOMB UNOWA United Nations Office for West Africa UNPOS UNTOP WFP World Food Programme 1. In its resolution 58/271 of 23 December 2003, the General Assembly appropriated a total of $169,431,700 for special political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/58/6 (Sect. 3). During the course of 2004, a total of $166,429,100 was charged against that provision, and at the time of writing, an amount of $3,002,600 remained unencumbered. However, with the action to be taken by the Assembly on the funding of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for the 90-day period up to 10 December 2004 (see A/59/534), not only the full provision for special political missions would be exhausted, but also the Assembly will have appropriated, under the provisions of its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, an additional amount of $17,006,900 net ($17,788,200 gross) to cover the remaining requirements of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for the period up to 10 December 2004. In its resolution 58/295 of 18 June 2004, the Assembly augmented the provision for special political missions when it provided $2.5 million for security-related requirements in special political missions. The three appropriation actions of the Assembly in December 2003, June 2004 and December 2004 would amount to a total appropriation provision of $188.9 million. Details of the charges against the provision for special political missions are provided in annex I to the present report. 2. The purpose of the present report is to seek funding for the second year of the biennium 2004-2005 for 25 special political missions in connection with actions taken or expected to be taken by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council on the basis of requests from Member States and/or recommendations of the Secretary-General. 3. Of the 25 missions whose requirements are set out in the present report: (a) One mission (the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Myanmar) is under consideration by the General Assembly, and the related statement of programme budget implications has been submitted to the Assembly (A/C.3/59/L.76); (b) Three missions (the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide) have open-ended mandates; (c) Two missions (the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate) have mandates until 31 December 2007; (d) One mission (Support to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), has a mandate until 27 April 2006; (e) Five missions (the Central American peace process, the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, and the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA)) have mandates until December 2005; (f) Six missions (the Monitoring Group on Somalia, the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004), the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding (UNTOP) and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)) have mandates ending at dates ranging from March to August 2005; (g) One mission (the Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General to the International Advisory and Monitoring Board) will end once a representative Government has been properly constituted in Iraq, as specified by the Security Council in its resolution 1483 (2003); (h) Two missions (the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala and the United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville) are not anticipated to be extended. Resources have, however, been included in the present report relating to the liquidation of the activities at these missions; (i) One mission (the United Nations advance team in the Sudan) has had its mandate extended to 10 March 2005; (j) It is anticipated that the Security Council will extend the mandates of the remaining three missions (United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa and the Panel of Experts on Liberia), whose mandates will expire in December 2004, on the basis of reports and requests already submitted or to be submitted to it. 4. It is assumed that all the missions mentioned above that have not yet been extended will be extended for periods similar to those approved for 2004. Further, while the resource requirements for those missions whose mandates emanate from the General Assembly will be sought by means of statements of programme budget implications submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, those requirements are also presented in the current report so as to consolidate the overall requirements for all special political missions. Without prejudice to any decisions that the General Assembly or the Security Council may take, it is considered desirable, as in the case of budgets for peacekeeping operations, to present the overall level of resource requirements for all missions at one time as it would allow Member States to review the overall level of resource requirements for political missions at one time, reduce the need for piecemeal consideration of budget proposals for special political missions and provide a greater degree of predictability regarding the overall level of resource requirements for political missions for the balance of the biennium. This is in keeping with the request of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (see A/57/7/Add.17, para. 5). It should be noted, however, that any expenditures against appropriations for political missions would be strictly subject to the extension of the relevant mandate. 5. In its resolution 1574 (2004) of 19 November 2004, the Security Council extended the mandate of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for a further three months, from 11 December 2004 to 10 March 2005. The requirements of the mission for the extended period are proposed on the basis of the proration of the level of recurrent resources requested in the report of the Secretary-General (A/59/534) for the period from 11 September to 10 December 2004. 6. In its resolution 58/284 of 8 April 2004, the General Assembly, inter alia, authorized the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure, to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed $16.7 million to supplement the financial resources of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004. At this point the commitment authority has not yet been drawn on. The requirements for the subvention for the Special Court and any related proposals to extend the validity of the commitment authority of $16.7 million beyond 2004 will be submitted to the Assembly in a separate report. 7. In line with the Secretary-General's commitment to further refine the results-based budgeting elements and to extend its application to other special political missions where practicable, the results-based budgeting techniques have been applied to special political missions included in the present report, which together represent 99.6 percent of total level of resources requested (22 out of 25 missions). The missions for which no result-based budgeting logframe have been included relate to the two missions that will be under liquidation (United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) and the United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB)), as well as the Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General to the International Advisory and Monitoring Board. Complementarities and synergies 8. In section V of its resolution 58/272 of 23 December 2003, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to further explore synergies and complementarities between various missions and other relevant entities of the United Nations in order to ensure efficiency and optimum use of resources and to report thereon in the context of future budget proposals on special political missions. The following paragraphs provide a summary of efforts to achieve synergies and complementarities between various political missions and other entities. 9. Over the past year, special political missions under the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat have sought to develop further complementarities and synergies with other United Nations entities in the missions' areas of responsibilities. The Department has placed emphasis on coordination in the field with other United Nations departments, agencies, funds and programmes in areas related to peace and security as well as in achieving administrative efficiencies through the sharing of resources and costs. 1. Early warning and conflict prevention 10. In the area of early warning and conflict prevention, special political missions have sought to advance complementarities with other United Nations entities in order to enhance their related early warning mechanisms, preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution capacities. In Beirut, for instance, the day-to-day focus of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon and his periodic reporting and analysis of the political, security and economic-related developments along the Blue Line and in the rest of Lebanon, contributes to the monitoring of the Israel-Lebanon sector and also to its overall assessment of the region by the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. Simultaneously, the monitoring and reporting by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) of the security and military situation on the ground provides the important context for the diplomatic measures taken by the Personal Representative at times of increased tension along the Blue Line. Through cooperation, both the Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General and UNIFIL are able to orchestrate their respective political and operational responses to serious violations of the Blue Line, thus maximizing the complementarities and mutual benefits of their roles in southern Lebanon. 11. Similarly, the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) in Dakar has sought to develop further an integrated approach to conflict prevention and early warning. For example, it has contributed to an important report of the Secretary-General on inter-mission cooperation and possible cross-border operations between the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) (S/2004/200). In addition, UNOWA participates in regular force commanders meetings and in a recently established working group to develop a study on West African regional threat assessment. Generally, regular meetings of the special representatives of these missions and UNOWA have proved to be a very useful forum to discuss subregional issues of common interest and coordinate actions. 12. Political leadership provided by special missions plays an important coordinating role for United Nations country teams. UNPOS, for example, provides political leadership to the United Nations family with respect to Somalia. By participating in the coordination meetings of the United Nations country team, UNPOS provides regular political briefs to other United Nations entities. UNPOS, in cooperation with other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, has also sought to develop its peacebuilding activities, and in that regard, has been coordinating with the United Nations Resident Coordinator for Somalia, preparatory activities for a comprehensive peacebuilding mission in Somalia. 2. Development, peacebuilding and capacity-building 13. Similarly, other special political missions have sought to integrate the development and peacebuilding perspectives of other United Nations entities into their work. For instance, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has assigned to UNOWA, without cost to the latter, the director for development activities. UNOWA is also a part of a recently established United Nations task force consisting of the International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), UNDP, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the International Organization for Migration and the World Bank that aims to address the problem of youth unemployment in West Africa. Similarly, the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon performs an advocacy role for the continued reconstruction of southern Lebanon in line with the socio-economic programme of UNDP for the area. 14. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA), in cooperation with UNDP and other United Nations agencies, has developed joint projects that enable the United Nations country team to harmonize their activities with other non-United Nations entities in building local government capacities. UNAMI too, working with other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, has sought to build capacity within Iraqi ministries, non-governmental organizations and other Iraqi partners. In February 2004, the country team developed a strategic planning framework for the activities of all United Nations entities in Iraq, which included the areas of education, health, water and sanitation, energy, housing and food delivery. 15. The United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), in cooperation with UNDP and the rest of the United Nations country team, has sought to aid capacity development in Guinea-Bissau. Notable activities include the provision of relevant training for parliamentary commissions, training for judges and lawyers on the rule of law, assistance related to constitutional reform, training for trainers on the code of conduct of police forces and training on human rights for women's groups and women politicians. 3. Demining and humanitarian assistance 16. In the area of demining activities, the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon was instrumental in establishing the International Support Group, an international assistance donor support group, for demining in southern Lebanon. The Mine Action Coordination Centre, a joint coordinating body of which Mine Action Service of the United Nations Secretariat is a central part, has coordinated the implementation of mine action activities in Lebanon, while UNDP has acted as the secretariat and coordinating body of the International Support Group. The result has been real progress in demining large parts of southern Lebanon -- a development that can only contribute towards its possible return to normalcy and stability. 17. Special political missions have also developed synergies and complementarities in cooperating with other United Nations entities in the area of humanitarian assistance. For example, BONUCA, working under the lead of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat as well as with the rest of the United Nations country team and other national and international humanitarian agencies, is taking part in the preparation of a new consolidated humanitarian appeal for 2005. Furthermore, BONUCA worked closely with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food Programme (WFP), UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and UNDP in developing contingency plans for the latest crisis in Chad and the Sudan related to the situation in Darfur. 18. For its part, UNAMI is providing vital information and political guidance as part of the inter-agency multisectoral Emergency Response Working Group established in April 2004 to undertake humanitarian monitoring, contingency planning, coordination and advocacy. 19. In UNOWA, the head of the regional support office of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs serves as the senior humanitarian adviser to UNOWA, and as a result UNOWA is better able to work with humanitarian agencies while the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to mobilize stronger and wider political attention on humanitarian issues have been greatly facilitated. UNOWA has also joined a newly created Inter-Agency Standing Committee, based in Dakar, made up of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, WFP and the International Committee of the Red Cross. The Committee aims to monitor the humanitarian situation in West Africa and report on major developments. 4. Cost and resource sharing 20. There are notable examples of special political missions achieving resource-sharing arrangements with other United Nations entities in the mission area. For instance, in order to achieve efficiencies and the optimum use of resources, UNOGBIS shares with other United Nations agencies premises, communication facilities and pouch and mail services. Likewise, UNIFIL provides the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon with logistical support, such as use of vehicles and communication facility. The United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) shares with UNDP, United Nations Office for Project Services and UNICEF office accommodation, Internet and telephone communication links and transportation in various locations in Bougainville. 21. UNTOP uses UNDP services for cash and banking. In turn, UNTOP makes available free of charge to UNDP an armoured vehicle for the transport of cash. BONUCA, in an effort to improve post-conflict responses, is working with the United Nations country team to redeploy offices and installations within its area of operations. As a result, UNDP, UNICEF, WFP and the World Health Organization are considering a joint relocation to Bossangoa in partnership with BONUCA. UNAMI too has sought to develop a United Nations common services system in Amman and Kuwait. It has also worked with UNDP and the World Bank to establish the mechanisms for the International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq to accept funds and appraise, approve, implement and monitor projects. In the important area of security, UNTOP for example, has established a common security assistance system with area security coordinators, a system for information dissemination and a countrywide radio system. 5. Sanctions monitoring 22. The sanctions monitoring bodies continuously coordinate their efforts with the relevant international and regional organizations and with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. The European Union, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and others provide valuable information to the monitoring bodies and complementarities are explored with specialized agencies, as relevant, for the individual monitoring bodies. For example, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team interacts with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) to streamline efforts in the fight against terrorism and helps channel requests for assistance to the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the Centre for International Crime Prevention of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In many cases contacts are established with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization and other bodies concerned with sanctions regimes with the aim of improving sanctions implementation and exchanging best practices and lessons learned. 23. The overall requirements for special political missions included in the present report amount to $177,547,600 net ($189,680,100 gross). Most of these requirements (70 per cent) are for the two largest missions (UNAMA and UNAMI). These missions also account for a majority of the staffing resources (71 per cent). Individual requirements for the remainder of the missions amount to less than $7 million, and vary from $180,000 (UNOMB) to $7 million (Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate). 24. Table 1 below contains a complete list of the political missions, indicating their respective appropriations for 2004, commitments authorized during 2004, estimated expenditures and requirements for the next budget period (2005) and their mandates and expiry dates. Also included in table 1 are those operations that have been completed or subsumed under other missions during 2004 and for which no resources are requested for 2005. An overall summary of requirements by major component is presented in table 2. 25. The staffing requirements of each mission, by category and level, are presented in table 3. The action requested of the General Assembly with respect to financing is set out in section V below. 26. The sections that follow provide, in brief, background information and the mandates, objectives and resource requirements of special political missions mandated by the General Assembly, as well as special political missions of which the Security Council continues to be seized and for which the Council calls upon the Secretary-General to provide the necessary support for the peace process during the biennium 2004-2005. Table 1 Estimated costs of activities of special political missions (Thousands of United States dollars) Appropriation and expenditures 2004 Requirements for 2005 Appropriations Commitment authority Redeployments Estimated expenditures Variance surplus (deficit) Total requirements for 2005 Net additional requirements Periods covered by this budget Mandates and expiry dates A. 1 year General Assembly resolution 58/239 (31 December 2005) General Assembly resolution 58/247 (31 December 2004) General Assembly resolution 58/238 (31 December 2004) Subtotal A B. Special political missions emanating from the Security Council and other political initiatives relating to the maintenance of international peace and security S/2003/1096 and S/2003/1097 (December 2004) SpSSpecial Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa S/2003/1138 and S/2003/1139 (December 2004) S/2004/904 and S/2004/905 (December 2005) Open mandate Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) (31 July 2005) Security Council resolution 1558 (2004) (March 2005) 11 months in 2005 Security Council resolution 1549 (2004) (December 2004) 8 months Security Council resolution 1552 (2004) Security Council resolution 1366 (2001) and S/2004/567 and S/2004/568 (open mandate) Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directoratea Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) (December 2007) Security Council resolution 1536 (2004) (25 March 2005) 4 months Security Council resolution 1557 (2004) (11 August 2005) 1.5 months S/2004/526 and S/2004/527 (December 2004) S/2004/331 and S/2004/332 (1 June 2005) Open-ended mandate S/2004/298 and S/2004/299 (December 2005) S/2004/874- S/2004/875 (December 2005) S/2004/804-S/PRST/2004/38 (December 2005) S/2004/797-S/2004/858 (December 2007) Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) (27 April 2006) Security Council resolution 1574 (2004) (10 March 2004) Security Council resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1511 (2003); S/2003/1030 Special Court for Sierra Leoneb Not drawn on so far To be determined General Assembly resolution 58/284 Subtotal B C. Special political missions that have been completed, integrated with other operations United Nations Mission in Côte d'Ivoire Transformed into peacekeeping mission (UNOCI) effective 4 April 2004 (Security Council resolution 1528 (2004)) United Nations Office in Burundi Transformed into peacekeeping mission (UNUB) effective 1 June 2004 (Security Council resolution 1545 (2004)) Subtotal C Total a The total requirements of $6,888,300 has been further reduced by the redeployment of $694,300 from Section 3, Political affairs (see paras. 154-156), thereby reducing the net requirement to $6,085,000. b As indicated in paragraph 5 above by resolution 58/284, the General Assembly authorized the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed $16.7 million dollars. A supplementary report will be submitted to the Assembly on the 2005 requirements for subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Table 2 Summary of requirements by major component 2004 appropriation Total expenditure Variance 1 January-31 December 2005 Category of expenditure 1 January- 31 December 2004 Provision under unforeseen and extraordinary expenses Redeployment Savings (deficit) requirementsa Net requirements Non-recurrent requirements Military and police personnel Military observers Military contingent Civilian police Subtotal Civilian personnel International staff National staff United Nations Volunteers Operational costs General temporary assistance Consultants and experts Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment Quick-impact projects Other programmes Political programme Military programme Civilian and police programmes Public information programme Human rights programme Training programmes Total (net requirements) a The requirements under column 6 reflect the additional amounts after taking into account the proposed redeployment of $694,300 from Section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget (see paras. 154-156). Professional category and above General Service and related categories USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 Field Service/ Security Principal level General Service international National Officer Local level United Nations Volunteers Grand total Current (2004) Proposed (2005) Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Myanmara United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemalab Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africac Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004)d Monitoring Group on Somaliae Group of experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocidef United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainvilleb United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuildingg Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon United Nations Office for Somalia Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africah United Nations Mission to Côte d'Ivoire a The Special Envoy to the Secretary-General for Myanmar is engaged on a when-actually-employed basis. b Staffing from MINUGUA and UNOMB are for the liquidation periods only. c The Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa is engaged on a when-actually-employed basis. d Previously the Monitoring Group established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1363 (2001). e Previously the Panel of Experts on Somalia. f The Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide is engaged on a when-actually-employed basis. g The grade level of the head of UNTOP reflects the actual level at which the position is encumbered. h The D-2 position in the United Nations Office in West Africa is provided by UNDP. II. Special political missions emanating from the General Assembly A. Central American peace process Background, mandate and objective 27. Post-conflict peacebuilding is at the core of the activities performed by the Department of Political Affairs and by the entire United Nations system in Central America. As indicated in the reports of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central America (see A/58/262, A/58/267 and A/58/270) and a more recent report related to MINUGUA of 30 August 2004 (A/59/307), the United Nations continues to play an active role in the consolidation of the Central American peace process. 28. The comprehensive recovery plan undertaken by the United Nations system in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch (October 1998) continues to lay the groundwork for sustainable development and the prevention of future disasters. Central America has in recent years been hit repeatedly by the vagaries of nature. The entire region has suffered food shortages and hunger as a result of continuing drought, even as it experienced a modest economic recovery, and poverty and inequality continue to prevail. Commitment of the international community remains important in order to ensure that rehabilitation and preventive efforts contribute to the consolidation of peace and development in the Central American region. 29. The peace agreements signed in Guatemala in 1996 provided the basis for the mandate entrusted by the General Assembly to MINUGUA. The Mission has played a major role, together with the other parts of the United Nations system and the international community, in a multifaceted peacebuilding exercise. The departure of MINUGUA at the end of 2004 will mark the end of United Nations verification in Guatemala and the beginning of a new and necessary phase of the peace process, one in which national actors assume full responsibility for monitoring and promoting the implementation of the peace accords. The peace process has matured, and Guatemala has consolidated its democratic framework to the point where it should be possible to address unresolved issues peacefully, through national mechanisms and international cooperation. 30. The departure of MINUGUA is neither the end of the peace process nor the end of the involvement of the United Nations in building a lasting peace in Guatemala. The United Nations system will continue to play an important role in supporting efforts to fully implement the peace accords. Continued monitoring and support will remain important in the period ahead, in particular with regard to specific projects related to peace accords and the ongoing political dialogue with the Government of Guatemala on the implementation of the peace accords. The human rights situation requires the continued verification of alleged abuses and analysis of their implications for society and the overall peace process. 31. In Central America, the United Nations remains committed to the consolidation of the peacebuilding process, and will continue to track issues, including, developments in the countries' democratic transition, efforts for the consolidation of peace and democracy in the region, initiatives in the fields of disarmament and demilitarization, combating transnational organized crime and terrorism and improving public safety. The Organization will monitor regional integration processes that can contribute to the sustainable development of the region. 32. In its resolution 58/239 of 23 December 2003, the General Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to continue to lend his fullest support to the initiatives and activities of the Central American Governments, in particular their efforts to consolidate democracy through the promotion of integration and the implementation of a comprehensive sustainable development programme and to submit to the General Assembly a complete consolidated report on the implementation of all the relevant resolutions on Central America at its sixtieth session, under the item entitled "The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development". It also decided that from then onwards the item would be considered every two years. 33. The resource requirements for the Central American peace process for 2004 were approved by the General Assembly on the basis of a statement of programme budget implications (A/C.5/58/30). As indicated in paragraph 10 of that statement, the requirements for 2005 would be considered in the context of the estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives, authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council. Accordingly, the present report includes the request for resource requirements for 2005 in order for the Department of Political Affairs to continue to provide adequate support to the efforts of the Secretary-General in Central America, as requested in General Assembly resolution 58/239. 34. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of the Central American peace process are presented below. Objective: To promote, maintain and consolidate peace and sustainable development in the Central American region. Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement Outputs (a) Central American Governments advance regional integration efforts towards the consolidation of peace and democracy (b) Timely and effective implementation of measures within a long-term sustainable development programme (a) and (b) (i) Increased cooperation between the Central American Governments for the consolidation of peace (ii) Increased number of Central American initiatives to promote integration, development and the implementation of related agreements and accords (iii) Increased number of measures to address the underlying causes of conflict in the region, including the peaceful settlement of territorial and border disputes (iv) Increased United Nations system support to activities and initiatives of Central American Governments :: Complete and consolidated report on the implementation of all relevant resolutions on Central America at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly :: Periodic political assessment of developments in the Central American region :: Periodic briefings, analytical notes, policy option papers on regional issues, as well as draft communications prepared :: Meetings with various Central American authorities, including at the regional, State and local level, to discuss pending aspects of peace agreements and regional integration and development :: Consultations/meetings with United Nations system organizations, including with the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force for the Reconstruction and Transformation of Central America :: Informational meetings with members of the donor community External factors 35. The provision of good offices is expected to achieve the objective, provided that the international community and the Governments in the region are committed to the advancement of peace and development. Resource requirements 36. The estimated requirements relating to the provision of support to the Central American peace process for 2005 amount to $222,700 net ($266,500 gross). Of this amount, $62,400 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriation for 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for the Central American peace process for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $160,300 net ($204,100 gross). 37. These resources would provide for the continuation of two general temporary assistance positions (1 P-4 political affairs officer and 1 General Service (Other level)). Other requirements relating to those two positions would be met from within the resources appropriated for the Department of Political Affairs. B. Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Myanmar 38. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Myanmar was appointed in accordance with the mandates entrusted to the Secretary-General by the General Assembly, most recently in resolution 58/247 of 23 December 2003, to continue to provide his good offices and to pursue discussions on the situation of human rights and the restoration of democracy with the Government and people of Myanmar. 39. Since his appointment in April 2000, the present Special Envoy for Myanmar has visited Myanmar several times in connection with the good offices role of the Secretary-General and has played a catalytic role in facilitating the national reconciliation process in that country. National reconciliation in Myanmar is by its nature a "home-grown" process and the role of good offices of the Secretary-General is primarily to facilitate that process. 40. In implementing the mandate entrusted to the Secretary-General by the General Assembly, the Special Envoy and the Department of Political Affairs cooperate and collaborate closely with the United Nations Resident Coordinator and the United Nations country team. There has been an increasing awareness and recognition of the important linkage between the political efforts and the operational activities of the country team in the country in the economic and social areas. It has become an established practice for the Special Envoy to meet with members of the country team when he visits Myanmar, and for the United Nations Resident Coordinator and other members of the country team to meet regularly with representatives of the Department of Political Affairs when they visit Headquarters. 41. The mandate relating to the Special Envoy will expire at the end of 2004. It is anticipated that, after its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to the General Assembly, and in view of the continued need for the Secretary-General's good offices role, the Assembly will renew the mandate further. 42. Should the General Assembly so decide, resource requirements will arise to cover the expenditures relating to the discharge of the Secretary-General's good offices mandate, in particular, the activities of the Special Envoy. These resources will be sought through the presentation, prior to the Assembly's decision, of a statement of programme budget implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. 43. However, the requirements relating to the activities of the Special Envoy are presented in the current report for the purposes of consolidating requirements for all political missions, as requested by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (see A/57/7/Add.17, para. 5). 44. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of the Special Envoy are presented below: Objective: To advance the national reconciliation and democratization process in Myanmar. (a) Release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and her deputy from house arrest (a) Restoration of their freedom of movement. :: Discussions/consultations with the Myanmar authorities (b) Restoration of political activities (b) (i) Reopening of the offices of the National League for Democracy throughout the country. (ii) Resumption of dialogue among the Government, the National League for Democracy and ethnic nationalities on ways to advance the country's democratic transition (iii) Increase in the level of international aid to Myanmar :: Discussions/consultations and consultations with the international community, especially with the countries in the region :: Statements and reports on the situation in Myanmar 45. The provision of the good offices role of the Secretary-General, carried out largely through the Special Envoy, is expected to achieve its objective provided that the Government of Myanmar, the National League for Democracy and ethnic nationality groups are willing and committed to reach a political solution and that the international community, especially the countries in the region, provide support for the Secretary-General's efforts. 46. The estimated requirements for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Myanmar for a one-year period ending 31 December 2005 amount to $252,400 net ($294,900 gross). Of this amount, $6,200 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriation for 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Special Envoy for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $246,200 net ($288,700 gross). 47. The 2005 requirements of the Special Envoy in the amount of $252,400 would provide for the salaries of the Special Envoy at the Under-Secretary-General level for a period of 210 days in 2005, as was the case in 2004, on a when-actually-employed basis and the salary of a local staff ($102,600), official travel ($95,600), services of consultants ($48,500), communications ($2,100) and other miscellaneous supplies and services ($3,600). C. United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala 48. The United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala, originally known as the Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala, was established on the basis of General Assembly resolution 48/267 of 19 September 1994, and in accordance with the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General (A/48/985). 49. On 29 December 1996, the Agreement on the Implementation, Compliance and Verification Timetable for the Peace Agreements (A/51/796-S/1997/114, annex I) was signed in Guatemala. In that agreement, the Secretary-General was requested to set up a mission to verify compliance with all the agreements signed by the Government of Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca. In its resolution 51/198 B of 27 March 1997, the General Assembly decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala, to be known as the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala, to carry out international verification of the peace accords in accordance with the recommendations of the Secretary-General for a further period of one year. 50. The mandate of MINUGUA has been renewed by the General Assembly periodically, most recently in its resolution 58/238 of 23 December 2003, by which the Assembly decided to authorize a final renewal of the mandate of MINUGUA until 31 December 2004. 51. Since the previous reports of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly (A/58/262 and A/58/267) the Mission has continued to carry out its mandate to verify compliance with the peace agreements, offer good offices, provide technical assistance and inform the public on its activities and results of its verification. This has been done within the framework of a general transition strategy designed to contribute to the long-term sustainability of the peace process and to minimize the potential void created by the Mission's withdrawal from Guatemala. MINUGUA has implemented a transition strategy based on a core notion that future advances and the long-term success of the Guatemalan peace process depend on the capacities and renewed commitment to the peace agreements of Guatemalan institutions, both State and civil society. Much of the Mission's work, both at headquarters and in the regional offices, has focused on capacity-building of these partners in their respective roles for oversight, and promoting and monitoring of issues defined in the Accords. The final report of the Mission (A/59/307) is before the General Assembly. 52. The Mission is expected to continue with its transition work until closure in December 2004, when its mandate will expire. An account of the activities of the Mission during 2004 will be contained in an end-of-mission report of the Secretary-General. In 2005 the work of the Mission will be dedicated to the liquidation phase, which is expected to last three months, from 1 January to 31 March 2005. 53. The estimated requirements for MINUGUA for the period from 1 January to 31 March 2005 amount to $386,200 net ($432,300 gross). Of that amount, $114,100 will be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriations for 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for the liquidation plan of MINUGUA, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $272,100 net ($318,200 gross). 54. This amount would provide for staffing costs ($271,200) for the liquidation team of 8 international staff (1 P-5, 1 P-3, 3 Field Service officers, 3 General Service) and 27 administrative support local staff, and operational costs ($115,000) including facilities and infrastructure, communications, transportation and other requirements. This compares with a provision for 32 international staff and 62 local staff in 2004. III. Special political missions emanating from the Security Council A. United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau 55. The United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau was established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1233 (1999) of 6 April 1999. The objectives of UNOGBIS are: (a) To support all efforts to promote political dialogue, national reconciliation, the rule of law and respect for human rights, and to strengthen democratic institutions; (b) To encourage the Government and other national stakeholders to restore and consolidate constitutional normality and to create a conducive environment for peace, stability and the holding of free and transparent elections; (c) To assist with these elections in close cooperation with the United Nations country team and other international partners; (d) To support national efforts, including those of civil society and in particular women's organizations, aimed at strengthening the country's capacities for conflict prevention and for the peaceful management of differences, especially during the transition period; (e) To encourage initiatives aimed at maintaining friendly relations between Guinea-Bissau and its neighbours and building confidence between the country and its external partners; (f) To encourage the Government to enact the programme of small arms collection and destruction; (g) To facilitate, in close cooperation with the United Nations country team, the Bretton Woods institutions and the relevant intergovernmental bodies and mechanisms, international political support to help address the post-conflict recovery priorities of Guinea-Bissau, within the framework of an integrated peacebuilding strategy. 56. Working in close cooperation with the United Nations country team and other partners, the mission develops comprehensive peacebuilding strategies that integrate political and development assistance objectives; provides facilitation and good offices; and contributes to strengthening fragile democratic institutions by establishing conflict-prevention mechanisms to safeguard constitutional law and order and ensure political stability, without which economic, social and financial progress and sustainable development would not be possible. The Representative of the Secretary-General also uses his good offices to help promote friendly and cooperative relations with the country's neighbours, thereby enhancing peace and security in the immediate region. To further support the implementation of its mandate, UNOGBIS designs and implements concrete projects in the political, human rights and security areas. The projects are partially financed from voluntary contributions. 57. On 14 September 2003 the Government of Guinea-Bissau experienced a coup d'état leading to the subsequent resignation of President Koumba Yala. Since then important progress has been made towards restoring constitutional order. The President and Vice-President of the Supreme Court of Justice were elected in January 2004 and legislative elections took place in March 2004. A new National Popular Assembly was inaugurated in May 2004, which completed the first phase of the transition. Carlos Gomes Junior, the leader of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) was appointed Prime Minister. On 12 May 2004, a new 24-member Government formed by the Prime Minister was inaugurated. Though composed exclusively of PAIGC supporters, it represents all ethnic groups and includes five women. In July 2004, Parliament passed the Government's budget. 58. On the basis of a letter dated 25 August 2003 from the President of Guinea-Bissau, addressed to the Secretary-General requesting the extension of UNOGBIS, the Secretary-General, in his letter to the President of the Security Council dated 11 November 2003 (S/2003/1096) proposed that the mandate of UNOGBIS be extended until 31 December 2004. In that letter, the Secretary-General revised the mandate in the light of the recent developments in Guinea-Bissau, and following consultations with the transitional authorities. The President of the Security Council, in his letter to the Secretary-General dated 14 November 2003 (S/2003/1097), took note of the proposal. While the President of Guinea-Bissau has yet to request a further extension of the mandate of UNOGBIS until 31 December 2005, it is anticipated that, on the basis of a request to be submitted to the Council, the mission will be extended into 2005. 59. The objective, expected accomplishment and indicator of achievement are presented below. Objective: To improve the capacity of national institutions, including the military, to maintain constitutional order, prevent conflict, consolidate peace and democracy and promote the rule of law and respect for human rights. (a) Improved dialogue among key stakeholders, and continued progress towards national reconciliation and improvement in conditions for conducting free, fair and transparent presidential elections, as envisaged in the Transitional Charter of 28 September 2003 (a) (i) Successful presidential elections leading to a peaceful end of the transitional period (ii) Increased number of constructive political debates organized by the national media :: Provision by the Representative of the Secretary-General of good offices and advice, as needed :: Promotion of dialogue among all actors, including leaders of political parties and representatives of civil society, especially leading to the presidential elections :: Organization of a workshop for journalists on a free, democratic and impartial media and to support in the organization of radio and television programmes to promote political awareness, constructive debates and national reconciliation (b) Strengthened capacity of the National People's Assembly to function effectively (b) Regular sessions of the National People's Assembly held in accordance to its schedules, rules and procedures :: Organization of a workshop for parliamentary commissions and government officials :: Training seminar providing assistance for the revision, actualization and divulgation of fundamental texts (c) Conducive environment for the country's Constitution to replace the Transitional Charter (c) Constructive national and parliamentary discussions on ways to harmonize texts and provisions of the 1996 constitution and the 2001 constitution, which was revised, but not promulgated :: Provision of advice and expertise on constitutional issues (d) An environment for restoring an independent judiciary as a guarantor of the rule of law (d) Due judiciary process with respect to all detainees :: Organization of a training programme for judges and lawyers on the rule of law :: Provision of assistance and advice to enhance professional competence of members of the judiciary (e) Increased awareness of, and respect for the culture of democracy, constitutional order, rule of law and human rights by the security forces, the military and civilian police (e) Reduction in the instances of interference by the military and civilian police in the political process :: Organization of a seminar for the security forces on their constitutional mandate :: Promotion for the inclusion of a module on human rights, democratic principles and humanitarian rights in the curriculum of the security forces, and the establishment of a police academy :: Organization of a training for trainers (police officers) course on the code of conduct of police forces in maintaining public order, and training of provincial governors and administrators on the management of police forces (f) Compliance by the national institutions with their obligations under international human rights instruments :: Advice and assistance to women's organizations, including a seminar on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, raising their level of awareness of their political, economic and social rights :: Provide members of the inter-ministerial committee on human rights with new mechanisms for incorporating human rights principles into government 60. UNOGBIS is expected to accomplish its objectives provided that there is no political or socio-economic instability in the country and that the stakeholders are committed to reaching an agreement on the constitution. 61. The estimated requirements for UNOGBIS, assuming that its mandate is extended for another year, amount to $3,359,000. These requirements would provide for two military advisers and one civilian police officer ($155,400); staff costs of the existing 27 staff ($2,071,000); and operational costs ($771,900) consisting largely of official travel ($110,600), communication requirements ($140,800) and facilities and infrastructure ($267,200). B. Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa 62. The Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa was appointed in accordance with the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in his letter of 12 December 1997 (S/1997/994) to the President of the Security Council and the latter's reply of 19 December 1997 (S/1997/995) expressing the Council's support of the proposal. The main objective of the Special Adviser is to promote peace and security, particularly in the Horn of Africa region, especially in Somalia and the Sudan. 63. The Special Adviser to the Secretary-General monitors the situation in the Horn of Africa closely and engages in efforts to resolve conflicts in the region and, in doing so, works closely with the Department of Political Affairs at Headquarters. With the development in the peace talks in the Sudan and the appointment of the Special Representative for the Sudan, the Special Adviser was assigned to follow, on a more sustained basis and in close collaboration with the Special Representative for the Sudan, the political negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and Darfur rebels to address the root causes of the Darfur conflict. The Special Adviser represents the United Nations in peacemaking initiatives in the Horn of Africa, carries out liaison with the parties to conflicts, the Governments and, national and international organizations concerned with conflict resolution in the Horn of Africa, and provides advice on matters related to the situation in Somalia and the Sudan. He is based in Geneva and is engaged on a when-actually-employed basis. 64. In accordance with the Secretary-General's proposal contained in his letter of 14 November 2003 to the President of the Security Council (S/2003/1138) and the latter's reply of 21 November 2003 (S/2003/1139), the current appointment of the Special Adviser is extended to 31 December 2004. While the Security Council has yet to be requested to make a decision with regard to extending the appointment of the Special Adviser beyond 31 December 2004, in view of the need for the continued good offices role, it is anticipated that the mission of the Special Adviser will be extended into 2005. 65. During 2004 the Special Adviser was actively involved in the peace process between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). In March 2004 he undertook a mission to the region (Egypt, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, Eritrea and the Sudan) to consult with all relevant stakeholders involved in the resolution of the Sudan conflict. He also represented the United Nations as an observer at several rounds of talks at the IGAD peace talks in Naivasha; in the Darfur talks in Addis Ababa (15-19 July) and Abuja (23-25 August). In October, the Special Adviser undertook a resource mobilization mission for the Sudan, to several Gulf States (Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Qatar), which has resulted in pledges of $3 million. 66. During 2005, in anticipation of the extension of the mandate of the Special Adviser, it is expected that there would be sustained involvement of the Special Adviser with respect to peacemaking efforts in Darfur, and developments regarding Somalia. In addition, it is anticipated that the Special Adviser will be asked to undertake other missions of representation, particularly related to the activities of IGAD, the League of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, or to join the missions of the Secretary-General, including the African Union summit. The Special Adviser is expected to monitor the situation in the Horn of Africa, with an emphasis on Somalia and Darfur, contribute to the deliberations of the Security Council, the Executive Committee on Peace and Security, the United Nations Development Group and others on the issues of the Horn of Africa, support the regional mediation on Somalia, participate in the Somali National Reconciliation Conference, and interact with Somali leaders in order to harmonize their position at the Conference. 67. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of the Special Adviser are presented below: Objective: To promote international peace and security, particularly in the Horn of Africa. (a) Completion of the IGAD peacemaking initiative on Somalia (the Somalia National Reconciliation Conference) (a) Agreement on the establishment of the Transitional Federal Parliament and Government :: Reports and oral briefings to the Secretary-General :: Contribution to the deliberations of the Security Council, the Senior Management Group, the Executive Committee on Peace and Security, the Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Development Group on the issues of the Horn of Africa :: Support for the regional mediation on Somalia (b) Political settlement of the Darfur problem (b) (i) A political accord on Darfur (ii) Respect for the ceasefire :: Substantive contribution to the African Union mediation in Darfur 68. The efforts of the Special Adviser are expected to achieve the objective on the assumption that there is sufficient political will among the participants at the Somali National Reconciliation Conference, and among the parties to the Darfur political negotiations; major policy decisions made by the external actors and the mediators involved in peacemaking in Somalia and in Darfur lead to an increase in political and material support for the negotiations; and there is commitment among the parties, the donors, international guarantors and facilitators to the peacemaking initiatives in Somalia and in Darfur. 69. The resource requirements for the Special Adviser, in anticipation that his good offices' role would be extended in 2005, are estimated at $208,900 net ($226,900 gross). Of this amount, $105,200 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the activities of the Special Adviser in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $103,700 net ($121,700 gross). 70. These resources would provide for the salaries of the Special Adviser, engaged on a when-actually-employed basis ($42,900), official travel ($158,700) and other logistical and miscellaneous requirements ($7,300). C. Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region 71. The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region was established on the basis of the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in his letter to the President of the Security Council dated 12 December 1997 (S/1997/994) and the latter's reply of 19 December 1997 (S/1997/995), expressing the Council's support of the proposal. The objective of the Office is to represent the Secretary-General at meetings and deliberations of the Arusha peace process; to address the regional dimensions of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and to solicit the views of the countries in the region regarding the organization of an international conference on the Great Lakes region of Africa. 72. Several nations, including countries in the Great Lakes region, have on many occasions called upon the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity/African Union to speed up the organization of an international conference on peace, security, democracy and development in the Great Lakes region. The Executive Council of the African Union, meeting at Maputo from 4 to 8 July 2003, welcomed the proposal and expressed satisfaction that the preparatory process, marked by the first meeting of National Coordinators, held at Nairobi on 23 and 24 June 2003, had began. During the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, many delegations also urged the United Nations and the newly established Commission of the African Union to redouble their efforts for the preparation process and the holding of the conference. 73. The international conference on the Great Lakes would set a regional framework for the adoption and implementation of a pact with the focus on four thematic areas: peace and security; democracy and good governance; economic development and regional integration; and humanitarian and social issues. 74. During 2004, major progress has been made towards convening of an International Conference on the Great Lakes region. The Office of the Special Representative, in collaboration with the African Union, undertook several consultation tours of the region, its friends and neighbours. The Office also consulted United Nations agencies, bilateral and multilateral partners, as well as influential non-governmental organizations and regional think tanks to prepare the ground for the preparation and holding of the international conference. At the same time, the Office has been coordinating with regional independent actors and institutions such as women, youth, trade unions, faith-based organizations, parliamentarians and non-governmental organizations contributing to the preparation of the conference. As a result, the Special Representative has been instrumental in assisting countries of the region put into place the necessary framework for the conference. Further, in September 2004, four countries, namely Angola, the Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo and the Sudan joined the core members of international conference, bringing the total number of core members to 11. 75. The purpose of the action-oriented international conference organized by the United Nations, in partnership with the African Union, is to initiate a process that will bring together the leaders of the countries of the Great Lakes region (Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, the Sudan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia) to reach an agreement on a set of principles, and articulate and launch selected policies and programmes of action with a view to ending the cycle of crises, and ensure durable peace, stability, security, democracy and development in the region. 76. All countries of the region have appointed national coordinators and have set up national preparatory committees. The countries of the region have agreed on a timetable and a broad course of action. Five meetings of national coordinators have taken place to assess the degree of the preparatory activities at the national level and pave the way for the launching of the meetings of the regional preparatory committee (comprised of all the national committees). The first meeting of the regional preparatory committee was held at Bujumbura in September 2004, at which substantive preparations for the conference were launched. Two more regional preparatory meetings were held in October at Kinshasa and in November at Kampala prior to the first summit of heads of State and Government, held at Dar es Salaam on 19 and 20 November 2004, at which the Dar es Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes Region was adopted. On the basis of the Declaration, standing inter-ministerial committees will be set up to translate the Declaration into concrete regional plans and programmes of action. It is expected that the plans and programmes of action will be adopted by the heads of State at a second summit, tentatively scheduled to be held in June 2005. The Office is committed to making the outcome of this action-oriented conference consolidate political stability through good governance and democracy, effective economic development and regional integration through priority projects. 77. In his letter dated 11 November 2004, the Secretary-General advised the President of the Security Council that the mandate of his Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region was due to expire on 31 December 2004 and that it would be his intention to extend the mandate until 31 December 2005 (S/2004/904). In its letter dated 16 November 2004 (S/2004/905), the President of the Security Council indicated that the Council had taken note of the Secretary-General's intention. The present report reflects resource requirements at the maintenance level for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005. 78. While continuing to monitor, assess and report on the situation in the region, preparation for and the convening of an international conference on the Great Lakes region of Africa remains the main purpose of the Office. Further, the Office will continue to contribute to the consolidation of peace and security in the Great Lakes region by promoting good governance, democracy, economic development and regional integration within the region. 79. Since the organization of the international conference depends on the progress made in the implementation of the Arusha and Lusaka Peace Accords, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region is closely collaborating with the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United Nations Office in Burundi (ONUB). Further, lead agencies have been designated for each of the four themes of the Conference, as follows: (a) Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Department of Political Affairs for peace and security; (b) Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, office for the Great Lakes Region, for humanitarian and social issues; (c) the Economic Commission for Africa Great Lakes Regional office, for regional integration and economic development; and (d) UNDP, for good governance and democracy, as well as other humanitarian agencies. The Office of the Special Representative will continue interacting on a regular basis with the selected lead agencies. This will be done through participation in regular steering committee meetings. The office will pursue working relations with other missions or programmes of the United Nations system, which could be instrumental in fulfilling its mandate, including the World Health Organization, United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, UNHCHR, UN-HABITAT and the United Nations Environment Programme. 80. The objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below: : To consolidate peace in the Great Lakes region by promoting security, stability and development. (a) Strengthened dialogue among the countries of the region (a) (i) Adoption of policies, programmes and activities in the four themes of the international conference on the Great Lakes region (ii) Adoption of the security, stability and development pact :: Provision of advice and expertise to Government and civil society institutions :: Creation of a regional mechanism for conflict resolution :: Convening of the second summit :: Provide support to inter-ministerial meetings (b) Agreement on a plan of action (b) Increase in the number of issues agreed by consensus among States members of the Great Lakes region :: Setting up of national preparatory committees :: Facilitation of meetings for national coordinators, regional preparatory committees and specialized meetings :: Setting up of the group of friends of the Great Lakes region :: Coordination and facilitation of the international conference on the Great Lakes region 81. The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region is expected to accomplish its objectives, provided that the national peace process continues to progress, that there is no political instability in the region and that the stakeholders are committed to implementing the plan of action. 82. The estimated requirements relating to the Office of the Special Representative for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would amount to $1,963,900. Of this amount, $65,700 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Office in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Office for 2005, after taking into account the above, amount to $1,896,900. 83. The resources requested for the Office of the Special Representative for 2005 would provide for salaries ($1,578,900), services of experts to advise the Special Representative on various topics ($65,800), official travel ($153,000) and other operational and logistical costs ($166,200). D. Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus 84. In its resolution 1250 (1999) of 29 June 1999, the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to invite the leaders of the two sides to negotiations in the autumn of 1999. In October 1999, the Secretary-General appointed Alvaro de Soto to serve as his Special Adviser on Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot parties accepted the Secretary-General's invitation and numerous sessions of proximity talks were held from December 1999 to November 2000 (see letters and reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council contained in S/2001/1122, S/2001/1162, S/2001/1182 and the response of the President of the Council contained in S/2001/1183), and direct talks from January 2002 to February 2003. 85. Between January 2002 and February 2003, an intensive round of talks took place on Cyprus in the presence of the Special Adviser, resulting in a comprehensive settlement proposal on 26 February 2003. The plan called for a referendum before 16 April 2003 to approve it and reunify Cyprus. However, despite the Secretary-General's direct personal involvement and several meetings with leaders from both sides, and visits to Greece and Turkey, a breakthrough could not be attained. It was at that juncture that the Secretary-General announced that the process which had begun in December 1999 had reached an end. 86. In his report of 1 April 2003 to the Security Council (S/2003/398) the Secretary-General observed that, in his view, a solution on the basis of the plan could be achieved only if there is an unequivocal stated preparedness on the part of the leaders of both sides, fully and determinedly backed at the highest political level in both motherlands, to commit themselves: (a) to finalize the plan (without reopening its basic principles or essential trades-offs) by a specific date with United Nations assistance; and (b) to put it to simultaneous referenda as provided for in the plan on a date soon thereafter. The Security Council, in its resolution 1475 (2003) of 14 April 2003, inter alia, stressed its full support for the Secretary-General's mission of good offices as entrusted to him in resolution 1250 (1999) and requested the Secretary-General to continue to make available his good offices in Cyprus as outlined in his report. 87. A renewed effort at reaching a settlement commenced on 13 February 2004, when the parties in Cyprus committed themselves to negotiations in good faith on the basis of a settlement plan dated 26 February 2003, to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem before 1 May 2004, the date when a unified Cyprus would accede to the European Union. To that end the parties agreed to a three-phase negotiations process. The first phase took place in Cyprus between 19 February and 22 March. During the second phase, the Secretary-General convened a meeting of the two sides in Bürgenstock, Switzerland, from 24 to 29 March. However, the agreement on a finalized text did not prove possible. In the third phase, after consultations with the parties, the Secretary-General presented a finalized plan on 31 March 2004. The proposed foundation agreement on "the comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem", as presented on 31 March 2004, was submitted to separate simultaneous referenda on 24 April 2004. It was rejected by the Greek Cypriot electorate and approved by the Turkish Cypriot electorate. It therefore did not enter into force. 88. In his 28 May 2004 report to the Security Council on his mission of good offices (S/2004/437), the Secretary-General noted that the outcome of the referenda has resulted in a stalemate, and he did not see any basis for resuming his good offices as long as the stand-off remained. The Secretary-General further indicated that the prospect for the reunification of their country rested primarily in the hands of the Cypriots. The foregoing factors combine to make it imperative that the Secretary-General's good offices mission retains a capacity and readiness during 2005 to re-engage in Cyprus as and when needed and at the shortest possible notice. 89. The objective, expected accomplishment and indicator of achievement are presented below. Objective: To achieve a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem. Expected accomplishment Indicator of achievement Agreement by both parties on a comprehensive settlement Dialogue among political parties, including governmental coalition, leading to a new approach towards settlement :: Political discussions among political parties and civil society :: Reports to the Security Council :: Briefings of the Security Council 90. The objective is expected to be achieved provided that the two political parties in Cyprus are willing and committed to reach a political solution, and that the international community, especially the interested countries in the region, provide support for the Secretary-General's efforts. 91. The estimated requirements for the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for Cyprus for a one-year period ending 31 December 2005 amount to $532,700 net ($576,500 gross). Of this amount, $202,300 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriation for 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Special Adviser for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $330,400 net ($374,200 gross). 92. The 2005 requirements of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Cyprus in the amount of $532,700 would provide for the salaries and common staff costs of his staff ($222,700), official travel of the Special Adviser and his staff ($304,300) and other operational and logistical costs ($5,700). E. Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities 93. The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team was established on 15 March 2004 pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) of 30 January 2004, as a successor arrangement to the Monitoring Group established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1363 (2001) and extended by resolutions 1390 (2002) and 1455 (2003). The Team, composed of eight experts and based in New York, assists the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) in the fulfilment of its mandate. 94. The Committee was initially established to oversee States' implementation of the measures imposed with respect to members of the Al-Qaida organization and the Taliban and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them, in areas of the freezing of financial assets, prevention of the entry into or the transit through their territories, as well as the prevention of direct or indirect supply, sale and transfer of arms and related material. In its resolution 1526 (2004), the Security Council strengthened the mandate of the Committee to include a central role in assessing information for the Council's review regarding effective implementation of the measures, as well as in recommending improvements to the measures. 95. To support the Committee in its strengthened role and with a view to improve the implementation of the measures set out in Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000) and 1390 (2002), the Security Council, in its resolution 1526 (2004), requested the Secretary-General to establish, for a period of 18 months, a New York-based Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team under the direction of the Committee. The Monitoring Team was mandated to submit three independent reports to the Committee, the first by 31 July 2004, the second by 15 December 2004 and the third by 30 June 2005. In the annex to resolution 1526 (2004), it was further assigned the following responsibilities: (a) To collate, assess, monitor and report on and make recommendations regarding implementation of the measures; to pursue case studies, as appropriate; and to explore in depth any other relevant issues as directed by the Committee; (b) To submit a comprehensive programme of work to the Committee for its approval and review, as necessary, in which the Monitoring Team should detail the activities envisaged in order to fulfil its responsibilities, including proposed travel; (c) To analyse reports submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1455 (2003) and any subsequent written responses provided by States to the Committee; (d) To work closely and share information with Counter-Terrorism Committee experts to identify areas of convergence and to help facilitate concrete coordination between the two Committees; (e) To consult with States in advance of travel to selected States, based on its programme of work approved by the Committee; (f) To consult with States, including through engaging in regular dialogue with representatives in New York and in capitals, taking into account comments from States, especially regarding any issues that might be contained in the Monitoring Team's reports referred to in paragraph 8 of the resolution; (g) To report to the Committee, on a regular basis or when the Committee so requests, through oral and/or written briefings on the work of the Monitoring Team, including on its visits to States and its activities; (h) To assist the Committee in preparing its oral and written assessments to the Council, in particular the analytical summaries referred to in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the resolution; (i) Any other responsibility identified by the Committee. 96. In carrying out its work and in preparing its reports, the Monitoring Team seeks cooperation and assistance from government authorities and relevant international and regional organizations. It also cooperates with the Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate established pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004). It submitted its first report to the Security Council in August 2004 (S/2004/679). 97. While the current mandate of the Monitoring Team expires at the end of July 2005, it is anticipated that, after the consideration of the second and third reports by the Monitoring Team referred to in paragraph 95 above, the Security Council will extend the mandate beyond July 2005. 98. In 2005, the Monitoring Team is anticipated to continue to operate under the direction of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and carry out the tasks entrusted to it as specified above or as may be revised by the Security Council at the end of the current mandate. Its primary role is to collect information on implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Council, to monitor and make recommendations for consideration by the Committee on future action to be taken. 99. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action taken by the United Nations, collectively by the international community, the Committee, the Security Council and by the Secretary-General, are presented below. The determination of effectiveness of the sanctions, by using the indicators of achievement, will enable the Security Council to take decisions on further action required. Objective: To prevent terrorist activities perpetrated by individuals or entities belonging to or associated with Al-Qaida and Taliban. Compliance with the sanctions measures imposed by resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000) and 1390 (2002) (i) Increase in legislation adopted to comply with the measures imposed by the respective resolutions (ii) Increase in the level of funds and assets frozen in application of the respective resolutions (iii) Prevented listed individuals from travelling ("travel ban") (iv) Prevented access of listed individuals and entities to all types of arms :: Investigations, including specific case studies, related to the implementation, or violations, of the Council's relevant resolutions :: Recommendations on improvements to the measures and their implementation :: Analysis of reports submitted by Member States pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1455 (2003) :: Consultations with States on issues contained in the reports to the Committee :: Reports to the Security Council, through the Committee 100. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Monitoring Team, and provided that the Team's investigations are not hindered by adverse security situations. 101. The estimated requirements for the Monitoring Team for 2005 amount to $3,559,300 net ($3,756,300 gross). Of this amount, $242,200 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriation for 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Monitoring Team, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $3,317,100 net ($3,514,400 gross). 102. The proposed resources for the Monitoring Team for 2005 would provide for the salaries of and common staff costs of maintaining the existing staffing resources comprising five Professional and five General service (Other level) staff ($1,027,300), fees and travel of the eight members of the Monitoring Team ($1,725,800), travel of the Committee members ($217,200), official travel of staff ($184,200) and other operational requirements ($404,800), including premises, communications, supplies and services and other logistical support. F. Monitoring Group on Somalia 103. The Monitoring Group on Somalia was established on 22 January 2004 (see S/2004/73) pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 1519 (2003) of 16 December 2003, as a successor arrangement to the Panel of Experts on Somalia, after the Council's consideration of the latter's report of 4 November 2003 (S/2003/1035). The Group, composed of four experts, is based in Nairobi, and monitors violations of measures imposed by the Security Council in its resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992. The Monitoring Group reports to the Security Council through the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia. 104. The Group submitted its report to the Council on 11 August 2004 (S/2004/604). Having considered that report, in its resolution 1558 (2004) of 17 August 2004, the Council requested the Secretary-General, inter alia, to re-establish the Monitoring Group within 30 days from the date of the adoption of that resolution, and for a period of six months, with the following mandate: (a) To continue the tasks outlined in paragraph 2 (a) to (d) of resolution 1519 (2003); (b) To continue refining and updating information on the draft list of those who continued to violate the arms embargo inside and outside Somalia, and their active supporters, for possible future measures by the Council, and to present such information to the Committee as and when the Committee deemed appropriate; (c) To continue making recommendations based on its investigations, on the previous reports of the Panel of Experts (S/2003/223 and S/2003/1035) appointed pursuant to resolutions 1425 (2002) of 22 July 2002 and 1474 (2003) of 8 April 2003, and on the Monitoring Group's first report (S/2004/604); (d) To work closely with the Committee on specific recommendations for additional measures to improve overall compliance with the arms embargo; (e) To provide the Council, through the Committee, a midterm report and a final report covering all the tasks set out above. 105. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1558 (2004), the Monitoring Group was re-established on 16 September 2004 for another six months following the Secretary-General's reappointment of its members on 23 August 2004 (S/2004/676). The current mandate of the Monitoring Group will expire in March 2005. After the consideration of the Group's next report to the Security Council, it is anticipated that the mandate of the Group will be renewed or extended beyond March 2005. 106. In 2005, it is anticipated that the Monitoring Group will continue to monitor the implementation of the measures in accordance with the Security Council mandate. The Group is anticipated to continue conducting extensive field work, and informing the Security Council Committee established pursuant to Council resolution 751 (1992) on its activities on a bi-weekly basis. It is also anticipated to provide oral briefings periodically, and to submit its final report as required by the Council, which will set forth a detailed account of its investigations as well as policy options to address violations of measures. 107. In carrying out its mandate, the Monitoring Group cooperates with other similar groups established by the Security Council. It also cooperates with and seeks the assistance of agencies, regional and intergovernmental organizations, such as the African Union, the League of Arab States, IGAD, ICAO, the International Maritime Organization, Interpol and the World Customs Organization. 108. The primary role of the Monitoring Group is to collect information on the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council, to monitor and make recommendations for consideration by the Security Council on future action to be taken. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action taken by the United Nations, collectively by the international community, the Security Council and by the Secretary-General, are presented below. The determination of effectiveness of the sanctions, by using the indicators of achievement, will enable the Security Council to take decisions on further action required. Objective: To stop and prevent all delivery of weapons and military equipment to Somalia. Compliance with resolution (i) Reduction in the use of weapons and ammunition in Somalia (ii) Reduction in the inflow of weapons and ammunition to Somalia :: Recommendations and assessments of progress made by States regarding arms embargo violations :: Refined/updated information on the draft list of arms embargo violators :: Recommendations, by working closely with the Committee, additional measures to improve overall arms embargo compliance :: Reports to the Security Council through the Security Council Committee 109. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Monitoring Group, and provided that the Group's investigations are not hindered by adverse security situations. 110. In anticipation that the mandate of the Monitoring Group on Somalia will be extended or renewed beyond March 2005, the estimated requirements relating to the Group for one year, from 1 January to 31 December 2005, amount to $1,460,200 net ($1,479,400 gross). Of this amount, $160,100 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts appropriated for the Group for 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Group for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $1,300,100 net ($1,319,300 gross). 111. The 2005 requirements of the Monitoring Group in the amount of $1,460,200 would provide for the salaries and common staff costs of two General Service (Other level) staff to support the Group ($100,300); the fees and travel of the four members of the Panel ($1,275,700); and other operational and logistical support ($84,200). G. Panel of Experts on Liberia 112. The Panel of Experts on Liberia was initially established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1343 (2001) of 7 March 2001 to carry out the functions mandated in paragraph 19 of the resolution. The Panel was subsequently extended/ re-established by the Council in resolutions 1395 (2002) of 27 February 2002 for five weeks, 1408 (2002) of 6 May 2002 for three months, 1458 (2003) of 28 January 2003 for another three months, 1478 (2003) of 6 May 2003 for five months, 1521 (2003) of 22 December 2003 for another five months and 1549 (2004) of 17 June 2004 for six months. The Panel submitted eight reports to the Council (S/2001/1015, S/2002/470, S/2002/1115, S/2003/498, S/2003/779, S/2003/937 and Add.1, S/2004/396 and Corr.1 and S/2004/752). The most recent report of the Panel (S/2004/752), as requested by the Council in its resolution 1549 (2004), was considered by the Council on 7 October 2004. The Panel is expected to submit its final report for the current mandate period in December 2004. 113. In the most recent mandate of the Panel, contained in resolution 1549 (2004), the Security Council, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to re-establish, no later than 30 June 2004, a Panel of Experts for the period up to 21 December 2004: (a) To conduct a follow-up assessment mission to Liberia and neighbouring States in order to investigate and compile a report on the implementation, and any violations, particularly ongoing violations, of the measures referred to in paragraphs 2, 4, 6 and 10 of resolution 1521 (2003), including any violations involving rebel movements and neighbouring countries, and including any information relevant to designation by the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) of the individuals described in paragraph 4 (a) of resolution 1521 (2003), and including the various sources of financing, such as from natural resources, for the illicit trade of arms; (b) To assess the progress made towards the goals described in paragraphs 5, 7 and 11 of resolution 1521 (2003); (c) To monitor the implementation and enforcement of the measures imposed by paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004), particularly in Liberia and in neighbouring States, as well as in other regions, and to provide the Committee with any information the Panel requires which will facilitate the identification of individuals and entities of the types described in paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004), and with recommendations on technical assistance Liberia and other States might require to implement the measures; (d) To assess the socio-economic and humanitarian impact of the measures imposed by resolutions 1521 (2003) and 1532 (2004). 114. In carrying out its mandate, the Panel has sought the cooperation and assistance of government authorities; diplomatic, bilateral and multilateral agencies; civil society; the private sector; media; as well as other relevant parties in Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, including the United Nations Mission in Liberia, UNAMSIL and UNOCI. 115. By December 2004, the Panel will have completed approximately 11 months of operation in 2004. While the Panel's activities under resolution 1549 (2004) will cease with the conclusion of its time-bound mandate, the Security Council may decide to re-establish or extend the mandate of the Panel for a similar period in 2005, as was the case in 2004, after its consideration of the Panel's final report. In anticipation of such an extension of the mandate, resources are requested for the Panel to continue to carry out its work as the Council may decide for 2005. 116. The Panel's main role is to collect information on implementation by States of the relevant measures imposed by the Security Council, to gauge progress made towards the Council's goals for the lifting of those measures, to assess the socio-economic and humanitarian impact of those measures, and to undertake analyses and make recommendations for consideration by the Security Council on future action to be taken. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action taken by the United Nations, collectively by the international community, the Security Council and by the Secretary-General, are presented below. The determination of effectiveness of the sanctions, by using the indicators of achievement, will enable the Security Council to take decisions on further action required. Objective: To improve the effectiveness of the relevant sanctions measures (arms embargo, travel ban and assets freeze on designated individuals, and prohibitions on the import of Liberian rough diamonds and timber), and to gauge progress made towards the Council's goals for the lifting of those measures. Compliance with the sanctions measures imposed by resolutions 1532 (2004) and 1521 (2003) (i) Reduction in the inflow of arms and related materiel to Liberia (ii) Reduction in the illicit import of Liberian diamonds and timber (iii) Increase in the amount of misappropriated funds and other financial assets owned or controlled by designated individuals that are frozen by States pursuant to resolution 1532 (2004) :: Investigations related to the implementation or violations of the Council's relevant sanctions measures :: Assessment of progress made towards the goals described in Council resolution 1521 (2003) concerning the peace process, as well as the diamond and timber sectors :: Monitoring the implementation and enforcement of the assets freeze imposed by paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004) :: Assessment of the socio-economic and humanitarian impact of the measures imposed by resolutions 1521 (2003) and 1532 (2004) 117. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Monitoring Group, and provided that the Group's investigations are not hindered by adverse security situations. 118. In anticipation that the Panel of Experts will be required to continue its work in 2005, the resource requirements of the Panel for a period of 11 months, as was the case in 2004, are estimated at $1,338,600. These resources would provide for the continuation of services of the five members of the Panel and 15 months of specialized expertise not otherwise available to the Panel, including their travel ($1,306,900), and other operational costs, such as communications, transportation and miscellaneous supplies and services ($31,700). 119. It is recalled that an amount of $826,300 was appropriated for the Panel for an eight-month period in 2004. Since the Security Council mandated the Panel to operate for another three months in 2004, the additional requirements amounting to $499,000 were met through redeployment of resources from another special political mission, thus bringing the total resources provided to the Panel in 2004 to $1,325,300. Of these resources, an amount of $47,800 is anticipated to remain unencumbered. Taking this unencumbered balance into account, the net additional requirements of the Panel for 2005 amount to $1,290,800. H. Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo 120. By its resolution 1533 (2004) of 12 March 2004, the Security Council decided to establish a Security Council Committee to oversee the implementation of the arms embargo imposed on the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Council in its resolution 1493 (2003) of 28 July 2003, with particular emphasis on North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. In paragraph 10 of the same resolution, the Council requested the Secretary-General to create, within 30 days from the date of adoption of that resolution, and for a period expiring on 28 July 2004, a Group of Experts consisting of no more than four members, having the necessary skills to perform the mandate contained in the same resolution. 121. The mandate of the mission as reflected in resolution 1533 (2004) is as follows: (a) To examine and analyse information gathered by MONUC in the context of its monitoring mandate; (b) To gather and analyse all relevant information in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, countries of the region and, as necessary, other countries, in cooperation with the Governments of those countries, flows of arms and related materiel, as well as networks operating in violation of the measures imposed by paragraph 20 of resolution 1493 (2003); (c) To consider and recommend, where appropriate, ways of improving the capabilities of States interested, in particular those of the region, to ensure the measures imposed by paragraph 20 of resolution 1493 (2003) are effectively implemented; (d) To report to the Council in writing before 15 July 2004, through the Committee, on the implementation of the measures imposed by paragraph 20 of resolution 1493 (2003), with recommendations in this regard; (e) To keep the Committee frequently updated on its activities; (f) To exchange with MONUC, as appropriate, information that might be of use in the fulfilment of its monitoring mandate as described in paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution 1533 (2004); (g) To provide the Committee in its reports with a list, with supporting evidence, of those found to have violated the measures imposed by paragraph 20 of resolution 1493 (2003), and those found to have supported them in such activities for possible future measures by the Council. 122. By his letter of 21 April 2004 (S/2004/317), the Secretary-General informed the President of the Security Council of the appointment of members of the Group of Experts. 123. Having considered the report of the Group of Experts of 15 July 2004 (S/2004/551), the Security Council, in its resolution 1552 (2004) of 27 July 2004, requested the Secretary-General to re-establish the Group for a period expiring on 31 January 2005 to carry out the mandate contained in Council resolution 1533 (2004). Accordingly, the Group was re-established for a period up to 31 January 2005 (S/2004/677). 124. By the end of 2004, the Group of Experts will have completed approximately 8 months of operation. The requirements of the Group for that period have been met through the use of the authority granted to the Secretary-General in paragraph 1 (a) of resolution 58/273 of 23 December 2003 on unforeseen and extraordinary expenses. 125. While the current mandate of the Group of Experts will expire on 31 January 2005, it is anticipated that, after the consideration by the Security Council Committee and Council of further reports by the Group, the Group's mandate will be extended beyond 31 January 2005, for a similar period of time as in 2004. Accordingly, provision for 2005 has been incorporated in the present report. 126. The main roles of the Group of Experts are to collect information on implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council, to investigate and analyse information regarding flows of arms and operation of networks in violation of the Council's relevant arms embargo and to make recommendations for consideration by the Security Council on future action to be taken. 127. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action taken by the United Nations, collectively by the international community, the Security Council and by the Secretary-General, are presented below. The determination of effectiveness of the measures imposed, by using the indicators of achievement, will enable the Security Council to take decisions on further action required. Objective: To stop and prevent the supply of arms and any related materiel or assistance to armed groups operating in North and South Kivu and in Ituri and to groups not party to the Global and All-Inclusive Agreement on the Transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, signed in Pretoria on 17 December 2002. Compliance with resolutions 1493 (2003) and 1533 (2004) (i) Reduction in the flow of arms and related materiel (ii) Reduction in the number of networks operating in violation of the measures imposed :: Investigations related to the implementation, or violations, of the Council's relevant sanctions measures :: Recommendations on how States might improve implementation of the Council's relevant arms embargo :: Reports to the Security Council, through the Security Council Committee 128. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Group of Experts, and provided that the Group's investigations are not hindered by adverse security situations. 129. In anticipation that its mandate will be extended or renewed beyond 31 January 2005, the estimated requirements relating to the Group of Experts for eight months in 2005, based on an assumption of similar duration as in 2004, would amount to $969,400 net ($983,500 gross). Of this amount, $27,700 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Group in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Group for eight months in 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $941,700 net ($955,800 gross). 130. The resources requested would provide for staffing costs of one P-3 political affairs officer ($74,400), official travel of the political affairs officer ($42,100), fees and travel requirements of the four members of the Group ($653,000), fees and travel of two consultants for an aggregate of 12 work months of specialized services ($152,500) and other operational costs such as local transportation, communications and miscellaneous supplies and services ($47,400). I. Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide 131. In its resolution 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001, the Security Council invited the Secretary-General to refer to the Council information and analyses from within the United Nations system on cases of serious violations of international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law. On 26 January 2004, the Secretary-General delivered a statement to the Stockholm International Forum: Preventing Genocide; Threats and Responsibilities, emphasizing that the international community had a clear obligation to prevent genocide. The Secretary-General proposed the appointment of a Special Adviser on the prevention of genocide to ensure that the Security Council was fully and timeously informed of situations of threats of genocide, which most often also represented threats to international peace and security. 132. In a statement commemorating the tenth anniversary of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, the Secretary-General announced the appointment of his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and launched a five-point action plan to prevent genocide, which included: (a) preventing armed conflict, which usually provided the context for genocide; (b) protection of civilians in armed conflict, including a mandate for United Nations peacekeepers to protect civilians; (c) ending impunity through judicial action in both national and international courts; (d) information-gathering and early warning through a United Nations special adviser on the prevention of genocide, making recommendations to the Security Council on actions to prevent or halt genocide; and (e) swift and decisive action along a continuum of steps, including military action. 133. In his letter of 12 July 2004 (S/2004/567), the Secretary-General informed the President of the Security Council of his decision to appoint Juan Mendez as his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. In his reply of 13 July 2004 (S/2004/568), the President of the Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had taken note of the Secretary-General's decision. The appointment of the Special Adviser was effective 1 August 2004. 134. The responsibilities of the Special Adviser are: (a) to collect existing information, in particular from within the United Nations system, on massive and serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law of ethnic and racial origin that, if not prevented or halted, might lead to genocide; (b) to act as an early-warning mechanism to the Secretary-General, and, through the Secretary-General to the Security Council, by bringing to the latter's attention potential situations that could result in genocide; (c) to make recommendations to the Security Council, through the Secretary-General, on actions to prevent or halt genocide; and (d) to maintain liaison with the United Nations system on activities for the prevention of genocide and to work to enhance the United Nations capacity to analyse and manage information relating to genocide or related crimes. 135. Since his appointment in August 2004, the Special Adviser has established a small office and a system of information exchanges to provide early warning of situations of massive violations of human rights and international humanitarian law that could lead to genocide. He visited Darfur in conjunction with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and briefed the Security Council on the situation. The Special Adviser has also provided guidance to the Secretary-General on other situations of concern. 136. In 2005, the Special Adviser will focus on the development of a methodology, approach and system for data collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting, in accordance with his mandated functions. He will also carry out liaison with the United Nations system and regional entities and collect information on massive and serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law of ethnic and racial origin that, if not prevented or halted, might lead to genocide, and will act as an early warning mechanism to the Secretary-General and the Security Council. 137. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of the Special Adviser are presented below. Objective: To facilitate international action to prevent massive violations of human rights and international humanitarian law of national, ethnic, racial or religious character that could lead to genocide. (a) Increased understanding and knowledge of situations that could lead to genocide (a) Increase in the number of measures that are taken to prevent situations that might lead to genocide :: Reports to the Security Council; good offices (b) Improved cooperation with United Nations agencies on actions to be taken in situations that may lead to genocide (b) Agreement reached on guidelines to be followed in situations that may lead to genocide :: Database; studies; background papers; publications; information materials; web site, outreach activities (c) Early detection at the regional level of signs of genocide (c) Development of regional mechanisms to monitor evidence of massive and serious violations of human rights and international law of ethnic and racial origin :: Expert group meetings; workshops; advisory missions; consultations; liaison activities :: Inter-agency cooperation; guidelines 138. The efforts of the Special Adviser are expected to achieve the objective provided that there is a political will on the part of members of the Security Council and other intergovernmental bodies to engage with the Special Adviser, and to consider and as necessary act upon the Special Adviser's analysis and recommendations; there is a willingness among countries that are host to critical events, to allow access to and engage with the Special Adviser; and there is goodwill and active involvement of regional and other organizations. 139. The initial requirements of the Special Adviser for the period 1 August to 31 December 2004 were sought under the authority granted to the Secretary-General in resolution 58/273 concerning unforeseen and extraordinary expenses, and will be reported in the context of the first performance report for the biennium 2004-2005. 140. The estimated requirements for the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Prevention of Genocide for a one-year period ending 31 December 2005 amounts to $757,800 net ($858,100 gross). Of this amount, $68,000 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the commitments granted for 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Special Adviser for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $689,800 net ($790,100 gross). 141. These requirements would provide for the salaries and common staff costs under general temporary assistance of the Special Adviser, engaged on a when-actually-employed basis for an aggregate of 150 days, and his three staff (1 P-4 political affairs officer, 1 P-4 human rights officer and 1 General Service (Other level) research/administrative assistant) ($456,900), services of consultants for an aggregate of four months to assist the Special Adviser to develop methodological approaches for the collection and analysis of information, and to prepare thematic studies on early-warning capacity ($40,200), official travel ($178,300) and other operational and logistical requirements, including, rental and maintenance of office space, other miscellaneous supplies and services ($82,400). J. Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate 142. In its resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001, the Security Council, inter alia, established the Counter-Terrorism Committee, consisting of all 15 members of the Security Council. The Committee monitors the implementation by all States of the provisions of Council resolution 1373 (2001) and seeks to increase the capability of States to fight terrorism. In its resolution 1535 (2004) of 26 March 2004, the Council endorsed the report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on its revitalization (S/2004/124), and established as a special political mission for an initial period ending 31 December 2007, subject to a comprehensive review by the Council by December 2005, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to enhance the Committee's ability to monitor the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). 143. As stated in paragraph 2 of document S/2004/124, the revitalization of the Committee is necessary to fight against terrorism by giving the Committee further means to fulfil its mandate of monitoring the implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). This is particularly so since the Committee has evolved to assume a more proactive role in the dialogue with Member States, in evaluating the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), in facilitating technical assistance to Member States and promoting closer cooperation and coordination with international, regional and subregional organizations. 144. In the exchange of letters between the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council (S/2004/388, S/2004/389 and S/2004/390), the Security Council approved the appointment of Javier Rupérez as the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. The Executive Director took office on 29 June 2004 with responsibility for tasks stated in the report of the Committee (S/2004/124). 145. In accordance with paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 1535 (2004), the Executive Director was requested to submit to the Council for its endorsement within 30 days of taking office, and in consultation with and through the Secretary-General, an organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, consistent with the Committee's report (S/2004/124) and United Nations rules and regulations, including its structure, staffing requirements, budget needs, management guidelines recruitment procedures, recognizing in particular the need for an effective, cooperative management structure for the new body, and staffing with suitably qualified and experienced personnel, who would be international civil servants subject to Article 100 of the Charter of the United Nations, securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity and paying due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. 146. The organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate was submitted to the Security Council by the Secretary-General and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council (S/2004/642). 147. The Executive Directorate has prepared general guidelines as well as procedures for the Counter-Terrorism Committee visits to Member States. In addition, the Executive Director has initiated contacts with international organizations of primary relevance to the future work of the Executive Directorate, such as the International Monetary Fund, the Organization of American States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African Union, the European Union, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Atomic Energy Agency. 148. The reports submitted by Member States on steps taken, or planned, to implement relevant resolutions form the basis of the work of the Executive Directorate with Member States. Based upon its analysis of the reports and other available information, the Counter-Terrorism Committee assesses Members States' compliance with the Security Council resolutions. The aspects of a Members States' laws under review cover the following fields: legislative drafting, the law and practices pertaining to finance, customs, immigration, extradition, police and law enforcement and illegal arms trafficking. 149. In 2005, the Executive Directorate will oversee the preparation of extensive and complex legal analysis, policy documents and guidelines in the field of counter-terrorism within the framework of relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Further, the Executive Directorate will, in accordance with the quarterly work programme agreed at the Counter-Terrorism Committee, visit 12 Member States and produce 12 detailed reports. It will analyse an estimated 200 reports and prepare an equal number of letters in answer to those reports. In carrying out its functions, the Executive Directorate will cooperate with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Legal Affairs, the Department for Disarmament Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as well as with government officials. 150. Initial arrangements provided in the programme budget for 2004-2005 for support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee were incorporated in subprogramme 3, Security Council affairs, of Section 3, Political affairs. An appropriation of $4,606,500 related to provisions for eight established posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-2 and 5 General Service) together with supplementary resources for consultants, travel and operational costs. The initiative of the Security Council with regard to the establishment of the Executive Directorate means that these provisions need realignment during the latter part of 2004 and following in 2005. The details of the transitional arrangements are provided in paragraphs 154-156 below. 151. The effect of completing the transition would be for all Counter-Terrorism Committee resources in section 3 to be treated as Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate resources under special political missions with the sole exception of the retention of one single Professional (P-5) and one General Service (Other level) post in the Security Council Affairs Division to provide technical services to the Counter-Terrorism Committee as a subsidiary organ of the Council. 152. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action taken by the United Nations, collectively by the international community, the Security Council and by the Secretary-General, are presented below. Objective: To prevent and counter terrorist acts. Progress towards compliance by Member States with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) (i) Increase in the number of measures taken by Member States in order to comply with the resolution (ii) Increase in the number of measures taken by regional and subregional organizations for enhanced cooperation and coordination :: Analyses of country reports 153. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolution of the Security Council and provided that the collection of information by the Counter-Terrorism Committee/Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate is not hindered by adverse security situations. 154. Under Section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, provision is made in the amount of $4,606,500 for secretariat support to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. As indicated in paragraphs 150 and 151 above, as a transitional arrangement, the initial resource requirements of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate for the six-month period ending 31 December 2004 amounting to $617,700 were met through the redeployment of resources which had been appropriated under Section 3, Political affairs, for secretariat support to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. This redeployment was made bearing in mind that both the secretariat support to the Committee and to the Executive Directorate were established under the auspices of the Committee and that these resources would need to be realigned during the course of 2004-2005 at such a time the Security Council decides that the Executive Directorate is operational and the Committee secretariat will no longer continue to operate (see para. 7 of Security Council resolution 1535 (2004)). Subject to the Council recognizing that the Executive Directorate has become fully operational, the six established posts under subprogramme 3, Security Council affairs, for secretariat support to the Committee (see para. 151) would be proposed for abolition as of 31 December 2005. 155. The resource requirements for the Executive Directorate for 2005 are estimated at $6,888,300 net ($7,875,100 gross). Of this net amount, $109,000 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Executive Directorate in 2004. Additionally, following the arrangements applied in 2004, it is proposed to redeploy an additional amount of $694,300 from the resources already appropriated for the biennium for support to the Counter-Terrorism Committee under Section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget to meet the 2005 requirements of the Executive Directorate, as a continuing measure to realign resources between the Counter-Terrorism Committee secretariat and the Executive Directorate. Thus the overall financing requirements for the Executive Directorate for 2005, after taking into account the above, amount to $6,085,000 net ($7,071,800 gross). 156. These resources would provide for the costs of staffing, comprising a total of 34 positions ($4,877,200), services of experts and consultants ($190,400), official travel ($963,800) and other operational costs, such as facilities, communications, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($856,900). K. United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan 157. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1401 (2002) of 28 March 2002 for a period of 12 months from the date of adoption of the resolution following consideration and endorsement of the mandate and structure laid out in the report of the Secretary-General of 18 March 2002 (A/56/875-S/2002/278). 158. In its resolution 1471 (2003) of 28 March 2003, the Security Council extended the mandate of UNAMA for an additional period of 12 months, welcomed the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/333) and the recommendations contained therein and endorsed the Secretary-General's proposal that an electoral unit be established within UNAMA. 159. The mandate of UNAMA was further extended to 25 March 2005 by the Security Council in its resolution 1536 (2004) of 26 March 2004 and at the same time the Council welcomed the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/230) and the recommendations contained therein and recognized that the United Nations must continue to play its central and impartial role in the international efforts to assist the Afghan people in consolidating peace in Afghanistan and rebuilding their country. The Council requested UNAMA, with the support of UNHCHR, to continue to assist the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission in the full implementation of the human rights provisions of the new Afghan Constitution, in particular those regarding the full enjoyment by women of their human rights, support the establishment of a fair and transparent judicial system and work towards the strengthening of the rule of law. 160. In his biannual report to the Security Council dated 12 August 2004 (A/58/868-S/2004/634), the Secretary-General apprised the Council of the current political and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and progress made in the ongoing implementation of the Bonn Agreement by the Afghan Transitional Administration, supported by UNAMA. The report highlighted the holding of the presidential election on 9 October and the postponement of parliamentary elections until April 2005, which is the last formal step in the Bonn process, as well as the human rights situation in Afghanistan. On 12 October 2004, the Council welcomed the presidential election that took place on 9 October 2004 in Afghanistan and stressed its historic importance as a milestone in the political process (S/PRST/2004/35). 161. The International Conference on Afghanistan held at Berlin on 31 March and 1 April 2004, sponsored by the Governments of Afghanistan, Germany and Japan together with the United Nations, evaluated the progress made in the Bonn process to date and discussed the path forward, taking into consideration the significant challenges to the implementation of the peace process. The Government of Afghanistan presented its work plan, a programme of political, social and economic reform that would have to be implemented to complete the country's transition from conflict to sustained peace and development. This plan was subsequently endorsed by the Conference. 162. UNAMA is comprised of the office of the Special Representative, which includes four special advisers in the cross-cutting fields of human rights, demobilization, gender and rule of law, as well as three sub-components: two substantive pillars, one for political affairs (Pillar I) and one for relief, recovery and reconstruction (Pillar II), and an administrative component. UNAMA is headquartered in Kabul and there are seven regional offices in Bamiyan, Gardez, Herat, Jalalabad, Kandahar, Kunduz and Mazar-e-Sharif and three sub-offices in Faizabad, Maimana and Panjao. These regional offices play an integral role in monitoring activities and implementing/coordinating programmes of the substantive pillars. The programme of work will emphasize on the shorter-term (Pillar I) and the longer-term (Pillar II) processes although many interdependencies exist. Pillar I would include monitoring disarmament, demobilization and reintegration at locations across the country in order to build confidence, monitoring the electoral process, and the verification and exercise of political rights. Pillar II would be engaged in the longer-term institution building activities, the process of reconstruction and coordination of the humanitarian activities of the United Nations agencies. 163. Although the current mandate of UNAMA expires on 25 March 2005, it is anticipated that after its consideration of further reports, the Security Council will extend the mandate of the Mission beyond March 2005. 164. The objective expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: To consolidate peace and rebuild Afghanistan. (a) Achieved free and fair parliamentary and local elections in Afghanistan (a) (i) Increase in the number of Afghan's registered to vote (ii) Increase in the number of Afghan women registered to vote (iii) Polling in Afghan Parliamentary elections held without violence in all the provinces :: Conducted civic education campaigns with civil education materials printed and distributed, and teachers trained :: Support to Joint Electoral Management Board in the preparation and conduct of 2005 elections for Wulesi Jirga and Meshrano Jirga at provincial and district level :: Technical assistance to national governmental elections body to conduct registration and electoral campaigns according to international technical electoral standards :: Advice to Afghanistan government on elections security in cooperation with International Security Assistance Force and coalition forces, as well as national security agencies :: Monitor political rights and, where necessary, provide advocacy to promote a political process free of intimidation (b) Progress towards reform of the Afghanistan security sector and rule of law (b)(i) Former combatants participate in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (ii) Formation of Afghan national army (iii) Formation of Afghan national police force :: Regular advice and support on the judicial reform process provided to stakeholders, in particular the Judicial Reform Commission and the permanent institutions, Afghan civil society organizations and the international community, including donors and non-governmental organizations :: Police advice on reform provided on a regular basis to the Government, ministries, lead donor nations, consultative committees and local officials covering all provinces :: Quarterly reports to the Security Council :: Regular briefings to governments and other organizations :: Regular meetings and provision of advice to national and international actors engaged in security sector reform :: Weekly meetings to provide strategic guidance and political direction for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration team, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration commission, the Ministry of Defence and senior government officials :: Coordination of and participation in the monitoring of disarmament, demobilization, transport and storage of weapons under the auspices of the international observer group :: Advice to and monitoring of Consultative Group on Justice to Government and donors :: Newspapers, publications, radio and television programmes aimed at educating the general public on rule of law (c) Increased respect for human rights in Afghanistan (c)(i) Increase in the number of successful human rights cases dealt with by the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) (ii) Publication by AIHRC of political/human rights verification reports (iii) Increase in the number of women employed in Afghan civil service (iv) AIHRC introduce mechanisms to document human rights violation cases (v) Publication of training manuals for protection of human rights for police and corrections officers by AIHRC :: Assist in building capacity of AIHRC in promoting and protecting human rights consistent with human rights provisions of Afghan constitution, in particular full enjoyment by women of human rights :: Investigate human rights violations, and recommend corrective action, where possible in cooperation with AIHRC :: Provide advice on human rights to the Afghan government, including reports on human rights issues and violations :: Assist in building capacity of the Ministry of Interior Human Rights Unit :: Verify freedom of press, and equitable access by candidates and political parties to government media :: Develop policies, monitor and enforce procedures to enable gender mainstreaming within all sectors, programs and policies within the Afghan government :: Support AIHRC in making concrete recommendations to the government on desired mechanisms for addressing crimes of the past and national reconciliation (d) Increased rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction of Afghanistan (d)(i) Publication by the Afghan Government of the Millennium Declaration Goals progress report (ii) Participation by the Afghan Government in the Millennium Summit Plus 5 meeting (iii) National priority programmes extended to provinces (iv) Afghan Anti-corruption commissioner begins prosecuting cases of corruption :: Monitor and advice to government and donors on Consultative Group on rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction process :: Facilitate meetings of the Monitoring and Evaluation Advisory Group on monitoring the Berlin work plan :: Policy advice on the implementation of the priority reform and restructuring decree and implementation in ministries :: Coordinate capacity-building in Afghan ministries to enhance implementation and delivery of national priority programmes :: Facilitate coordination between government and provincial reconstruction teams to include majority of provincial reconstruction teams projects into the national priority programmes and national development budget framework :: Finalize common country assessment and United Nations Development Assistance Framework process to prioritize and coordinate development programmes :: Advise and coordinate United Nations common programming processes to ensure support for government strategies, policies and national priorities :: Assist in developing capabilities of national disaster management unit :: Advisory services on drafting legislation and mechanisms to reform land tenure laws and resolve disputes :: Support to anti-corruption commissioner through policy advice and funding, and coordination of United Nations agency support :: Regular information updates on United Nations programmes, projects and activities through newsletters, web sites, issue- or sector-specific publications and briefings 165. The programme is expected to achieve its objectives provided that the international community's commitment to extend political support and financial resources for the full implementation of the Bonn process and the Afghan stakeholders' continued commitment to the Bonn Agreement are reinforced. It is also necessary that the security situation remain stable and conducive to the implementation of the Bonn Agreement. 166. In anticipation that its mandate will be extended or renewed beyond 25 March 2005, the estimated requirements relating to the UNAMA for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would amount to $63,583,300 net ($69,754,700 gross). Of the net amount, $9,404,900 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for UNAMA in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Office for 2005, after taking into account the above, amount to $54,178,400 net ($60,349,800 gross). 167. The amount requested relates to the costs for: 13 military advisers/liaison officers ($527,800); 8 civilian police advisers ($324,800); salaries and common staff costs under general temporary assistance ($38,082,600) for a proposed staffing complement of 1,128 staff (251 international staff, 138 national officers, and 739 local staff), which reflects an overall reduction of 41 positions (net decrease of 38 international posts and 5 national officers offset by an increase of 2 local staff); services of 43 United Nations Volunteers ($1,698,500); official travel ($711,800); operational costs ($21,556,500); and information and training programmes ($681,300). 168. The resource requirements for UNAMA electoral activities are proposed for the period from 1 January to 31 July 2005, based on the assumption that parliamentary elections would be completed by May 2005 and liquidation of these activities would begin in June 2005. The reduced level of requirements also reflects the transfer of some electoral activities to UNDP. UNAMA will be expanding the regional field work for political and human rights verification and relief, recovery and reconstruction programme implementation. Hence resources are being redeployed from electoral activities towards these other programme activities. L. United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq 169. In its resolution 1483 (2003) of 22 May 2003, the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative for Iraq, whose responsibilities would involve reporting regularly to the Council on his activities under the resolution. Subsequently, in its resolution 1500 (2003) of 14 August 2003, the Council established the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for an initial period of 12 months to support the Secretary-General in the fulfilment of his mandate under resolution 1483 (2003) in accordance with the structure and responsibilities set out in his report of 17 July 2003 (S/2003/715). 170. Under the terms of resolution 1483 (2003), the Mission is mandated by the Security Council, inter alia, to carry out the following activities: (a) To coordinate activities of the United Nations in post-conflict processes in Iraq, coordinating among United Nations and international agencies engaged in humanitarian assistance and reconstruction activities in Iraq and assisting the people of Iraq through: (i) Coordinating humanitarian and reconstruction assistance by United Nations agencies and between United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations; (ii) Promoting the safe, orderly and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons to their homes; (iii) Facilitating the reconstruction of key infrastructure, in cooperation with other international organizations; (iv) Promoting economic reconstruction and the conditions for sustainable development, including through coordination with national and regional organizations, as appropriate, civil society, donors and the international financial institutions; (v) Encouraging international efforts to contribute to basic civilian administration functions; (vi) Promoting the protection of human rights; (vii) Encouraging international efforts to rebuild the capacity of the Iraqi civilian police force; (viii) Encouraging international efforts to promote legal and judicial reform; (b) To report regularly to the Security Council on its activities under Council resolution 1483 (2003). 171. Further, in its resolution 1511 (2003) of 16 October 2003, the Security Council resolved that the United Nations, acting through the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and UNAMI, should strengthen its vital role in Iraq, including by providing humanitarian relief, promoting the economic reconstruction of and conditions for sustainable development in Iraq, and advancing efforts to restore and establish national and local institutions for representative government. In its same resolution, the Council requested the Secretary-General to pursue, as circumstances permitted, the course of action outlined in paragraphs 98 and 99 of his report of 17 July 2003 (S/2003/715). 172. In its resolution 1546 (2004) of 8 June 2004, the Security Council recalled its previous resolutions on Iraq and affirmed that the United Nations should play a leading role in assisting the Iraqi people and Government in the formation of institutions for representative government. In addition, the Council decided that in implementing, as circumstances permitted, their mandate to assist the Iraqi people and Government, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and UNAMI, as requested by the Government of Iraq, should: (a) Play a leading role: (i) To assist in the convening, during July 2004, of a national conference to select a consultative council; (ii) To advise and support the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq, as well as the Interim Government of Iraq and the Transitional National Assembly, on the process for holding elections; (iii) To promote national dialogue and consensus-building on the drafting of a national constitution by the people of Iraq; (b) And also: (i) To advise the Government of Iraq on the development of effective civil and social services; (ii) To contribute to the coordination and delivery of reconstruction, development and humanitarian assistance; (iii) To promote the protection of human rights, national reconciliation and judicial and legal reform in order to strengthen the rule of law in Iraq; (iv) To advise and assist the Government of Iraq on initial planning for the eventual conduct of a comprehensive census. 173. Pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1483 (2003) and paragraph 12 of resolution 1511 (2003), the Secretary-General submitted his report (S/2004/625), to the Security Council. He apprised the Council of the political and humanitarian situation in Iraq and the work of UNAMI to implement its mandate. Further, on 3 September 2004, in accordance with paragraph 30 of Council resolution 1546 (2004), the Secretary-General submitted his report to the Security Council (S/2004/710 and Corr.1), providing an update on United Nations activities in Iraq since his previous report. It focused on the United Nations priority tasks set forth in resolution 1546 (2004), particularly with regard to the National Conference and the preparations for the elections scheduled for January 2005. The report also provided an update on security arrangements for the United Nations presence in Iraq and summarized UNAMI activities during the period under review. 174. Subsequently, in his letter to the President of the Security Council dated 21 September (S/2004/764), the Secretary-General indicated that in order for the Mission to be able to expand its staffing and its activities in Iraq, it would be necessary, in addition to the protection provided by the multinational force, to establish an integrated United Nations security structure to carry out access control and patrols within Mission facilities, to provide personal security details for personnel both within United Nations premises and on the move, to conduct training and to coordinate security arrangements between UNAMI and other United Nations organizations, as well as with the multinational force under unified command authorized by Council resolutions 1511 (2003) and 1546 (2004). The integrated security structure of UNAMI would consist of four elements, namely, international security staff, protection coordination officers, personal security details and guard units and, as indicated above, would be in addition to the protection provided by the multinational force. The deployment of all of these four elements would be subject to ongoing assessments of the overall security situation in Iraq over the coming months and the related deployment of substantive staff. Deployment would also depend on the completion of the necessary logistical arrangements, including secure office and living accommodation. 175. Further, the Secretary-General advised the Security Council that with regard to the fourth element that would form part of that integrated security structure -- namely, the guard units -- there would eventually be a need for three formed units, each consisting of up to 160 armed civilian police, paramilitary or military personnel, to be provided as contingents from Member States. These guard units would form part of UNAMI and would have the specific responsibility of controlling access to and conducting patrols within UNAMI premises, proposing security arrangements for UNAMI, including the deployment of guard units provided as contingents from Member States and which would form part of UNAMI, having the specific responsibility of controlling access to and conducting patrols within UNAMI premises. Initial provision is sought for a single unit for the period from 1 January to 30 April 2005. 176. In the response from the President of the Security Council, dated 1 October 2004 (S/2004/765), it was indicated that the Security Council welcomed the proposed arrangements set out in the letter of the Secretary-General and urged Member States to respond positively with contributions. 177. The initial mandate of UNAMI was extended by the Security Council in its resolution 1557 (2004) of 12 August 2004 for a further period of 12 months from the date of that resolution. While the mandate of UNAMI has been extended to 11 August 2005, the resource requirements proposed in the present report have been formulated for an initial four-month period, from 1 January to 30 April 2005 only, in the light of the significant uncertainties in the security situation and the evolving political situation in Iraq. Funding for UNAMI beyond this period would be requested at the appropriate time taking into account developments over the forthcoming months which should help clarify the requirements of the Mission for the balance of the mandate and allow for the formulation of more reliable estimates. 178. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: To achieve security and prosperity in Iraq. (a) Progress towards national dialogue and consensus-building in Iraq (a) (i) The Iraq Constitution is approved by a popular referendum (ii) Participation of all registered Iraqi political parties, as well as all major civil society and special interest groups in meetings discussing provisions of the new constitution :: Advisory services and good offices for national dialogue and consensus-building on the political transition process :: Assistance in furtherance of the programme provided by the Governing Council for the drafting of the new constitution for Iraq and for the holding of democratic elections under that constitution :: Reports to the Security Council in cooperation, as appropriate, with the Interim Iraqi Government on the progress being made in returning governing responsibilities and authority to the people of Iraq :: Advice for the transition process to both the Interim Iraqi Government and the evolving interim political structures in Iraq :: Promotion of meeting opportunities under regional, bilateral, League of Arab States, Organization of the Islamic Conference and European Union auspices that would increase political dialogue between disparate Iraqi interests/parties :: Verification of equitable access by parties and concerned individuals to government media :: Directory of constitutional expertise made available to Transitional National Assembly committee/body responsible for the draft national constitution :: Technical assistance in the preparation of the draft constitution, including workshops and related training :: Presentation of draft constitution studies to the Transitional National Assembly Committee :: Facilitation of the publication of the draft national constitution :: Regular liaison and briefings with concerned Member States and organizations, including but not limited to Turkey, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon, Syrian Arab Republic, Egypt, the League of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, at the technical level :: Nationwide multimedia public information programme in support of the national dialogue, consensus-building and drafting of the constitution, including television air time, radio air time, advertisements in local newspapers, articles in national newspapers, posters, flyers, billboards and newsletters (b) Free and fair elections in Iraq (b)(i) Iraq National Assembly elections are held (ii) Kurdistan National Assembly elections are held (iii) Governance Council elections are held (iv) Iraq constitutional elections are held :: Technical assistance and support to the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq in planning and determining the electoral process in accordance with international standards, including institutional design of the Commission, operation planning, administration, regulatory framework, training, security coordination and public information :: Coordinated support from the international community to the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq :: Regular briefings to the international community on the progress of elections and the evolving needs of the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq :: Assessment of electoral assistance performance and challenges :: Training workshops for Iraqi journalists and civil servants associated with elections public information (c) Progress towards promoting the protection of human rights, national reconciliation, and judicial and legal reform in order to strengthen the rule of law in Iraq (c)(i) Ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (ii) Ministry of Human Rights with increased operational and managerial capacity (iii) Civil society organizations with increased operational capacity in promoting and protecting human rights :: Advice on human rights to the interim and the transitional Governments, including advice to the Ministry of Human Rights and the Ministry of Justice, on effective institutional arrangements to guarantee full respect for human rights in Iraq and on the reform of Iraqi laws that are inconsistent with international human rights standards :: Advice to the Government and regular liaison with the United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations on promoting gender equality and women's full and equal participation in decision-making structures at all levels :: Monthly coordination meetings in Baghdad, Basrah, Erbil, Amman and Kuwait with government representatives, national and international non-governmental organizations present in Iraq and United Nations entities to coordinate on human rights strategy and to address human rights promotion and protection issues :: 10,000 CD-ROMs with relevant human rights publications available in Arabic and distributed to Ministry of Human Rights and Ministry of Justice personnel, as well as to other government representatives and to civil society :: Advice to national and local non-governmental organizations on building local capacity for human rights monitoring :: Regularly collected and analysed information on the human rights situation in the country :: Five special investigations, fact-finding missions and reports on allegations of human rights violations carried out :: Facilitation of and participation in training of Iraq Government officials and civil society representatives by OHCHR, UNDP and other United Nations partners :: Facilitation of and participation in meetings organized jointly with UNDP, OHCHR, with international and national experts and government representatives, to identify and discuss options of transitional justice institutions :: Nationwide multimedia public information programme in support of human rights, including 0.5 hours each of television and local radio air time per week, weekly radio programmes on the government radio station, monthly advertisements in five local newspapers, five articles per month in national newspapers, posters, flyers, billboards and newsletters (d) Increased relief, recovery and reconstruction in Iraq (d)(i) Relief, recovery and reconstruction organizations have access to all Governorates (ii) Increase in relief, recovery and reconstruction aid funds received in Iraq (iii) Reduction in Iraq's unemployment rate :: Facilitation of the monitoring, coordination, and response capacity of Iraqi ministries in resource mobilization for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to vulnerable populations in Iraq :: Ongoing assessment and analysis of political, economic and social changes, and dissemination of this information to partners, donors and Iraqi authorities for appropriate planning, funding and assistance delivery :: Monitoring and reporting of violations of international humanitarian law, and promotion of the observance of humanitarian principles, including the protection of civilians in conflict and the safeguarding of humanitarian space :: Assistance in the establishment of a national disaster management unit/emergency coordination centre in the Office of the Prime Minister 179. The objective is expected to be achieved provided that circumstances are conducive for the United Nations to carry out its role as mandated by the Security Council, the security situation in Iraq will not negatively affect its political transition process, and the international community and the Iraqi authorities will provide funding as required. 180. The estimated requirements for UNAMI for the four-month period from 1 January to 30 April 2005 amount to $59,574,800 net ($60,968,100 gross). Of this amount, $614,900 would be met from the unencumbered balance of the amount appropriated for UNAMI for 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for UNAMI for the four-month period 1 January to 30 April 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, would amount to $58,959,900 net ($60,353,200 gross). 181. The amount of $59,574,800 net ($60,968,100 gross) requested would provide for: (a) the cost of deployment to Baghdad of a guard unit of 160 personnel ($5,061,100), including logistics/life support provided to these troops by the Multinational Force; (b) salaries and common staff costs, applicable mission subsistence and hazard allowances, and log-cap support for staff deployed in Baghdad, for 272 international staff positions, assuming a 20 per cent vacancy rate for the first four months of 2005 ($12,103,300); (c) salaries and common staff costs, hazard pay and overtime for 346 national staff positions, also taking into account a 20 per cent vacancy factor ($2,028,700); (d) services of experts and consultants ($1,116,500); (e) official travel ($467,200); (f) facilities and infrastructure ($21,475,700); (g) ground transportation ($4,836,200); (h) air transportation ($1,185,400); (i) communications ($7,279,700); (j) information technology ($2,383,700); and (k) other operational costs ($1,637,300). M. United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville 182. The United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville was established in 2003, initially for six months, as a follow-up mission to the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville at the request of the Secretary-General to the Security Council (S/2003/1198), and in the light of the progress achieved in the peace process in Bougainville and in accordance with the request of the Government of Papua New Guinea, which was also supported by the Bougainville parties. 183. The Mission was mandated to carry out the following functions: (a) Chair the Peace Process Consultative Committee, which would consult with the parties on the peace process and make preparation for elections; (b) Report on the security and the subsequent destruction of the contained weapons; (c) Monitor the constitutional process leading to the adoption of the Bougainville Constitution; (d) In accordance with the amended Constitution of Papua New Guinea, and if requested by any of the parties, verify and certify substantial compliance by the parties in the handing in of weapons and whether the level of security was conducive to the holding of elections; (e) Perform other good offices, as appropriate, or when requested to do so by the parties. 184. In his letter of 25 June 2004 to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/526), the Secretary-General informed the Council of the further progress by the parties in the implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. Given the crucial role of UNOMB in building confidence among the parties, as well as the need for it to complete its remaining mandated tasks, the Secretary-General recommended the extension of the UNOMB mandate for a further six-month period from 1 July to 31 December 2004. 185. In his reply of 30 June 2004 (S/2004/527), the President of the Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the Security Council had taken note of recommendation and information in the letter. The Council also noted its intention that it would be the final extension of the Mission and requested that the Secretary-General present a report to the Council within three months on an assessment of the ground situation and on a mission-closure plan. 186. In his report of 29 September 2004 to the Security Council (S/2004/771), the Secretary-General reported on the progress achieved by the parties to the Bougainville Peace Agreement, the development of a constitution for an autonomous Bougainville government, preparations for elections and the plan for the closing of the Mission. He also informed the Council that at the time of the submission of his report to the Council, 92.6 per cent of the weapons had been destroyed. UNOMB had been functioning as a facilitator in the constitution-making process as well as providing assistance in the process of island-wide reconciliation. In accordance with the request of the Council, UNOMB had drawn up a Mission liquidation plan. The process of liquidation would take an estimated six to eight weeks after the expiration of the mandate of the Mission on 31 December 2004. 187. The Secretary-General will be submitting a report to the Security Council on the progress of the peace process in Bougainville in December 2004. Pending the consideration of the Secretary-General's report and a decision by the Council, the present request for resources for UNOMB is limited to the requirements for liquidation activities only. The Secretary-General will revert to the General Assembly, should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of UNOMB further. 188. The resource requirements for the liquidation of UNOMB from 1 January to 15 February 2005 are estimated at $180,300 net ($187,500 gross). Of this amount, $142,800 will be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriations for 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for UNOMB for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $37,500 net ($44,700 gross). 189. This amount would provide for the continuation of the two international staff (1 P-5 Head of the Mission and 1 Field Service administrative officer) and four Local level positions ($62,900); official travel of the Head of Mission and his staff ($12,600); and operational requirements, including premises/accommodation, air operations, communications and supplies and services ($104,800). N. United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding 190. The United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding was established in June 2000 with the support expressed by the Security Council in its presidential statement of 21 March 2000 (S/PRST/2000/9). The mission was created in response to the Secretary-General's proposal to establish an office for post-conflict peacebuilding in Tajikistan and following the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan. 191. In view of the important and positive role played by UNTOP, its operation has been extended several times, most recently in April 2004 for a period of one year until 1 June 2005 (see S/2004/331 and S/2004/332). Given the importance of the role of the Office in furthering the consolidation of peace in the country, it is anticipated that the operation of the Office will continue beyond 1 June 2005. 192. The process of post-conflict peacebuilding has come a long way towards strengthening stability and restoring national accord in Tajikistan. At the same time an array of problems related to the civil war, such as issues of amnesty and high unemployment among ex-combatants, the spread of small arms among the civilian population, drug trafficking and the resurgence of extremist organizations render the political equilibrium of the country fragile. UNTOP continues to make a significant contribution to addressing the challenges of the country's post-conflict transition through the implementation of the mission's term of reference, which inter alia provides for the consolidation of peace and national reconciliation; the promotion of the rule of law; and the strengthening of democratic institutions and support for national capacity-building in the area of human rights. An important priority for UNTOP has been political support for mobilization of international resources and assistance for national reconstruction and development. 193. The fundamental political objectives of post-conflict peacebuilding are to help ensure the consolidation of peace and to prevent a relapse into conflict. In this regard, the United Nations peacebuilding efforts need to be comprehensive, well harmonized and fully integrated. Working in close cooperation with the United Nations country team, the Office provides the political framework and leadership for post-conflict peacebuilding activities of the United Nations system in Tajikistan, including the Bretton Woods institutions. The political liaison of the Representative of the Secretary-General for Tajikistan with the Government, political parties, and other key political actors in the country is beneficial for the entire United Nations country team and other international organizations. The Office also mobilizes international support for the implementation of targeted programmes and projects. Reintegration, job creation, resolution of amnesty issues for former combatants and assistance to conflict-prone districts of the country are key priorities for the Office in this regard. 194. In 2004, a new law on parliamentary elections was passed after unprecedented open consultations between parliament and political parties, incorporating recommendations of an UNTOP-supported working group and political discussion club sessions. The Office resolved disputes on the implementation of the amnesty law for ex-combatants and on the functioning of political parties on the local level, working to lower tensions on the issues between authorities and political opposition figures. UNTOP achieved measured success in 2004 in the sphere of strengthening the rule of law with the passage of a new law on the militia that reflects international standards, implementation of the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials into the Government's curriculum for police training, and increased engagement with State officials on the agenda of police reform. The Office's involvement in the human rights area in 2004 include improved drafting and presentation of reports by the Government of Tajikistan to relevant United Nations bodies; implementation of the human rights education programmes in the sectors of education, government and civil society; and creating awareness about human rights issues. 195. The forthcoming general elections scheduled for early 2005 and presidential elections of 2006 will mark an important period in the political life of the country. Following the request of the Government of Tajikistan, UNTOP will provide technical assistance in preparation for the 2005 elections, based on the recommendations resulting from a needs assessment mission undertaken in 2004 by the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political Affairs. Sustained political stability in the two-year period of electoral competition would be a significant benchmark for the Office's work in Tajikistan. 196. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: To consolidate peace in Tajikistan. (a) Increased ability of the Government and political parties to maintain stability in the country and prevent conflict (a) Increased dialogue and strengthened role of political parties and civil society in the decision-making process, as evidenced by number of policies introduced to broaden citizens' participation in government, particularly among women :: Seven sessions of the political discussion club :: Publication and distribution of the recommendations of the political discussion club to presidential apparatus and Government :: Seminars on the role of the media in reporting on public affairs, gender issues, government policy, political life and electoral issues :: Electoral assistance and training activities :: Ten seminars on conflict prevention and resolution :: Four roundtables for local government representatives on issues of potential conflict (b) Strengthened respect for rule of law in society (b) Decreased number of violations of the legal rights of citizens by law enforcement personnel :: Training of mid-level police officers, aimed at strengthening the understanding of human rights issues in law enforcement :: National advisory group on law enforcement established :: Training and study tour for teachers of the Academy of the Ministry of Interior :: Training of police officers on guidelines for the use of force and gender-responsive policing :: Conference on issues of law enforcement reform for State officials and civil society in Tajikistan (c) Increased national capacities in treaty reporting and human rights education (c) (i) Increase in number of treaty reports under Tajikistan human rights treaty commitments (ii) Increased awareness among educators on human rights and gender issues (iii) Increase in the number of activities of human rights information centres :: Training to enhance national capacity in implementation of the State programme and OHCHR regional project on human rights education :: Development and implementation of small projects on human rights education for schoolchildren, students, journalists and teachers :: Training for members of the Government Commission and non-governmental organizations in the treaty reporting requirements of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention against Torture and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Radial Discrimination :: Seminars on the implementation of Human Rights Commission recommendations on Tajikistan :: Establishment of national committees of State and civil society representatives on human rights education 197. The objective would be achieved provided that there is ongoing observance by all parties of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord. 198. In anticipation that its mandate will be extended or renewed beyond 1 June 2005, the estimated requirements relating to UNTOP for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would amount to $2,124,500 net ($2,423,600 gross). Of this net amount, $87,700 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Office in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Office for 2005, after taking into account the above, amount to $2,036,800 net ($2,335,900 gross). 199. The resources requested for UNTOP for 2005 would provide for salaries and common staff costs of the existing 10 international and 21 local staff ($1,655,100); official travel ($62,900); replacement of obsolete communications and information technology equipments ($98,100); other operational costs such as communications, facilities and infrastructure, transportation, and other supplies and services ($308,400). O. Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon 200. The Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon was created in 2000 following a proposal submitted by the Secretary-General in his report on UNIFIL (S/2000/718) in order to help coordinate the United Nations political and diplomatic role as well as activities in support of reintegration, reconstruction and development in southern Lebanon. 201. In a letter to the President of the Council dated 6 December 2000 (S/2000/1167), the Secretary-General informed the Council that he had decided to appoint Staffan de Mistura to succeed Rolf Göran Knutsson, and that he would be coordinating closely with the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. Given the continuing need for the presence of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon in Beirut, no time frame was specified in his letter. 202. In a letter dated 8 December 2000 (S/2000/1168), the President of the Security Council informed the Secretary-General that members of the Council had taken note of his decision. 203. The Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon was created as a political mission focusing on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) of 19 March 1978 on Lebanon. The Office is responsible for high-level diplomatic and political liaison with the Government of Lebanon, the Government of Israel through the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and the diplomatic community in Beirut. 204. While the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process maintains an overall regional responsibility, the Personal Representative focuses on the day-to-day developments in Lebanon and provides regular reporting and analysis on the situation in Lebanon that contributes to the Special Coordinator's overall political and socio-economic assessment of the region. 205. The functions performed by the Personal Representative also complement those of the peacekeeping mandate of UNIFIL. The UNIFIL Force Commander is responsible for all military issues and the day-to-day operational activities of UNIFIL under Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). The Force Commander reports to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and keeps the Personal Representative and the Special Coordinator informed and updated on issues under his responsibility. The Personal Representative is responsible for the political issues associated with the further implementation of these resolutions and for the day-to-day political liaison with the Government of Lebanon. The Personal Representative also mobilizes the necessary political and diplomatic momentum in support of operational issues of concern to UNIFIL. During times of increased tension and incidents of violence along the withdrawal line in southern Lebanon (the Blue Line), the Special Coordinator, the Personal Representative and the UNIFIL Force Commander have coordinated closely their respective areas of responsibility. 206. Within the context of its mandate for southern Lebanon, the Office of the Personal Representative maintains a close and collaborative relationship with the United Nations Resident Coordinator/UNDP and other relevant bodies of the United Nations. The Office has undertaken various forms of collaborative action in Southern Lebanon jointly with UNDP, focused mainly on the demining process. The Office also works closely with the Mine Action Coordination Centre in southern Lebanon and provides the necessary political and diplomatic support for the demining process. 207. In the past 12 months the Personal Representative has undertaken on 36 occasions a specific series of preventive diplomatic actions in order to help defuse tensions along the Blue Line and has contributed to wider international diplomatic efforts to maintain stability. In the context of its advocacy role for southern Lebanon, the Office continued to provide diplomatic support and political coordination for the $50 million demining process in the south. Demining efforts in the south were initiated by an advocacy campaign led by the Personal Representative in coordination with UNDP. To date, the demining process, which has been coordinated by the Mine Action Coordination Centre, has led to the identification and removal of over 60,000 landmines within 5 million square metres of contaminated land and over 500 square kilometres of land being released back to the local community within a two-year period. The International Support Group for Mine Action in Lebanon, established by the Office in collaboration with UNDP, has also facilitated the provision of $13 million in mine action assistance by donor countries. The Office also expanded its "trees instead of mines" initiative, through which it has to date raised over $340,000 to plant over 58,000 trees in 10 different locations throughout the south. The office has, to date, also facilitated the donation of 30 computers to three vocational training centres in southern Lebanon in the framework of a joint project with the local authorities, UNIFIL and ESCWA. 208. In 2005, the Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General will continue to play its early warning role and undertake preventive diplomacy as the situation requires. It will maintain its role as the focal point for southern Lebanon among the diplomatic community by continuing to provide political briefings to Member States and diplomatic missions on the overall situation along the Blue Line. The Office will also continue to initiate and implement peacebuilding initiatives that contribute to the return of normality, confidence and socio-economic development and to generate donor contributions for this purpose. In close collaboration with the United Nations Resident Coordinator and the relevant United Nations agencies, the Personal Representative also serves as advocate for the further socio-economic development of southern Lebanon as a means of enhancing stability in the area. 209. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: To restore international peace and security in Southern Lebanon. (a) (i) Prevent violations of the Blue Line (ii) Containment of escalation of violence (a) (i) Absence of air, sea or ground incursions or firing incidents across the Blue Line (ii) Absence of escalation following serious violations of the Blue Line :: "Good offices" role for the parties (38 substantive meetings) :: Statements identifying violations and calling for restraint (27 statements) :: Policy coordination with UNIFIL (16 meetings) :: Analysis of the overall situation along the Blue Line (23 analytical reports) (b) Normalization of living conditions in southern Lebanon (b) (i) Initiation of peacebuilding projects in south Lebanon (e.g., demining process, "Seeing the South" competition and "trees instead of mines") (ii) Reduction in the number of landmine deaths/injuries in southern Lebanon :: Continuous cooperation with Lebanese authorities, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations regarding socio-economic development of southern Lebanon (14 public statements/project initiatives) :: Support to municipalities in southern Lebanon by establishing relationships between them and various donors (26 meetings with municipal authorities) 210. The Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General is expected to accomplish its objective provided that regional developments and the domestic and political situations of the parties will not negatively affect the situation in southern Lebanon. Peacebuilding initiatives will also depend on availability of donor country funding. 211. In anticipation that its open mandate will continue, the estimated requirements relating to the Office of the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would amount to $894,500 net ($1,037,900 gross). Of this amount, $124,900 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Office in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Office for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $769,600 net ($913,000 gross). 212. The resource requested for the Office would provide for the salary of the Personal Representative at the Assistant-Secretary-General level and other existing international and local staff ($706,900); official travel of the Personal Representative and his staff ($68,000); and other operational costs ($119,600). P. United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission 213. The United Nations has been providing support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission and facilitating the implementation of the 10 October 2002 decision of the International Court of Justice on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary dispute. The Mixed Commission was established, following a series of meetings between the Secretary-General and the Presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria, in order to pursue peaceful ways for the settlement of the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary dispute and to implement the 10 October 2002 decision of the Court. The Mixed Commission, composed of representatives from Cameroon and Nigeria, and chaired by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa, is responsible for considering the implications of the Court's decision, including the demarcation of the land boundary between the two countries and making recommendations on additional confidence-building measures, such as the development of projects to promote joint economic ventures and cross-border cooperation, troop withdrawal from relevant areas along the land boundary, eventual demilitarization of the Bakassi peninsula, and reactivation of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, a five-nation structure of which Cameroon and Nigeria are leading members. 214. The Mixed Commission has established two subcommissions, which report to the Commission, one responsible for demarcation of the land boundary between the two countries and the other on affected populations with a mandate to assess the situation of these populations and to consider effective ways to ensure protection of their rights. It has also established the following working groups which report to it: (a) a working group on the withdrawal of civil administration and military and police forces and the transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area, which completed its work in January 2004; (b) a working group on withdrawal and transfers of authority in the land boundary; (c) a working group on withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Bakassi peninsula; and (d) a working group on the maritime boundary. 215. In December 2003 Nigeria and Cameroon carried out the first phase of peaceful and coordinated withdrawals and transfers of authority in the Lake Chad area. In late 2003 and early 2004, the subcommission on affected populations carried out five separate field missions to the border areas to assess the situation of local populations. During the same period, the subcommission on demarcation carried out field visits to improve its plan for the demarcation of the land boundary. Following the conclusion of the Lake Chad process, the two Heads of State and the Secretary-General met at Geneva on 31 January 2004 to review the progress achieved by the Commission, and endorsed the work completed till then and instructed the Commission to carry out the rest of its tasks according to its work calendar. In July 2004, a second phase of withdrawals and transfers of authority along the land boundary was carried out. By August 2004, the civilian observers had also carried out three follow-up missions to the Lake Chad area and the land boundary. They met with local populations, assessed the situation in the aftermath of the transfers of authority, and submitted related reports to the Mixed Commission. They noted that, in general, peaceful and good relations prevailed among the population and the new authorities. 216. The third and final phase of withdrawals and transfers of authority was delayed for technical reasons. Nonetheless, the parties reiterated their commitment to implement the Court's ruling. At the twelfth meeting of the Mixed Commission, held at Abuja from 21 to 22 October 2004, the issue of the modalities of the third phase of withdrawal and transfer of authority from the Bakassi peninsula was referred to the heads of State and the Secretary-General. 217. The 2005 activities of the Mixed Commission will be devoted to three core tasks: (a) completing and consolidating the transfers of authority undertaken in 2004 through monitoring, assessment and support activities focused on the situation of the affected populations placed under new administration along the final boundary; (b) finding definitive solutions to the outstanding maritime boundary issues; and (c) carrying out the demarcation process forward towards its conclusion. The work of the Mixed Commission is expected to be completed by the end of 2005. 218. The United Nations has been supporting the Mixed Commission in carrying out its mandate. To date the United Nations has provided support to and facilitated 12 meetings of the Mixed Commission. It has also been providing substantive support and good offices to the Mixed Commission, and monitoring the progress in withdrawals and transfers of authority in concerned areas and in the demarcation exercise. The revised requirements to carry out these United Nations activities in support of the Mixed Commission for the period from 1 June to 31 December 2004 were presented to the General Assembly on 9 September 2004 (A/58/886). 219. In 2005, the United Nations will continue to provide support to the Mixed Commission and facilitate the implementation of the Court's decision. To this end, the United Nations will provide substantive support to the Mixed Commission, provide good offices in facilitating the agreement between the two countries on withdrawals and transfers of authority in the remaining areas, and monitor such withdrawals and transfers of authority. It will also monitor the progress in demarcation of the border between the two countries, and provide support in the identification of joint projects, as confidence-building measures. The United Nations support will also include efforts to raise voluntary contribution for the demarcation exercise and joint projects. 220. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: To conclude in an orderly and peaceful manner the follow-up to the 10 October 2002 decision of the International Court of Justice regarding the land and maritime boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria. (a) Consolidation of progress made in 2004 on demarcation of the land boundary and on resolution of outstanding boundary issues (a) (i) Cameroon and Nigeria participate in a sustained manner in the meetings of the subcommission on demarcation (ii) Cameroon and Nigeria actively support the demarcation activities in the field including participation in the field work of the joint technical team (iii) Cameroon and Nigeria participate in a sustained manner in the meetings of the working group on the maritime boundary (iv) The situation along the border remains peaceful, leading to improved local cross-border relations and increased free movement of persons and goods :: Participation in, and provision of advice and support to, four meetings of the Mixed Commission, four meetings of the subcommission on demarcation and one meeting of the working group on the maritime boundary :: Oversight of the demarcation activities and related tasks :: Facilitate discussions between the parties on maritime boundary-related issues and on economic cooperation, including possible joint ventures (b) Completion and consolidation of the withdrawals and transfers of authority carried out in 2004 in the Lake Chad area, along the land boundary, and in the Bakassi peninsula (b) (i) The transfer of the authority in the concerned areas of the Lake Chad, Land Boundary and in the Bakassi peninsula through increased contact between the administrative authorities of Cameroon and Nigeria (ii) Cameroon and Nigeria support in a sustained manner the work of the civilian observer team in the border areas :: Advice and support to the civilian observer team in the Lake Chad area, the land boundary and the Bakassi peninsula :: Regular field assessments by the civilian observer team of the conditions of affected populations (c) Continued respect for the rights of the affected populations and community development in the border areas (c) (i) Cameroon and Nigeria participate in a sustained manner to address issues related to meeting the needs of the affected populations (ii) Relevant international instruments, to which both Cameroon and Nigeria have acceded, are applied to ensure respect for the rights of the affected populations in the border areas :: Quarterly reports by the civilian observer team to the Mixed Commission on the conditions of the affected populations :: Visits to border communities to consider possible confidence-building initiatives across the border to address the well-being of affected populations 221. The objective is expected to be achieved provided that Cameroon and Nigeria continue to adhere to the letter and spirit of the Court's decision and the work plan adopted by the Mixed Commission; that the political, social and economic environments in the two countries remain conducive to the implementation of the Court's judgment; and that donor funding for the demarcation exercise is received. 222. The requirements for United Nations support to the Mixed Commission for a 12-month period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 amount to $5,888,300 net ($6,323,700 gross). Of this amount, $1,950,100 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriation for the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission for the period from 1 June to 31 December 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the United Nations support to the Mixed Commission, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $3,938,200 net ($4,373,400 gross). 223. These requirements would provide for: (a) the continuation of two military advisers ($89,800), which reflects the reduction of two military liaison officers that will not be needed in 2005; (b) civilian staffing costs in general temporary assistance, consisting of the salaries and common staff costs of 20 staff (14 international and 6 local staff), which reflects a reduction of one D-1 position ($2,272,300); (c) official travel ($335,800); (d) costs of 22 civilian observers ($1,835,000); and (e) other related operational requirements ($1,355,400). Q. United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic 224. The United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic was established in February 2000, following the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA). On the basis of a letter dated 3 December 1999 from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council (S/1999/1235) and the President's reply of 10 December 1999 (S/1999/1236), it was established as a post-MINURCA political presence in the Central African Republic. 225. The purpose of the Office is to support government efforts to consolidate peace and national reconciliation through dialogue, the promotion of human rights, the strengthening of democratic institutions and to facilitate the mobilization of international resources for national reconstruction and economic recovery, poverty alleviation and good governance as well as helping mobilize international political support and resources for security-related reforms. 226. Since its establishment, BONUCA, working in close cooperation with the United Nations country team, has been striving to carry out its mandate, albeit in a volatile climate. In the light of the persistent instability, the Security Council approved a renewal of the BONUCA mandate for an additional year ending on 31 December 2003 (S/2002/930). 227. In March 2003, following the coup d'état staged by the former Army Chief of Staff, national institutions, including Parliament, were dissolved and replaced by the National Transition Council, comprising representatives of political parties, civil society, trade unions and religious organizations. The Council is helping to run the country until new general elections are organized, in early 2005. In this transitional period, BONUCA continues to provide good offices, mediation and advice, as appropriate, to the current Government with the aim of ensuring the peaceful management of the transition. In August 2003, the Government requested that the Secretary-General extend the mandate of BONUCA until December 2004. In his letter dated 5 September 2003 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2003/889), the Secretary-General requested the extension of the BONUCA mandate for an additional year, until 31 December 2004. The Council took note of the Secretary-General's request in a letter dated 11 September 2003 (S/2003/890) from the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-General. 228. On 18 October 2004, following consultations with the Transitional Government of the Central African Republic, during which the authorities requested the renewal of the mandate of BONUCA, the Secretary-General wrote to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/874) to propose an extension for an additional year, until 31 December 2005. The extension would enable the Office to continue to support the Transitional Government's efforts to restore constitutional legality and help to create a propitious political environment for the holding of credible presidential and legislative elections, which were expected to take place on 30 January and 27 February 2005. In his reply of 28 October 2004, the President of the Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had taken note of the proposal (S/2004/875). 229. The current political climate in the region has been marked by the launching of the electoral process, with a view to restoring constitutional legality and the rule of law in 2005. To that end, different electoral documents, namely the draft constitution, the electoral Code as well as ordinances on political parties and the status of the opposition, considered earlier by the National Transitional Council, have been formally adopted by the Government and promulgated by the Head of State, who signed and promulgated in April 2004 an ordinance creating the Electoral Commission, known as the "Mixed and Independent Electoral Commission". A separate presidential decree specified the organization and the functioning of the Commission. The latter, in conjunction with the Ministry of Interior and Territorial Administration, is responsible for conducting the entire electoral process. 230. BONUCA, in accordance with the relevant recommendations made by the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political Affairs, has initiated a framework for political consultations with external partners and the entire United Nations system, in order to follow up on the preparation for the general elections. In the same vein, together with BONUCA, a technical advisory committee, chaired by UNDP, has been established. It brings together all partners supporting the process. 231. BONUCA has continued to undertake all necessary efforts, through mediation and good offices, to diffuse tensions that frequently erupted among political actors. These efforts have prevented on a number of occasions the collapse of the fragile political consensus that governs the transition. BONUCA helped maintain dialogue between the Government, trade unions and other social actors, while pressing the transitional authorities to keep the matter of salary payment as a priority. The Office also assisted the transitional authorities and the Electoral Commission in drafting legal documents or reference texts that are deemed necessary for the electoral process, namely the draft constitution, the draft electoral code and other documents relating to the political parties and local authorities. 232. BONUCA has made significant contributions in the fields of the promotion and respect for human rights and the rule of law. Support continues to be given to various local non-governmental organizations that are active in the peace-promoting process. Further, it has continued to build partnerships with UNDP and other United Nations agencies. All United Nations entities have continued to undertake their respective activities within the overall framework of the peacebuilding strategy for the country. In particular, BONUCA has continued to participate more actively in the work of the country team, for the elaboration of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for the Central African Republic. Its relationship with the UNDP Resident Coordinator has been strengthened, particularly in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. BONUCA, together with UNDP, the Government of the Central African Republic and other partners, actively contributed to the successful conclusion of a project for the reintegration of former combatants and support to local communities, funded by the World Bank's Multicountry Demobilization and Reintegration Programme. 233. Concerning the situation of refugees in the Central African Republic, BONUCA, in close cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, continues to assist the Government and the National Refugee Commission in dealing with their situation on the refugee sites. More specifically, the human rights section of the Bureau paid regular visits to the refugees in their respective camps. 234. The objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below: To restore the constitutional order, consolidate peace and achieve national reconciliation in the Central African Republic. (a) Consensus among key stakeholders on ways to address major issues confronting the Central African Republic (a) Number of key stakeholders, including women's organizations, who have approved the drafting of the new constitution and electoral code :: Good offices and mediation among the key stakeholders in order to maintain the consensus during the transitional period :: Advisory services to the national authorities and institutions in order to improve their relationship with the key stakeholders :: Updating the electoral process by taking into consideration all the major recommendations of the national dialogue as requested by the key stakeholders :: Holding of free and fair elections in the Central African Republic (b) Improved capacity of Central African Republic national human rights mechanisms to respect and promote human rights, including women's rights (b) (i) Reduction in the number of complaints with respect to human rights violations, abusive arrests and extrajudicial executions (ii) Number of proposals for reform provided to and implemented by the Government on the status of magistracy ::Training workshops (civil, political and human rights, defence and security) for civil society organizations, including associations of women and youth :: Advisory services to national high commission for human rights and legal and judicial institutions :: Start-up workshop and adoption of a national plan of action on human rights :: Training on reporting obligations as well as a workshop on civil and political rights :: Follow-up on revision of the military and social workers codes and holding of a national seminar on the death penalty :: Training workshops for officials in the provinces of Kaga Bandoro, Bossangoa and Bangui, in order to integrate a human rights dimension in their daily work :: Training workshop on election observation and human rights :: Training for the "chefs de quartier", mayors and "chefs de groupe" :: Seminars on revision of the Central African Republic "Code criminel" and "Code de procédure criminelle", aimed at the adoption of new drafts :: Human rights training for law enforcement officials :: Reinforcement of the human rights documentation centre at BONUCA :: Human rights promotional activities :: Celebration of human rights days :: Opening a second regional human rights field office in Bossangoa to disseminate human rights activities in that region (c) Progress towards security sector reform in the Central African Republic (c) Number of proposals for reform provided to and implemented by the Government :: Training workshops (civil, political and human rights, defence and security) :: Advisory services to military and civilian police officials in their respective fields 235. BONUCA is expected to accomplish its objectives, provided that there is no negative impact of conflicts in neighbouring countries on the peace process in the Central African Republic. 236. The estimated requirements relating to BONUCA for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would amount to $5,533,900 net ($6,021,300 gross). Of this amount, $82,500 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Office in 2004. Thus the overall requirements for the Office for 2005, after taking into account the above, amounts to $5,451,400 net ($5,938,800 gross). 237. The resources requested for BONUCA for 2005 would provide for military and police personnel ($651,100); salaries of international and local staff ($3,469,600); official travel ($66,100); operational costs ($905,900); and other programmes ($441,200) such as public information, training and human rights. R. United Nations Political Office for Somalia 238. The United Nations Political Office for Somalia was established on 15 April 1995 pursuant to an exchange of letters between the Secretary-General (S/1995/231, S/1995/322 and S/1995/451) and the President of the Security Council (S/1995/452), in order to assist the Secretary-General's efforts to advance the cause of peace and reconciliation in Somalia through contacts with Somali leaders, civic organizations and the States and organizations concerned. UNPOS closely monitors the situation in and related to Somalia and assists the Secretary-General in providing periodic briefings and written reports to the Security Council. UNPOS continues to undertake efforts in support of initiatives by Member States and regional organizations in the search for peace and reconciliation in Somalia. 239. In his letter dated 13 November 2003 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2003/1092), the Secretary-General informed the Council that UNPOS had been assisting to advance the cause of peace and reconciliation in Somalia through contacts with Somali leaders, civic organizations and the States and organizations concerned, and was actively engaged in efforts to support the Somali National Reconciliation Conference under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). He also informed the Council that, once an agreement had been reached and the security situation improved, he would submit a proposal on the establishment of a peacebuilding office in Somalia, which would include adjustments that might be needed to the mandate of UNPOS. It was his intention to continue the activities of UNPOS at the current resource level for the biennium 2004-2005. 240. In his reply of 13 November 2003 (S/2003/1093), the President of the Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had taken note of the information and intention contained in the letter of the Secretary-General. 241. In a report to the Security Council dated 8 October 2004 (S/2004/804), the Secretary-General reported on the progress achieved at the Somali National Reconciliation Conference at Mbagathi, Somalia, under the auspices of IGAD, including the establishment of the Transitional Federal Parliament of Somalia and the subsequent election of the Speaker of Parliament. He commended the efforts of the States Members of IGAD in assisting Somalis to reach the necessary agreements for the re-establishment of peace and stability in the country. He urged Somali leaders to seize the opportunity to complete the process by electing a transitional president and to support in good faith the new transitional federal government that was to be formed. He indicated, however, that at that stage of progress in the Somali peace process, there would likely be a call for an expanded peacebuilding role and presence for the United Nations, in order that it might assist the Somali parties in implementing their agreement. He also indicated that any enhanced role for the Organization in Somalia should be incremental and should be based on the outcome of discussions with the new Government. Pending his recommendation in this regard and the decisions by the Security Council, the Secretary-General proposed that the resources available to UNPOS for 2004-2005 be maintained at the current level. 242. In a statement dated 26 October 2004 (S/PRST/2004/38), the Security Council commended the recent progress made, including the election of a Transitional President, towards the re-establishment of peace and stability in Somalia. It underscored the importance of consolidating the gains made so far, and encouraged the Transitional Federal Parliament and the President to take further steps to select a Prime Minister and an efficient and effective Cabinet, and to develop a preliminary programme of action and timetable for the transitional period. The Council shared the Secretary-General's assessment of the situation and looked forward to receiving the Secretary-General's recommendations for an expanded peacebuilding presence. 243. The mandate of the Office includes: (a) Monitoring developments in Somalia as a whole and keeping the Secretary-General informed about the situation in the country, taking into account relevant decisions of the Security Council and other organs of the United Nations; (b) Assisting the people of Somalia, where appropriate, in their efforts to achieve national reconciliation; (c) Liaising with the countries neighbouring Somalia and concerned organizations, in particular: IGAD, the African Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, on political developments relating to Somalia; (d) Liaising with the Office of the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinators for Somalia, as and when necessary; (e) Performing other activities commensurable with the mission of UNPOS; (f) Assisting external actors on Somalia towards a uniformity of approach in the Somali National Reconciliation Process. 244. During 2004, the main focus of UNPOS was to coordinate the activities of the international community in support of progress at the Somalia National Reconciliation Conference, in particular the efforts of member States and regional organizations that are extending political and financial assistance to the reconciliation process. 245. In 2005, the main objective of UNPOS will be to support national reconciliation in Somalia in general and to assist the new governance structures in particular. UNPOS will aim at facilitating a deeper understanding of the Somali situation and assistance for the new Government in various international decision-making bodies, including key and concerned States Members of the United Nations, the Security Council, as well as regional and international organizations such as IGAD, the African Union, the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the European Union and IGAD Partners Forum. 246. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement of UNPOS are presented below: Objective: To enhance peace and national reconciliation in Somalia, following the establishment of a transitional federal Government. (a) Continued coherent regional approach by neighbouring countries and organizations (IGAD, African Union, League of Arab States, Organization of the Islamic Conference) in support of the establishment of a transitional federal Government in Somalia (a) Increase in the number of regional countries and regional organizations that adopt or support coherent regional approaches supporting the new transitional federal Government in Somalia :: Support to coordination meetings with Somali leaders and members of the international community on the implementation of agreements emanating from the Transitional Federal Charter adopted by the Somali leaders :: Consultations with regional governments and the international community on fostering peace and national reconciliation in Somalia (b) Increased support to the peace-building process in Somalia (b) (i) Increase in financial resources allocated to United Nations system operations in Somalia (ii) Increase in contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for peacebuilding in Somalia :: Consultations and coordination with the donor community, the United Nations country team and partners in order to increase programme implementation in Somalia. :: Draft plans for supporting the future transitional federal Government and institutions in Somalia in collaboration with the donor community and the United Nations country team 247. UNPOS is expected to achieve its objective provided that: (a) the new governance structures are not destabilized by internal/external opposition; (b) regional governments/organizations maintain a coherent regional approach in support of the peace process; and (c) renewed and concerted engagement is provided by the international community in support of the peace process in Somalia. 248. The resource requirements of the Office for a one-year period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 amount to $1,342,000 net ($1,492,400 gross). Of this amount, $54,200 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriation for 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for UNPOS for 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $1,287,800 net ($1,438,200 gross). 249. The 2005 requirements of UNPOS in the amount of $1,342,000 would provide for the continuation of the existing seven staff ($1,006,000); official travel ($82,600); and logistical support, including communications, transportation and miscellaneous supplies and services ($253,400). S. Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa 250. With the concurrence of the Security Council, in March 2001 the Secretary-General dispatched an inter-agency mission to West Africa. In its report (S/2001/434), the mission recommended the establishment of a regional mechanism for systematic and regular consultations among United Nations entities for defining and harmonizing national and subregional policies and strategy in an integrated manner, in cooperation with West African States, ECOWAS and other subregional organizations. In his letter dated 30 April 2001 (S/2001/434) to the President of the Security Council, the Secretary-General transmitted the report of the multidisciplinary mission to the Security Council. 251. Based on his letter dated 25 June 2001 to the President of the Security Council, the Secretary-General indicated his intention to establish a United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) headed by a Special Representative. In a subsequent letter dated 26 November 2001 to the President of the Security Council (S/2001/1128), the Secretary-General indicated that UNOWA, to be established in Dakar, would be referred to as the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and outlined the functions of the Office. He further indicated that the duration of the Office would be three years, starting in January 2002. In his response of 29 November 2001 (S/2001/1129), the President of the Security Council indicated that the Council welcomed the intention of the Secretary-General to establish an Office and took note of the functions of the Office. In his letter to the Security Council dated 4 October 2004 (S/2004/797), the Secretary-General indicated that owing to administrative and logistical difficulties, the Office became operational only from January 2003. 252. The creation of UNOWA was welcomed by Member States as a ground-breaking initiative, a first attempt to bring closer the political services of the Organization to a particular subregion through harmonizing from a subregional perspective the work of the United Nations system on the ground in support of ECOWAS and its priorities. In addition, in its recent report on the Security Council mission to West Africa from 20 to 29 June 2004 (S/2004/525, para. 53), the Mission recommended that with the Office's wide-ranging activities and the importance of a coherent regional approach to the conflicts and other problems afflicting West Africa, additional resources be provided rapidly for the Office. 253. In his letter dated 4 October 2004 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/797), the Secretary-General indicated his intention to extend the mandate of UNOWA for a further period of three years, from 1 January 2005 to 31 December 2007, subject to a mid-term review in July 2006. Should the Council concur with his recommendation, the Secretary-General also indicated his intention to strengthen UNOWA, as called for in the report of the Council mission to West Africa of June 2004 (S/2004/525). 254. In his reply of 25 October 2004 (S/2004/858), the President of the Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council concurred with the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate of UNOWA for three years from 1 January 2005 to 31 December 2007, subject to a mid-term review in July 2006. The Council also took note of the Secretary-General's intention to strengthen UNOWA to enable it to perform its mandate more effectively and requested a copy of the intended mandate and functions of UNOWA for the next three-year period. 255. Currently, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa is entrusted with the following mandate: (a) To promote a United Nations integrated subregional approach to conflict prevention and peacebuilding in West Africa; (b) To liaise with and assist, as appropriate, ECOWAS; (c) To carry out good offices and other special assignments on behalf of the Secretary-General; (d) To report to Headquarters on key developments of subregional significance. However, an internal review of this mandate and performance has been taking place in 2004. The newly strengthened mandate will be finalized and submitted to the Security Council towards the end of 2004, as requested by the Council. 256. The primary role of UNOWA is to promote a United Nations integrated subregional approach in response to the conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding priorities of the West Africa subregion. Accordingly, the Office collaborates extensively with the regional United Nations entities in West Africa and the United Nations peace missions in the subregion. 257. In order to enhance linkages between the political, humanitarian and development assistance activities of the United Nations system in the subregion, UNDP has seconded to UNOWA a high-level official to serve as a Director of the Office and the Head of the Regional Support Office of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Dakar is the humanitarian adviser to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. 258. During 2004, UNOWA has increased awareness for the importance of concerted and integrated action on subregional political and security issues considered by the Secretary-General and the Security Council to be at the root of instability in West Africa. This work has involved a series of meetings and activities carried out in close collaboration with the United Nations system, including United Nations peace missions, ECOWAS, development partners and civil society. Further to the letter of the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council dated 26 November 2001 (S/2001/1128), an internal review of the mandate and performance of UNOWA has taken place in the course of 2004. 259. Accordingly, the objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action by UNOWA are presented below. Objective: To enhance the contribution of the United Nations towards the achievement of peace and security priorities of West Africa. (a) Increased attention is given to peace and security cross-border issues in West Africa by relevant entities and the implementation of the relevant Security Council recommendations is facilitated (b) Strengthened commitment of regional key players to the building of a harmonized subregional approach for more effective conflict prevention and peacebuilding in West Africa, and enhanced linkages and working relationships among United Nations missions and entities and other key partners, including ECOWAS, civil society and the private sector (a) (i) Continuous cross-border threats against peace and security in West Africa are identified, assessed and analysed and progress in implementing regional integrated solutions are brought to the attention of the Security Council (ii) Resolutions/decisions/ elements of plans of action are adopted, by international and regional institutions, for further action on subregional cross border issues following the production and discussion of related studies and reports (iii) Increased awareness on key cross-border issues among key civil society leaders, the private sector, ECOWAS and United Nations partners in the region (b) (i) Greater synergy between UNOWA and its partners, including ECOWAS, for addressing the subregional dimensions stemming from their respective mandates, resulting in the emergence of an integrated approach on regional issues (ii) Greater participation, as appropriate, of civil society, including the private sector, in UNOWA consultation meetings (a) (i) Report on cross-border issues (ii) Production and dissemination of information products - articles, fact sheets, press releases - and organization of media events (iii) Four studies/reports produced on cross-cutting issues and the regional dimension of peace and security challenges (iv) Periodic reports alerting and updating on political and security developments and cross-border issues in the subregion (b) (i) Elaboration of three joint plans of action between UNOWA and its partners (ii) Three joint meetings between United Nations institutions and other international partners, civil society and the private sector to exchange information and experience on regional peace and security challenges (iii) Greater interaction and consultation among the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in West Africa (iii) One meeting of United Nations focal points on subregional and cross-border issues (iv) Two meetings of the United Nations Task Force on "Youth unemployment as a source of regional instability in West Africa" to facilitate the implementation of the recommendations included in the final comprehensive report (v) Two jointly funded initiatives respectively with the International Labour Organization and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs undertaken on youth unemployment and border areas (vi) Development of new or refined procedures, mechanisms to facilitate the increased exchange of information for a more concerted and integrated approach on subregional problems with the United Nations system and its partners (c) ECOWAS/UNOWA cooperation is enhanced in addressing selected areas relating to good governance, democracy, conflict prevention and peacebuilding (c) (i) Signing of a UNOWA-ECOWAS cooperation agreement (c) (i) Two meetings of the ECOWAS-UNOWA working group to develop jointly implemented projects (ii) Agreement on and publication of recommendations on how to strengthen the institutional capacity of ECOWAS to address regional peace and security issues (ii) One meeting of the ECOWAS-UNOWA Working Group, the European Community and UNDP to follow up on the recommendations of the European Union-United Nations assessment report on ECOWAS (iii) New mechanisms for regular exchange of information and documentation on respective ECOWAS/UNOWA policies and activities (iii) Three project proposals, for joint projects of ECOWAS, UNOWA and other partners of the United Nations system, successfully developed, with at least two of them implemented before the end of 2005 (iv) Two meetings between ECOWAS and UNOWA senior management, and between the ECOWAS and UNOWA focal points, respectively (v) Three reports, sets of recommendations or regional strategies based on three joint ECOWAS/UNOWA seminars or workshops focusing on such areas as governance reform, security sector development, electoral assistance, small arms, regional integration and border security (vi) Four joint ECOWAS-UNOWA good offices, fact-finding and other assessment missions in the context of conflict prevention, conflict mediation and elections (d) New perspectives on current peace and security issues in West Africa are brought to the forefront to enable innovative policy changes for a more effective and sustainable conflict prevention and peacebuilding in the region (d) (i) Emergence of a dialogue on these issues among the regional and international stakeholders in general and decision-makers in particular (i) Production of three policy papers on key governance and peacebuilding issues, aimed at policy makers and opinion leaders (ii) Greater regional and international collaboration in action aimed at dealing with those issues (ii) UNOWA participation in three seminars/workshops on those issues (iii) Three media events organized to increase awareness on those issues (iv) Advocacy activities, discussions and brainstorming sessions to increase awareness on those issues 260. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that: (a) There will be no man-made or natural disasters that would affect the economic, political and social well-being of individual countries or the subregion, and no new major conflict which would shift the priority attention of the United Nations and its partners; (b) National and regional stakeholders and their partners will demonstrate the necessary political will to engage in conflict prevention, and United Nations agencies and peace missions in the region will cooperate with UNOWA towards the implementation of its mandate, which calls for enhanced linkages in the work of the United Nations and other partners in the subregion. (c) There is continued support for the work of UNOWA. 261. The estimated requirements relating to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would amount to $2,897,800 net ($3,197,800). Of this net amount, $202,900 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Office in 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for the Office for 2005, after taking into account the above, amount to $2,694,900 net ($2,994,900 gross). 262. The 2005 resource requirements for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005 would provide for a staffing complement of 22 positions, including 2 new positions of political affairs officers (1 P-3, 1 National Professional Officer) ($1,447,000); services of experts and consultants ($404,600); official travel ($324,000); and other operational requirements, such as communications, transportation and other requirements ($722,200). T. Support to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) 263. In its resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004, the Security Council decided to establish, for a period no longer than two years, a Committee of the Security Council, consisting of all members of the Council, which would report to the Council for its examination, on the implementation of the provisions of the resolution. The Council also called upon States to present a first report no later than six months from the adoption of the resolution to the Committee on steps they had taken or intended to take to implement the resolution. The resolution reflected the Council's grave concern of the threat of terrorism and the risk that non-State actors such as those identified in the United Nations list maintained by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and those to whom resolution 1373 (2001) applied might acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. The Council further decided that all States should refrain from providing any form of support to non-State actors that attempted to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery. To that end, the Council decided that all States should implement a number of measures and report thereon to the Council. 264. In accordance with the guidelines for the conduct of its work, the Committee would receive and examine the national reports of Member States on steps taken or intended to be taken to implement resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee may decide to establish, as necessary, arrangements to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other relevant international, regional, subregional bodies and relevant committees established under the Security Council, which it decides can contribute to the work of the Committee. 265. The primary role of the Committee is to facilitate the necessary controls called for by the resolution and to increase multilateral efforts towards non-proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction. During 2004, following the selection of its Chairman, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) adopted guidelines for the conduct of its work (terms of reference) and guidelines for the preparation of national reports pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). In addition, the Committee established three subcommittees to facilitate examination of national reports and selected three vice-chairmen to head the subcommittees. The Committee also discussed the content of its web site which was launched in October 2004. As of mid-November, the Committee had received 75 national reports and 17 candidatures for experts from Member States. The Committee has begun to consider these candidates. 266. In 2005, the Committee, with the assistance of experts, will review first reports submitted by Member States pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004), provide them with comments on their reports and request further clarification where necessary. The Committee will also submit to the Security Council regular reports, including recommendations as necessary, on the implementation of the resolution, based on its assessment of first reports and supplementary information from Member States. The Committee is expected to facilitate coordination of assistance required by States in implementing the provisions of the resolution from States in a position to offer such assistance. 267. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement related to action taken by the United Nations, collectively by the international community, the Security Council and by the Secretary-General, are presented below. Objective: To prevent non-State actors from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery, and to promote effective multilateral cooperation in addressing this threat. Implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) by Member States Number of reports submitted by Member States on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) Number of new and existing legislations and administrative measures that give effect to requisite controls called for by resolution 1540 (2004), promulgated or identified :: Relevant legislation and regulations on control measures :: Substantive servicing of meetings of the Committee. Reports of the Chairman of the Committee to the Security Council :: Database of information collected from Member States :: Background papers, information material, and questionnaires for gathering specific data :: Committee web site 268. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that the political environment is supportive of the Committee's efforts; Member States implement the requirements of the resolution and further recommendations from the Committee; and national institutions are supportive of the issues of concern in resolution 1540 (2004). 269. The requirements for supporting the Committee from 1 September to 31 December 2004 were met from the provision for special political missions appropriated under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium for 2004-2005. 270. The estimated requirements for supporting the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in 2005 amount to $1,736,300 net ($1,794,900 gross). Of this amount, $207,500 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the amounts provided for the Committee in 2004. Thus, the overall requirements for the Committee for 12 months in 2005, after taking into account the unencumbered balance, amount to $1,528,800 net ($1,587,400 gross). 271. These resources would provide for staffing costs in general temporary assistance ($322,300) for three positions comprising 1 P-3 for a political affairs officer, 1 P-3 information management officer and 1 General Service (Other level) staff for an administrative and research assistant, to support the Committee; official travel of the Chairman and/or the members of the Committee to represent the Committee at meetings related to the mandate of the Committee ($25,000); services of seven experts who would assist the Committee in considering the national reports submitted pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) ($1,195,800); and other operational costs, such as premises, communications and supplies and services ($193,200). U. United Nations advance team in the Sudan 272. The United Nations advance team in the Sudan was established as a special political mission pursuant to Security Council resolution 1547 (2004) of 11 June 2004 for an initial period of three months. This was against the background of expectations that a peacekeeping operation would later be mandated by the Council. The resource requirements of the special political mission for the initial period were met through redeployment and utilization of the provision for special political missions appropriated under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for 2004-2005. In its resolution 1556 (2004) of 30 July 2004, the Council extended the mandate of the mission for another 90 days, until 10 December 2004. As of writing, the budget proposals of the Secretary-General (A/59/534) for that period were under consideration by the General Assembly. 273. In its resolution 1574 (2004) of 19 November 2004, the Security Council extended the mandate of the mission for a further period of three months, until 10 March 2005. In adopting the resolution, the Council, inter alia, declared its strong support for the efforts of the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army to reach a comprehensive peace agreement. It also welcomed the signing on 19 November 2004 of the memorandum of understanding in Nairobi, entitled "Declaration on the conclusion of IGAD negotiations on peace in the Sudan", and the agreement that the six protocols referred to in the Nairobi Declaration of 5 June 2004 constituted and formed the core peace agreement. In the same resolution, the Council strongly supported the decisions of the African Union to increase its mission in Darfur to 3,320 personnel and to enhance its mandate to include the tasks listed in paragraph 6 of the African Union Peace and Security Council's Communiqué of 20 October 2004. 274. The conclusion of a comprehensive peace agreement at Naivasha and activities relating to Darfur will remain a primary focus of the mission. The mission's focus will be on readjustment in line with the political and other needs emanating from the urgent situation in Darfur, and will include regular meetings and verification missions of the Joint Implementation Mechanism created by the joint communiqué signed on 3 July 2004 by the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations (S/2004/635, annex), liaison with the ceasefire monitors from the African Union, international human rights monitors and humanitarian workers, systematic contacts with local authorities and rebel-controlled areas, and participation in the evolving political process. 275. The objective, expected accomplishment and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: To improve stability and peace in the Sudan. (a) The resumption of a sustained and successful north-south peace process (a) (i) Signature of protocols on security arrangements, agreement on implementation modalities, culminating in the completion of a comprehensive peace agreement (ii) Agreement by all parties on the role and responsibilities of the United Nations in the implementation phase, as well as international guarantees :: Meetings with northern and southern leaders to facilitate progress in the peace process and provide good offices :: Meetings with key officials in locations in north and south Sudan, as well as the region, to draw up a common strategy to facilitate a final agreement :: Meetings with IGAD, the troika and other partners to plan and coordinate support and assistance to the peace process :: Substantive briefs on priority peace issues related to human rights, devolution, security, rural and infrastructure development :: Technical assessments of policy, plans and budgets in the above-mentioned priority areas :: Periodic political analysis of specific issues relating to the negotiations :: Briefings to the Executive Committee on Peace and Security, the Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Development Group for policy formulation :: Briefings to the Security Council for guidance and mandate (b) The ceasefire will be maintained and transformed into a lasting peace agreement (b) The resumption of talks between the parties that make progress towards agreement on, and implementation of, security arrangements :: Continuation of the Joint Implementation Mechanism process through regular meetings :: Monitoring and verification reports on the state of implementation of the peace agreements and their presentation to Member States and others :: Established readiness for proposed international monitoring and peace support operation :: Regular reporting on the parties' compliance with Security Council resolutions :: Establishment of an evaluation and assessment commission chaired by the United Nations :: Initiation of a status of forces agreement with the Government of the Sudan with respect to the proposed peace support operation :: Exchange of letters with the Sudan People's Liberation Movement with respect to the status of forces agreement initialled by the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan (c) Progress in implementing the commitments by the Government of Sudan according to the joint communiqué and fulfilling obligations mandated by Security Council resolutions (c) (i) The start of voluntary internally displaced persons and refugee returns under secure conditions (ii) Containment of violence in Darfur (iii) Expansion of African Union mission in line with Security Council resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004) :: Meetings with state governors, local authorities and key officials of government agencies to discuss the peace process with emphasis on maintaining stability and security in all regions of the Sudan :: Periodic political analysis and technical assessment of specific issues relating to the implementation of the peace agreements :: Regular consultations with the parties, the African Union officials and international partners on restarting the African Union-led negotiations (d) Local authorities realize, in cooperation with United Nations and non-governmental organizations, an effective and efficient delivery system for humanitarian relief (d) Effective delivery of humanitarian assistance :: Inter-agency meetings to coordinate initiatives and other activities :: Technical support to the African Union through deployment of multidisciplinary UNAMIS team :: Enhanced monitoring of the impact of humanitarian assistance 276. The Mission is expected to achieve its objective provided that local, regional and international parties are willing to continue with their constructive contribution to the peace process. 277. The requirements of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for a three-month period from 11 December 2004 to 10 March 2005 amount to $12,716,300 net ($13,497,600 gross). These requirements would provide for (a) the costs of 10 military advisers ($187,100); (b) 4 civilian police advisers ($88,800); (c) civilian personnel costs, consisting of the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessments of the existing 419 positions ($5,109,800); (d) official travel of staff ($435,700); and (e) other related operational requirements, including facilities and infrastructure, ground and air transportation, communications, information technology and other requirements ($6,894,900). V. Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General to the International Advisory and Monitoring Board 278. The International Advisory and Monitoring Board is an audit oversight body for the Development Fund for Iraq. The main purpose of the Board, as set out in Security Council resolution 1483 (2003) of 22 May 2003, is to promote the objectives set forth in that resolution, inter alia, to help ensure that the Fund is used in a transparent manner for the benefit of the people of Iraq, and that export sales of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from Iraq are made consistent with prevailing international market best practices. The Fund was established pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003) and holds the proceeds of petroleum export sales from Iraq, as well as remaining balances from the oil-for-food programme and other frozen Iraqi funds. 279. The Board consists of duly qualified representatives of each of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, the Director-General of the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development and the President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and a duly qualified individual designated by the Government of Iraq. For the United Nations, the Secretary-General has designated the Assistant Secretary-General and Controller as his representative to the Board. 280. The mandate and membership of the Board was extended by the Security Council in its resolution 1546 (2004) of 8 June 2004. Following dissolution of the Coalition Provisional Authority on 30 June 2004 and the Fund resources are now controlled by the Interim Government of Iraq. 281. Under its terms of reference, the Board determines the frequency and location of its regular meetings, which occur at least quarterly. During the course of 2004, the Board was expected to hold up to nine meetings, on a rotational basis, at the offices of each representative. It is anticipated that an equal number will be held in 2005. Costs incurred by the members of the Board are paid by the respective institutions, and in the case of the member designated by the Government of Iraq, paid by the Government of Iraq. 282. In carrying out his ongoing functions, the Representative of the Secretary-General on the Board would require an amount of $231,200 net ($259,400 gross) for 2005. These resources would provide for general temporary assistance of one P-4 ($147,600); official travel of the Representative of the Secretary-General and his alternates/advisers to meetings of the Board, to be held on a rotational basis at the offices of each member ($76,500); and resources for the hosting of official functions when meetings are held in New York ($7,100). 283. It will be recalled that an amount of $826,700 was appropriated for the Representative of the Secretary-General to the Board for 2004. Of that appropriation, an amount of $639,200 is anticipated to remain unencumbered at the end of 2004. Thus, the 2005 requirements of the Representative of the Secretary-General to the Board would be fully met from the existing appropriation. In addition, the excess resources, amounting to $408,000, would be surrendered for the financing of other special political missions. IV. Estimated resource requirements for special political missions emanating from the decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council 284. The total requirements for the activities described in the preceding paragraphs are estimated at $177,547,600 net ($189,680,100 gross). Of these requirements, $14,932,900 would be met from the unencumbered balance against the appropriations provided for 2004. Mission-by-mission budget estimates are set out in table 1 above. V. Action required from the General Assembly 285. The General Assembly is requested to: (a) Approve the budgets for the political missions listed in table 1 above for the period up to December 2005 and to note that the charging of expenditures against the appropriation would be subject to extension of their respective mandates; (b) Note that the requirements arising under the regular budget in connection with the extension of the special political missions listed in table 1 above are estimated at $162,614,700 net ($174,747,200 gross), after taking into account the unencumbered balance of 2004, amounting to $14,932,900; (c) Appropriate $162,614,700 under section 3, Political affairs, and $12,132,500 under section 34, Staff assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the programme budget for 2004-2005. Provisions for special political missions (2004-2005) (Thousands of United States dollars) Amounts appropriated for special political missions A. Charges approved during the first part of the fifty-eighth session Human rights questions: human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development The situation in Central America -- United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives, authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council (A/C.5/58/20, table 1, part II): 17 political missions United Nations Mission in Côte d'Ivoire (A/58/370, A/58/538 and A/58/598) Total charges Unallocated balance at the end of first part of the fifty-eighth session B. Additional charges approved subsequently by the Advisory Committee United Nations Mission in Côte d'Ivoire (5-27 February 2004) United Nations Mission in Côte d'Ivoire (28 February-4 April 2004) Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities (successor to the Monitoring Group) Requirements for United Nations advance team in the Sudan to be met from discontinued mission (United Nations Office in Burundi) Unallocated balance at the end of the fifty-eighth session C. Additional charges to be approved by the General Assembly at the early part of the fifty-ninth session United Nations advance team in the Sudan (11 September-10 December 2004)a Balance in the provision for special political missions a In addition to the charge of $3,002,600 against the provision for special political missions, the General Assembly is requested to appropriate, under the provision of resolution 41/213, an amount of $17,006,900 net ($17,788,200 gross) to meet the remaining requirements of the United Nations advance team in the Sudan for the period from 11 September to 10 December 2004 (see A/59/534). 