%%%GENDER RESEARCH|WOMEN'S ADVANCEMENT|TRAINING AND RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS|PROGRAMME PLANNING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|CAPACITY BUILDING|GENDER MAINSTREAMING|RESEARCH|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|

Fifty-ninth session Agenda item 108 Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Report of the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women * The present document was submitted late without the explanation required under paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 53/208 B, by which the Assembly decided that, if a report was submitted late, the reason should be included in a footnote to the document. Note by the Secretary-General* Summary The Secretary-General hereby transmits to the General Assembly the report of the Director of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on its work programme and on the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, submitted in accordance with paragraph 7 of Assembly resolution 57/311, in which the Assembly requested the Institute to report to the General Assembly one year after the appointment of a Director. I. Introduction 1. In its resolution 57/311 of 18 June 2003, the General Assembly requested the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) to report to the Assembly, one year after the appointment of the Director, on its work programme and on the implementation of the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. 2. The present report responds to the above mandate. It should be read in conjunction with the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly on the future operations of the Institute (A/59/313) and the note by the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council on the revitalization and strengthening of the Institute (E/2004/66). II. Programme of work for 2005 3. At its first session, on 27 July 2004, the Executive Board of INSTRAW approved the strategic framework for 2004-2007, thus establishing the general guidelines and directions for the Institute's work. The strategic framework (medium-term plan) identifies four strategic areas of work, namely research, information and communication, capacity-building/training and institutional development. The strategic objectives have been identified for each area as well as expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement. These have been the basis for the programme of work for 2005 approved by the Executive Board at its resumed session on 1 October 2004. 4. The programme of work encompasses both core and project activities and contains the financial requirements needed for financing the Institute's operations during 2005. The budget for core operations by strategic areas identifying post and non-post costs totalling US$ 1,183,760 is provided in annex I to the present report. While the Executive Board unanimously approved the work plan and budget for 2005, it pointed out that there were no resources in the INSTRAW Trust Fund to finance those requirements. The estimated funding of project activities amounting to $7.7 million that are being considered for financing by several financial partners is detailed in annex II. A. Overall orientation 5. The overall objectives of INSTRAW are to stimulate and assist through research, training and the collection and dissemination of information, the advancement of women and their integration in the development processes both as participants and beneficiaries. The Institute will assist the efforts of intergovernmental, governmental and non-governmental organizations in this regard. B. Substantive strategic areas 6. In achieving its objectives, INSTRAW will play a catalytic role in preparing and designing research, information and communication collection and capacity-building/training programmes and projects in cooperation with Governments, other United Nations entities, the private sector, academia and other actors of civil society. In that regard, it will facilitate and promote implementation of gender related projects at the subregional, regional and global levels in the following strategic areas: (a) Research Strategic objective 1: To promote the development and implementation of local, regional and global policies that are gender-responsive and based on the results of research, the application of lessons learned and feedback and the replication of best practices. Expected accomplishments of the Institute Indicators of achievement (a) Stakeholders increase awareness on the importance of specific gender issues based on research areas promoted by INSTRAW (a) (i) Number of hits and downloads on the INSTRAW web site in at least three of the specific areas identified by INSTRAW, such as: migration-related issues (remittances, trafficking); information and communication technologies and women's empowerment; security and gender; women's political participation; reproductive rights (ii) Establishment of a baseline for future performance measure based on 2005 (b) Local policies are implemented in the countries based on research conducted with partners (as extrabudgetary funding becomes available) (b) Number of policies adopted by countries (c) Selected universities and research institutions include a gender perspective in research activities (c) At least four new research projects include a gender perspective in the region of the Americas in 2005 Outputs (a) Gender-related research activities are carried out in such areas as: (i) migration-related issues (remittances, trafficking); (ii) information and communication technologies and women's empowerment; (iii) security and gender; (iv) women's political participation; and (v) reproductive rights, as well as in global mandates such as the Beijing Platform for Action, the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled "Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century" and the Millennium Development Goals. (b) Research conducted with partners in identified areas such as migration/trafficking, remittances, reproductive rights, women's political participation, etc., as extrabudgetary funding becomes available. (c) Capacity-building of universities supported to include gender in research activities. (b) Information and communication Strategic objective 2: To strengthen national capacities to effectively manage gender-related knowledge to support governments and civil society in their efforts to mainstream gender into policies and programmes. (a) Stakeholders identify INSTRAW as a clearinghouse for gender-related information (a) Number of hits and downloads on the INSTRAW web site of gender issues increased by 50 per cent in 2005 (b) Stakeholders utilize materials and resources provided by INSTRAW in gender mainstreaming activities at national and regional levels (b) Number of individuals and institutions using the INSTRAW web site gradually increased in 2005 to establish a baseline for future performance measure (c) Visibility of gender issues is increased (c) Number of individuals and institutions using information packaged by INSTRAW on specific areas. The 2005 information to serve as a baseline for future performance measure (a) The INSTRAW web site is redesigned in a user-friendly manner, providing up-to-date information on priority areas for gender mainstreaming, including the Beijing Platform for Action, the outcome document of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled "Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century", and the Millennium Development Goals. (b) Progress report is assembled and posted in the web site on the 12 critical areas of the Beijing Platform for Action. (c) Materials and resources are provided to stakeholders for gender mainstreaming developed by INSTRAW and/or with other partners within quality standards as determined by the Institute. (d) Information is disseminated and packaged for different users (journalists, non-governmental organizations and national machineries) through INSTRAW web site. (c) Capacity-building/training Strategic objective 3: To strengthen national capacity to design and deliver training (including e-training) on gender mainstreaming. (a) Materials for training on gender mainstreaming are used by national institutions and non-governmental organizations for training (a) Number of institutions using material disseminated by INSTRAW for training increased. The 2005 data to establish a baseline for future performance (b) Universities include a gender perspective in their curricula, dependent on availability of extrabudgetary funding (b) Number of universities mainstreaming gender in their curricula increased (c) E-training on gender mainstreaming developed by national institutions in Latin America, dependent on availability of extrabudgetary funding (c) New e-training initiatives implemented in selected countries based on extrabudgetary projects (a) Training programmes, materials and tools (including trainer's rosters) for gender mainstreaming are developed and disseminated. (b) Best practices and experiences on mainstreaming gender in curricular and other training activities are identified and promoted. (c) Projects are developed to identify gaps and opportunities to deliver training and e-training on gender mainstreaming. 7. The estimated resource requirement for these substantive strategic areas is $693,000 representing 58.5 per cent of the total budget. This amount includes salaries and common staff costs of the social affairs officer at the P-3 level; an information/communications officer at the P-2 level and a computer/electronic data processing systems officer at the P-2 level; and a post of information/programme assistant and a secretary. The total amount includes contractual services, meetings, travel of staff, supplies, materials and consultancies. C. Institutional development strategic area 8. The institutional development strategic area provides overall oversight and direction, management, leadership and supervision to all the activities of the Institute. It is responsible for undertaking the necessary actions to ensure an adequate level of funds in the Institute's Trust Fund and for liaison with United Nations Headquarters and agencies, Member States, foundations, research and training institutions, non-governmental organizations, women's organizations and the public at large. (a) Institutional development Strategic objective 4: To shape a sustainable institution that is sound, innovative and applies good governance. Governing bodies and external partners support politically and financially the activities of INSTRAW (i) INSTRAW has a regular budget approved by member countries for its core operations (ii) Extrabudgetary funding is increased by 50 per cent in 2005 (a) The Institute's programme of work is implemented with the participation of stakeholders (United Nations organizations, research and academic institutions and non-governmental organizations) in order to optimize the use of resources for gender mainstreaming. (b) New initiatives for resources mobilization and innovative sources are explored and developed to secure a sustainable core financial and human resource base as well as for specific projects. (c) Results-based management processes are developed that optimize the use of resources with transparency and accountability. (d) An effective working relationship with the Executive Board is strengthened through systematic and interactive exchange and participation. (e) The network and partnership of INSTRAW are strengthened. 9. The estimated requirements for this area are $237,000, representing 20 per cent of the total budget. This includes the salary of the Director (D-2); as well as official travels, meetings and consultancies. Although financial limitations do not allow for the budgeting of the post of Deputy Director (D-1), mandated by the INSTRAW Statute (Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/57 of 24 July 2003), it is envisaged that the corresponding recruitment process for filling the post will be initiated as soon as funding becomes available. 10. The non-reimbursable services of an expert to provide technical assistance provided by the Government of Mexico complement the human resources in this area. (b) Administration and support services 11. This area is responsible for providing all the administrative support services required at the Institute's headquarters at Santo Domingo, such as financial and personnel management, budgetary controls and logistical backstopping for the core activities and special projects to be carried out by the Institute. These include the formulation of budgets, financial statements and accounting reporting, as well as the implementation of United Nations internal control systems and procedures in the areas of personnel management, the internship programme, travel, administration of health and pension fund plans, procurement of services/equipment/supplies and operation of INSTRAW premises. The area is also responsible for ensuring the appropriate application of relevant stipulations of the host country agreement with regard to the administrative and personnel functions of the INSTRAW headquarters. In addition, it provides all the general services and logistical support required for the implementation of special activities carried out by the Institute such as workshops, seminars and other relevant training activities. Objective: To provide administrative and support services and to facilitate the expeditious and effective delivery of the Institute's programme of work. Administrative and support services of the highest quality standards are provided consistently (i) Rules and regulations are followed consistently (ii) Human resources management is driven by results (iii) Unqualified audits are received Administrative and support services of the highest quality standards are provided consistently. 12. The estimated provision of $209,000, which represents 17.5 per cent of the total budget, includes $138,000 to cover salaries and common staff costs for the post of administrative officer (P-2), as well as one administrative secretary, a finance assistant and a chauffeur (who also assists in the performance of basic tasks related to the maintenance of INSTRAW premises) at the General Service level. 13. Estimated requirements under this heading also include $70,700 for general operating expenses related to the maintenance of INSTRAW premises, maintenance of furniture and equipment, as well as costs for communications, supplies and material. D. Estimated project activities 14. During 2004 INSTRAW gave high priority to resource mobilization. Its strategy in fund-raising is to strengthen partnerships and alliances with financial partners, and to seek innovative approaches to increase the Institute's resources. To that end, 16 project profiles were developed to explore the interest of stakeholders (see annex II). These 16 projects, with a total of $7.7 million, have been submitted to several financial partners who share the Institute's objectives. These financial partners are considering the projects for possible financing. III. Implementation of recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services 15. In 2002, the Office of Internal Oversight Services conducted a comprehensive audit of INSTRAW. In its report on the audit (A/56/907), the Office made the following 13 recommendations on future operations and functioning of INSTRAW: * The number in parentheses refers to an internal code used by the Office for recording recommendations. (a) The Secretary-General should detail the role and responsibilities of his Special Representative for INSTRAW with a clearly defined delegation of authority (AN2001/67/1/01);* (b) The Secretary-General should instruct his Special Representative for INSTRAW to propose to the Working Group on the future operations of the Institute that it consider the option of closing INSTRAW, taking into account the findings of the current report of the Office (AN2001/67/1/02); (c) The Secretary-General should instruct his Special Representative for INSTRAW to propose to the Working Group that it examine the feasibility of the Institute's continuation as an autonomous body within the framework of the United Nations and the strategy for achieving effective autonomy for INSTRAW through the appropriate delegation of authority (AN2001/67/1/03); (d) The Secretary-General should instruct his Special Representative for INSTRAW to propose to the Working Group that it consider improvements to the Institute's board of Trustees, such as possible reconstitution of the Board to include donor representation or, alternatively, replacing the Board by a consultative committee, thereby ensuring that the Institute's primary oversight and fund-raising functions are effectively carried out (AN2001/67/1/04); (e) The Secretary-General should propose to the General Assembly that it consider the need to continue the temporary funding of the core operations of INSTRAW from the United Nations regular budget until the Working Group has completed its in-depth assessment of the Institute and made its final recommendations concerning its sustainability, should the Working Group study not be completed before the end of the General Assembly's fifty-sixth session (AN2001/67/1/05); (f) The interim Director of INSTRAW should evaluate its Gender Awareness Information Networking System (GAINS) and refocus the project before proceeding with further implementation (AN2001/67/1/06); (g) The interim Director of INSTRAW should draw lessons learned from the single GAINS project entitled "Men's role as partners in ending violence towards women", and apply those lessons to the conception and development of future, more cost-effective projects (AN2001/67/1/07); (h) The interim Director of INSTRAW, should consider specific donor interests and intergovernmental mandates as primary criteria in developing a more focused plan of action (AN2001/67/1/08) and formulate a business plan geared to specific donor interests and establish a direct relationship with each of its donors in order to regenerate its financial base (AN2001/67/1/09); (i) The interim Director, of INSTRAW should ensure that: (i) Core staff members supervise consultants (AN2001/67/1/10); (ii) Each consultant is hired in accordance with United Nations rules for specific assignments with clear terms of reference and measurable output (AN2001/67/1/11); (iii) Consultant emoluments are determined on the basis of set criteria commensurate with the engagement (AN2001/67/1/12); (iv) The number of consultants is reduced to the minimum number required to maintain the web site and the project (AN2001/67/1/13). 16. Since the appointment of the Director in December 2003, the Institute has taken specific measures to implement the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. 17. The observations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the Institute's governance and autonomy were duly addressed by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council through their endorsement of the recommendations made by the Working Group on the future operation of the Institute submitted on 16 August 2002 (A/57/330) and led to a revision of the Statute of INSTRAW approved by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2003/57. The role and responsibilities of the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs with regard to INSTRAW were clearly established in article III of the Statute (AN2001/67/1/01). The Institute's autonomous status has been reaffirmed (AN2001/67/1/02 and AN2001/67/1/03). The Executive Board replacing the Board of Trustees was officially constituted and held its first session on 27 July 2004 and its resumed session on 1 October 2004 at United Nations Headquarters (AN2001/67/1/04). General Assembly resolutions 57/175 of 18 December 2002 and 58/244 of 23 December 2003 provided INSTRAW with the complementary funding required to ensure the Institute's core operations during 2003 and 2004 (Recommendation No. 5). 18. The Institute's web site has been redesigned. As per consultations between the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the Office of Internal Oversight Services, further evaluation of GAINS is no longer considered outstanding (AN2001/67/1/06). 19. As discussed in detail above, the Institute had developed the draft strategic framework and a portfolio of projects that were presented for the consideration by donors during 2004 (AN2001/67/1/07). The Executive Board of INSTRAW approved the strategic framework and the programme of work for 2005. 20. As requested by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (AN2001/67/1/08 and AN2001/67/1/09), the strategic framework of INSTRAW is based on the principles and objectives set forth by General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolution; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; the Beijing Platform of Action; the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled "Women 2000: gender equality; development and peace for the twenty-first century", the Millennium Development Goals and other platforms of action emanating from conferences dealing with food security, human rights and sustainable development. The Director of the Institute has approached donors, Governments, private sector and international banks in order to identify donors' interest. 21. The services of consultants at INSTRAW have been contracted in full compliance with the guidelines set forth in administrative instruction ST/AI/1999/7 (recommendations AN2001/67/1/10-13). Estimated operational budget for the Institute's core activities for 2005 Main object of expenditure Technical strategic areas Strategic area institutional development Administration and support services Total Executive Board meeting Professional post salaries General Services post salaries Travel to Board session Other official travel of staff Consultants Contractual services Maintenance of premises Rental, maintenance of equipment Communications Miscellaneous operating expenses Supplies, materials Acquisition of automation equipment Acquisition of office furniture and equipment Subtotal operating costs Programme support costs (4 per cent) Project profiles, 2005 (United States dollars) Title Possible interested countries Possible interested partners Estimated budget A. Strategic area: research 1. Gender perspectives in international remittances Egypt, El Salvador, Mexico, Philippines and others to be determined Inter-American Development Bank, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, Pew Hispanic Center and other institutions to be determined 2. Combating the trafficking of women and girls Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Italy, Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, United States of America and Zambia International Organization for Migration, Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, European Union, International Human Rights Law Group, Women's Consortium of Nigeria, Anti-Slavery International -- Thomas Clarkson House, Heinrich Böll Foundation, Hivos, Esperanza Foundation/Colombia and Spain, Foundation for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Child Labour, All African Women for Peace, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Division for the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat, United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, Cooperazione Italiana, Foundation for Women/Thailand, among others 3. Women's roles in conflict resolution and in establishing peace and democracy Colombia, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Haiti, India, Pakistan, Palestine, Rwanda and Zimbabwe World Food Programme (WFP), Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNFPA, UNICEF, European Union, women's networks and specialized non-governmental organizations 4. International migration of women Burkina Faso, Croatia, Dominican Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Haiti, Nepal, Mozambique, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Spain and United States of America IOM, Population Division of the Secretariat, DAW, Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, European Union, UNHCR, Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales, regional commissions of the Economic and Social Council, International Labour Organization (ILO), United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), Organization for Economic and Cooperation and Development 5. Gender perspectives in disarmament of small arms/light weapons Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Colombia, Croatia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Rwanda, South Africa and Sri Lanka Regional Disarmament Branch of the Secretariat, UNHCR, International Committee of the Red Cross, International Action Network on Small Arms, Norwegian Initiative on Small Arms Transfers, Small Arms Working Group, United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, African Union small arms project, United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, Oxfam 6. Cairo and beyond: reproductive rights and cultures Brazil, Ecuador, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, India, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Peru, Thailand, Viet Nam and Zambia UNFPA, United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), academic centres, women's groups, indigenous women's groups, health networks, Population Council, Ford Foundation, MacArthur Foundation 7. Social cohesion Latin America and the Caribbean European Union, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), International Fund for Agricultural Development, World Food Programme, UNFPA, UNIFEM, UNDP, UNICEF, UNESCO, national non-governmental organizations, women's organizations B. Strategic area -- information and communication 1. The use of information and communication technologies to strengthen gender perspectives in the dialogue between Governments, civil society and the international community Bangladesh, Barbados, Ecuador, Nigeria, Poland, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia and Tunisia UNESCO, women's organizations, regional commissions of the Economic and Social Council, International Telecommunication Union, UNFPA, UNIFEM, IDB and other regional banks, World Bank, bilateral development agencies, Gates Foundation 2. Creation of communication networks for indigenous women in Latin America Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Peru Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, European Union, UNFPA, World Bank, Tribal Link Foundation, UNESCO, Institute for Connectivity in the Americas (ICA) 3. Regional and global media campaigns on women's rights 6 countries (on average) from each of the following regions: Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean and the Middle East International Planned Parenthood Federation (worldwide), Ford Foundation (worldwide), MacArthur Foundation (Eastern Europe, India, Mexico, Nigeria, Russian Federation), EngenderHealth (worldwide), UNFPA (all regions), UNIFEM, WHO, European Union, regional and international women and health networks, international non-governmental organizations such as Catholics for the Right to Choose, Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN), academia 4. Announcements for marriage and sexual services on the Internet from a human rights perspective Women's Centres of British Columbia, Center for Sexual Studies (Columbia University), human rights groups, legal centres, UNESCO, etc. 5. Increasing indigenous women's connectivity for development in the Americas Guatemala, Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru and Mexico United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance, Tecnólogico de Monterrey, women's indigenous organizations, ICA C. Strategic area -- capacity-building/training 1. Strengthening the use of gender mainstreaming materials, tools, approaches. FAO, ILO, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA, UNIFEM, academic institutions, civil society networks 2. Strengthening women's political participation in local government Argentina, Barbados, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Morocco, Mozambique, Pakistan, Paraguay, Romania, Spain and United Republic of Tanzania Local governments and national women's machinery, associations of local municipals, national statistical institutes, women's networks, UNFPA, Inter-Parliamentary Union, UNIFEM, IDB, World Bank, regional banks, bilateral development agencies 3. Advocacy to increase the visibility of women's leadership and presence in public spheres Dominican Republic International Women's Health Coalition, Latin American Network of Women, CAPRA Networks, DAWN, Catholics for a Free Choice, Center for Development and Population Activities, Summit of the Americas, Center for Reproductive Rights, Latin American and Caribbean Committee for the Defense of Women's Rights, UNFPA, UNIFEM, UNICEF, World Health Organization (WHO), Reproductive Health Matters, Population Council, IPPF, Ford Foundation, MacArthur Foundation 4. Discussion forums on specific themes Virtual space in the Internet coordinated by INSTRAW United Nations system: Division for the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat, ILO, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, UNFPA, UNIFEM, WHO; non-governmental organizations such as DAWN, women's networks, academic institutes and centres, Ford Foundation, MacArthur Foundation, IPPF, youth centres, government organizations 