%%%APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|

Fifty-ninth session Agenda item 17 (c) Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments: confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mrs. Denisa Hutanová (Slovakia) 1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2004, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-ninth session the item entitled "Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments: confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee". 2. At its 21st meeting, on 5 November, the Fifth Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Note by the Secretary-General concerning vacancies in the membership of the Investments Committee that would occur as a result of the expiration of the term of office of three of its members on 31 December 2004 (A/59/103); (b) Note by the Secretary-General in which, in accordance with the provisions of article 20 of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, the Secretary-General, after consultation with the Standing Committee of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, submitted for confirmation by the General Assembly the reappointment of three persons as members of the Investments Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2005 (A/C.5/59/7). 3. At the same meeting, the Fifth Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend to the General Assembly that it confirm the appointment of William J. McDonough (United States of America), Hélène Ploix (France) and Jürgen Reimnitz (Germany) as members of the Investments Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2005 (see para. 5). 4. Also at the same meeting, the Committee was informed, in document A/C.5/59/7, of the resignation of Ahmed Abdullatif (Saudi Arabia), effective December 2004, and, in accordance with the recommendation contained in paragraph 4 thereof, the Committee confirmed the transformation of the appointment of Khaya Ngqula (South Africa) from that of an ad hoc member to that of a regular member in order to fill the remainder of Mr. Abdullatif's term, which is due to expire on 31 December 2006 (see para. 6). Recommendations of the Fifth Committee 5. The Fifth Committee recommends that the General Assembly confirm the appointment by the Secretary-General of the following persons as members of the Investments Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2005: Mr. William J. McDonough (United States of America) Ms. Hélène Ploix (France) Mr. Jürgen Reimnitz (Germany) 6. The Fifth Committee also recommends that the General Assembly confirm the appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Khaya Ngqula (South Africa) as a member of the Investments Committee for a term of office beginning in December 2004 and expiring on 31 December 2006. 