%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TRUCE SUPERVISION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|SUPPORT SERVICES|MILITARY ASPECTS|INTERNATIONAL POLICE|MINE CLEARANCE|CEASEFIRES|

Fifty-ninth session * A/59/50 and Corr.1. Item 112 of the preliminary list* Programme planning Proposed strategic framework for the period 2006-2007 Part two: biennial programme plan Programme 4 Peacekeeping operations Contents Page Overall orientation Subprogramme 1. Operations Subprogramme 2. Mission support Subprogramme 3. Military Subprogramme 4. Civilian police Subprogramme 5. Mine-action coordination Subprogramme 6. Peacekeeping missions Legislative mandates 4.1 The purpose of the programme is to support the maintenance of peace and security through the deployment of peacekeeping operations in accordance with and by authority derived from the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. The mandates of the programme are provided in resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. 4.2 The programme closely coordinates six interdependent and complementary subprogrammes (Office of Operations, Office of Mission Support, Military Division, Civilian Police Division, Mine Action Coordination and Peacekeeping Missions) and integrates cross-cutting responsibilities. Programme strategies are based on the development of capacities to address a wide variety of conflict situations and the need to plan, establish, manage and direct peacekeeping operations. A rapid and effective response to Security Council and General Assembly mandates is crucial for supporting the implementation of peace agreements between the parties to a conflict. Peacekeeping mandates may include the monitoring of ceasefires and buffer zones; disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating ex-combatants; reforming military establishments; training, advising, and monitoring police forces; creating security conditions conducive to the return of refugees and internally displaced populations; promoting electoral and judicial reform and assisting civil administrations; facilitating political processes to consolidate peace and legitimate government authority; coordinating economic rehabilitation and mine-clearance programmes; and facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Missions may also be mandated to maintain law and order and assume responsibility for a transitional administration or executive law enforcement, including criminal justice functions. The programme serves as the lead department in the implementation of integrated mandates, including multisectoral assistance operations, and provides logistical and administrative support, in addition to demining coordination. Regional approaches to peacekeeping, in terms of peacekeeping capacity, political strategies and common support to multiple operations, will be pursued when appropriate. 4.3 The programme will inform Member States on all phases of peacekeeping operations, paying particular attention to the requirements of troop and police contributors, which need to make informed decisions on their participation in peacekeeping missions. Special attention will be given to the safety and security of peacekeepers in the field. Careful consideration will also be given to gender and geographical balance in the staffing of peacekeeping operations. 4.4 Meeting the complex and evolving challenges of modern peacekeeping requires an integrated approach and greater coordination within the United Nations system and with external peacekeeping partners, including international financial institutions and regional organizations, to enhance the ability of the international community to maintain peace and security. To increase the programme's effectiveness, the research, analysis, review and application of peacekeeping best practices and lessons learned will continue, as will continued emphasis on proper conduct and tailored training for all peacekeeping personnel. In addition, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will continue its gender mainstreaming strategy, aimed at providing better policies and programmes that take fully into account the impact of peacekeeping operations on women, men, girls and boys. This will entail the incorporation of gender perspectives in all peacekeeping activities, from the initial planning stages to the liquidation of a mission, as well as ensuring adequate gender expertise at Headquarters and in the field. 4.5 The programme will provide substantive and technical support to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, including follow-up on decisions related to peacekeeping operations taken by the Security Council and the General Assembly. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations will implement the recommendations of the Special Committee, as endorsed by the General Assembly. Subprogramme 1 Operations Objective of the Organization: Effective implementation of Security Council mandates to plan, establish and manage peacekeeping operations Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat Indicators of achievement (a) Informed decision-making on issues related to peacekeeping by the Security Council, General Assembly, other intergovernmental bodies and troop-contributing countries (a) (i) Security Council resolutions incorporate recommendations for establishing new, or adjusting existing, peacekeeping operations (b) Effective and efficient direction and support for peacekeeping operations (b) (i) Relevant benchmarks of mission or mandate implementation are met (ii) The number of structural arrangements with/among regional organizations to promote regional peacekeeping capacities Strategy 4.6 The Office of Operations will continue to perform its core functions of providing timely advice and analysis to the Security Council, the General Assembly, intergovernmental bodies and troop-contributing countries on peacekeeping issues and on the integrated planning, effective direction of and support for peacekeeping operations through, inter alia, the provision of policy and operational guidance, security management and gender mainstreaming. 4.7 In that context, the Office of Operations will coordinate integrated mission planning processes, promote regional peacekeeping capacity and organizational relationships and focus on partnerships to address cross-cutting issues. Objective of the Organization: To staff, finance and equip United Nations peacekeeping and related operations to fulfil their mandates, as authorized by the Security Council and the General Assembly (a) Reduction of the time required to plan, rapidly deploy and establish peacekeeping and other operations in response to Security Council mandates (a) (i) A fully functional mission of up to 5,000 personnel within 90 days of a Security Council mandate (ii) 100% readiness of strategic deployment stocks (SDS) (b) Increased efficiency and effectiveness of peace operations (b) (i) Average mission vacancy rates of less than 7% for international staff and less than 5% for national staff (ii) 95% of all planned immediate operational requirements (IORs) achieved on target date (iii) The number of support models that are used in support of peace operations 4.8 Within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the substantive responsibility for this subprogramme is vested in the Office of Mission Support. The activities of the Office include ongoing support to peacekeeping and other operations in the areas of personnel, finance, logistics and communications. The subprogramme will enable missions to sustain themselves effectively and efficiently for the fulfilment of their mandates, respond to changing circumstances on the ground or changes in mandate and provide assistance and services when missions are unable to do so themselves. The subprogramme will continually monitor and provide policy guidance and oversight to the delivery of mission support. The subprogramme will also work towards the effective management of field missions. To that end, the subprogramme will enhance resource planning and improve project management techniques and processes, including the development of a repertoire of replicable support models for a variety of strategic conditions in launching, sustaining and liquidating missions. The subprogramme will also work towards ensuring operational readiness and will prioritize the timely deployment of financial, personnel and material resources, as well as enhance its capacity rapidly to deploy a fully effective mission to areas of operation. It will strengthen and support the operational capacities of the Department by managing and coordinating training and career development for civilian staff in field missions. Concerted efforts will be made to improve gender balance and geographical distribution in the staffing of field missions. Subprogramme 3 Military Objective of the Organization: To implement the military aspects of Security Council mandates effectively (a) Reduction of the time required to plan, rapidly deploy and establish the military component of peacekeeping operations in response to Security Council mandates (a) (i) Deployment of military components within the timelines planned for specific operations (ii) Increased commitments by Member States for capacities to enable force deployment and sustainment (b) Increased efficiency and effectiveness of the military components of peacekeeping operations (b) (i) Increase in the number of standardized interfaces in use with peacekeeping partners. (ii) All Military Observers and Staff Officers complete Department of Peacekeeping Operations or nationally recognized training prior to deployment to field missions 4.9 Within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the substantive responsibility for this subprogramme is vested in the Military Division. To meet the objectives, operational plans must be in place for the military components of potential and current peacekeeping operations, as must be appropriately trained and rapidly deployable personnel and other military resources. The activities of the subprogramme will include: the preparation of operational plans for military components of peacekeeping operations, such as contingency plans for potential, ongoing or closing operations; the generation of military forces, observers and Headquarters staff for deployment, including pre-deployment assessments, coordination of deployments and rotations of the military components of missions; daily monitoring of and support to the military components of peacekeeping operations; and the conduct and coordination of peacekeeping training activities for deploying uniformed personnel of Member States. Consideration to relevant gender dimensions will be given in undertaking these activities. 4.10 The subprogramme will provide military advice to peacekeeping partners within and outside the programme and will develop closer linkages with regional organizations, including the African Union, the European Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and others, on all military peacekeeping issues. The subprogramme will produce policies and papers on the employment of military capability in support of peacekeeping objectives and will liaise closely with peacekeeping partners to standardize approaches. To enhance the Organization's capacity to respond to conflicts, effective rapid deployment mechanisms and the immediate availability of military contingents and personnel to deploy to new operations is essential. A review of the United Nations Standby Arrangements mechanisms will therefore be ongoing. Subprogramme 4 Civilian police Objective of the Organization: To support and enable national police institutions in post-conflict societies to develop sustainable police services in accordance with United Nations criminal justice standards (a) Reduction of the time required to plan, rapidly deploy and establish police components of peacekeeping operations in response to Security Council mandates (a) (i) Reduction in number of days to deploy civilian police components (ii) Increase in the number of States contributing to the police persons on call roster (b) Increased efficiency and effectiveness of the police components of peacekeeping operations (b) (i) All benchmarks for Civilian Police Division, once established for mission or mandate implementation, are achieved 4.11 Within the Department, the substantive responsibility for this subprogramme is vested in the Civilian Police Division. In a post-conflict society the re-establishment and strengthening of the national internal security apparatus and institutions is paramount for the creation of an environment for sustainable peace. In this regard, the Division develops comprehensive police plans for peacekeeping operations that consider the judicial and correctional systems in place; the interrelation between the police, judiciary and corrections institutions; the nature of criminal procedures and laws in effect; and the relevant gender dimensions. The Division engages in partnerships for the development of national policing institutions, particularly with the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Through the standardization of mission oversight, the provision of strategic advice and guidance and the engagement of partners at Headquarters, the Civilian Police Division assists missions with the implementation of mandates that range from monitoring, training, mentoring, assisting and advising local police, as well as performing executive policing functions, when mandated. 4.12 Through the active engagement of Member States, the Division will continue to refine the recruitment process and to ensure that police officers with the required skills, including female officers, are recruited according to the needs of each mission. The Division will also ensure that police-contributing countries are provided with comprehensive training programmes for delivery at national police training institutions, as well as pre-deployment training materials. 4.13 The Civilian Police Division will act as a repository for civilian police peacekeeping issues. To enhance the development of institutional memory and expertise and the dissemination of lessons learned and best practices, the Division will actively engage regional and subregional organizations on all aspects of policing issues. It will also strengthen its engagement with Member States and regional peacekeeping training centres on current training practices, policing standards, training policy and material. In addition, the Division will continue to develop partnerships with police services, police colleges, research and academic institutions, police associations and others. Subprogramme 5 Mine-action coordination Objective of the Organization: To reduce the threat to individuals and communities from landmines and unexploded ordnance (a) Increased efficiency and effectiveness of mine-action operations (a) (i) Reduction in the number of mine victims in countries/territories where the United Nations Mine Action Service has programmes (ii) Reduction in the number of demining accidents in countries/territories where the Mine Action Service has programmes (iii) All benchmarks for the phases of initiation, development and devolution of the United Nations support to national mine-action programmes are met (b) Reduction of the time required to plan, rapidly deploy and establish peacekeeping and mine-action operations in response to Security Council mandates (b) (i) Deployment of mine-action assets within 30 days of Security Council resolution (c) Improved coordination of the United Nations response to the threats posed by landmines and explosive remnants of war (ERW) through strategic guidance, advocacy and resources mobilization (c) (i) All relevant benchmarks for the implementation of objectives of the United Nations mine-action strategy (2005-2009) are met (ii) All relevant benchmarks for the implementation of objectives of the United Nations mine-action advocacy strategy are met (iii) Receipt of at least 75% of the funding requirements of the United Nations, as contained in the annual portfolio of mine-action projects 4.14 The substantive responsibility for this subprogramme is vested in the United Nations Mine Action Service, which is the coordinating body in the United Nations for mine action. The Service will work with other United Nations and non-governmental organization partners to assist affected nations to develop local mine-action capacities; develop and manage mine-action programmes in support of peacekeeping missions or in humanitarian emergencies, when appropriate; develop policies and promulgate lessons learned in the areas of mine clearance, mine-risk education, victim assistance, advocacy and stockpile destruction; and coordinate the mobilization and administration of resources for mine action. It will also undertake assessment missions and surveys to establish priorities. The Mine Action Service will continue to oversee the development and implementation of internationally agreed standards that will provide a framework for efficient, effective and safer mine-action activities and provide guidance and coordination for the development of new mine-action technologies. It will produce, gather and disseminate information to aid mine action and to raise awareness of mine-related issues. Moreover, it will coordinate the implementation of the United Nations mine-action advocacy strategy, to strengthen the normative framework for the mine and explosive remnants of war (ERW) problem, as well as the rights of mine and ERW survivors; to promote integration of mine action throughout the work of the United Nations system; and to promote compliance by non-State actors with obligations and commitments on mine, ERW and survivors' rights matters. Consideration to relevant gender dimensions will be given in undertaking these activities. Subprogramme 6 Peacekeeping missions A. United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) Objective of the Organization: To observe and maintain the unconditional ceasefire and assist the parties to the 1949 Armistice Agreements in supervision of the application and observance of the terms of those agreements (a) The Security Council informed in timely manner of non-compliance with Security Council resolutions (a) (i) Timely submission of observation reports to Security Council 4.15 The mission will continue to provide trained military observers under the operational support command of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, assisting with the implementation of their respective mandates. It will continue its core functions of maintaining a minimum acceptable level of patrols, notwithstanding deterioration in the regional security situation. Moreover, it will continue mobile patrolling and will increase the number of observation patrols to ensure a greater presence in the areas of separation and Blue Line to deter all parties from any violation of the agreements. 4.16 The mission will continue to provide timely and accurate observation reports and analysis of political developments mission-wide, including safety and security situation. It will also continue to exercise command, administrative, logistical and security support to all outstations mission-wide. In addition, it will continue to use the good offices of the Head of Missions to strengthen and improve the relationships between Israel and its neighbouring countries. Moreover, the mission will continue to maintain and improve effective liaison with troop-contributing nations' ambassadorial and consular representatives, as well as regional United Nations organizations. Furthermore, it will continue to develop contingency planning to address changes in the military and/or political situation in the UNTSO area of operation. B. United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) Objective of the Organization: To observe developments pertaining to the strict compliance with the ceasefire of 17 December 1971 in accordance with Security Council resolution 307 (1971) (a) Supervision of the ceasefire in accordance with the mandate of the Security Council (a) (i) Timely submission of incident/violation reports to United Nations Headquarters (b) Effective, efficient patrolling, inspecting and investigation of complaints by the parties in areas near the Line of Control (b) (i) Number of operational patrols with free and secured access to notified areas (ii) Number of investigations of complaints undertaken 4.17 The United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan will continue to provide timely and detailed reports on relevant developments in the UNMOGIP area of operations in accordance with the implementation of its mandate. In addition, special ad hoc reports will be submitted immediately on developments of special importance when they occur. 4.18 UNMOGIP will continue to maintain military observers at all its operational field stations on both sides of the Line of Control (LOC), will conduct efficient patrols and effective inspections and investigations of the parties' complaints regarding possible LOC violations and, to the extent permitted by the host countries, perform field tasks in the vicinity of the LOC from the field stations. The number of United Nations Military Observers may be increased in field stations in some areas in accordance with operational requirements. The number of Military Observers at the headquarters on both sides of the LOC will be kept to a minimum. General Assembly resolutions 49/233 A and Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the 52/230 United Nations peacekeeping operations 55/271 Support account for peacekeeping operations 56/225 A and B Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping and 56/241 operations in all their aspects 57/290 A Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations 57/318 Support account for peacekeeping operations 57/336 Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping and operations in all their aspects 58/271 A-C Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 58/270 Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 56/219, Assistance in mine action 57/159 and A. United Nations Truce Supervision Organization Security Council resolutions 50 (1948) Resolution of 29 May 1948 54 (1948) Resolution of 15 July 1948 73 (1949) Resolution of 11 August 1949 B. United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan 39 (1948) Resolution of 20 January 1948 47 (1948) Resolution of 21 April 1948 91 (1951) Resolution of 30 March 1951 307 (1971) Resolution of 21 December 1971 