%%%SPACE RESEARCH|SPACE TECHNOLOGY|SATELLITES|SPACECRAFT LAUNCHINGS|REMOTE SENSING|EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS|METEOROLOGY|SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH|

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space: activities of Member States Note by the Secretariat* Addendum Contents Page Replies received from Member States Algeria Argentina Cuba Finland Germany Hungary Mexico Slovakia Turkey [Original: French] 1. In its first year, the Algerian Space Agency (ASAL) set itself the task of implementing a programme aimed at introducing space technologies and applications in the sustainable development process, using them in the preparation of national plans and/or regional projects in the planning and environment, agriculture, mining and petroleum geology, and telecommunication sectors. 2. In the field of infrastructure and technological facilities, Algeria plans to implement projects included in the national space programme, aided by international cooperation. The establishment of a unit for the development of microsatellites and Earth observation and telecommunication satellites is a priority. 3. Memorandums of understanding on cooperation have been concluded with Argentina and South Africa, focusing mainly on the transfer of know-how. Discussions are at an advanced stage with other countries, including France and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, on space technologies. 4. One of the first activities of ASAL was the organization in Algiers, on 14 and 15 July 2003, of an Algerian satellite (AlSAT-1) seminar for users with the objective of explaining to business circles the importance and usefulness of remote sensing -- through AlSAT-1 images -- for the gathering of knowledge and the monitoring of natural resources and the environment, land-use planning and the management of natural disasters. In addition to economic sector operators and national research institutions, space agencies at the international level took part in the scientific gathering, including those of Argentina, France, Nigeria, South Africa and the United Kingdom. 5. With the successful launching of the three microsatellites belonging to Nigeria, Turkey and the United Kingdom in September 2003, the constellation of satellites to which AlSAT-1 belongs is in the implementation stage. Coordination meetings of the Disaster Management Constellation have been held to decide on the mechanisms for exchanging data between the different systems. 6. ASAL has set up an integrated project concerning the reduction of earthquake risk, based mainly on space techniques, remote sensing and the Global Positioning System (GPS). Five research institutions concerned with such problems are involved in the implementation of this project, in which international partners are encouraged to participate. 7. The national institutions are the Centre for Research in Astronomy, Astrophysics and Geophysics, the National Centre for Space Technology (CNTS), the National Institute of Cartography and Remote Sensing (INCT), the National Earthquake Engineering Centre and the Centre for the Development of Advanced Technologies. On the international side, the School and Observatory of Earth Sciences in Strasbourg, France, the Earth Sciences Department of the University of Trieste (Italy) and the company Atlantis Scientific Inc. (Canada) are ready to contribute towards the success of this project. 8. The use of active, passive, medium, high and very-high resolution sensing for the preparation of detailed thematic cartographic material is envisaged. A seismic monitoring network based on GPS positioning techniques has been designed. About 40 permanent GPS stations will thus cover the northern part of Algeria, which is subject to relatively high earthquake risk. 9. Regarding forest fires, a quasi-continuous programme for the monitoring of forest areas was set up by ASAL during the summer of 2003. Thanks to AlSAT-1 data, a precise quantification has been carried out that has allowed the assessment of damage in an area where more than 30,000 hectares of forest have been affected by fires. 10. A project aimed at equipping services such as the Directorates-General for Forests and for Civil Defence with observation and monitoring units based on the use of satellite data is being implemented. 11. With regard to land-use planning, an agreement has been reached by the Ministry of Land-Use Planning and the Environment and ASAL. It provides for the use of satellite imagery in general, and AlSAT-1 data in particular, in the drawing up of national and regional plans for land use. 12. ASAL has begun considering the implementation of a teaching programme focused on space technology for the Ministry of National Education, intended for schools and training institutes. ASAL also intends to organize open days for secondary school students in order to introduce them to space sciences. 13. CNTS, a centre of excellence for graduate and postgraduate education, contributes to strengthening national capacity in the space field by training engineers and technicians in geographical sciences and preparing graduates for a master's degree in space technology. The Centre had planned to resume offering a master's degree in space instrumentation in the academic year 2003/04. 14. Agreements have been reached by ASAL and the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research concerning procedures for making AlSAT-1 data available to the university community (teachers, research workers and students). Their objective is to encourage the use of AlSAT-1 images and remote sensing in the faculties and laboratories of Algerian universities. 15. CNTS is the pilot agency for the awareness-raising programme entitled "space technologies and applications", which is one of the national research programmes. CNTS has also been entrusted with more than 20 research and development projects in areas relating to microsatellite technologies, space instrumentation, satellite-based location and positioning, Earth observation and space information. 16. Several topographic maps on the scale of 1:200,000 have been produced from Landsat 7 images. INCT has introduced remote-sensing images in the process of revising maps for the Saharan part of Algeria. Tests using AlSAT-1 data in map revision on this scale have been completely successful. 17. In the context of a project for the unification of North African geodetic reference systems -- a component of the African Reference System project resulting from a recommendation of the Economic Commission for Africa -- Algeria took an active part in the third workshop, which was held in Rabat in October. 18. The recommendations of this workshop confirmed those of the second workshop, held in Algiers in 2001. They concerned the establishment of permanent GPS stations and the adoption of the international geodetic system known as the International Terrestrial Reference Frame. INCT, in cooperation with CNTS, is responsible for managing the project. 19. As a member, Algeria has participated actively in the work of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as well as in the groups responsible for the implementation of the recommendations of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III). 20. Algeria began the process of acceding to the legal instruments governing space activities, including the five United Nations outer space treaties, and is making preparations for the introduction of national legislation to implement them. 21. Regarding the implementation of the recommendations of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 2002, Algeria began work on several projects utilizing space technologies and geographical information systems as research tools in integrated development projects on the basis of the norms in force with regard to environmental protection. 22. Algeria celebrated World Space Week from 8 to 10 October 2003 in Constantine (in eastern Algeria) with an event organized by the Sirius Astronomy Association (a non-governmental organization). National institutions such as ASAL, the University of Constantine, CNTS and INCT took part. [Original: Spanish] 1. The National Commission on Space Activities (CONAE) of Argentina carried out several activities associated with the peaceful uses of outer space in 2003. These are described below. 2. The first meeting of the scientific working group of CONAE and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America on their joint mission known as SAC-D/Aquarius (Satélite de Aplicaciones Científicas/Aquarius), was held in Mar del Plata from 18 to 20 March. 3. The first technical meeting of CONAE and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the United States was held in Buenos Aires on 20 and 21 May. The aim of that meeting was to analyse possible areas of cooperation between the two institutions. 4. CONAE and the Centre national d'études spatiales (CNES) of France held a working meeting on floods at the Gulich Institute for Advanced Space Studies in Cordoba Province from 2 to 4 July. The meeting resulted in the establishment of a cooperation project to develop early-warning tools for floods using space-based information. 5. A symposium on space technology applications for health was held at the Gulich Institute and at the Argentine Ministry of Health in Buenos Aires from 7 to 11 July. The symposium was organized by CONAE, the Ministry of Health and CNES. Its aim was to develop new epidemiological surveillance tools and to investigate and develop methods for monitoring public health and the environment using space-based information to construct early-warning systems, including modelling. It resulted in the establishment of a cooperation project with two main thrusts: (a) monitoring of leishmaniasis, hantavirus, Argentine haemorrhagic fever and malaria; and (b) a study of dengue fever in Salta Province. The work will be concentrated in the subtropical zone of northern Argentina and the pampa húmeda (wetlands) zone. 6. An expert workshop on space technology for flood and fire disaster management was held at the Gulich Institute. The meeting, jointly organized by CONAE, the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs and the European Space Agency (ESA), was attended by experts from the region who worked on the establishment of a cooperation project to develop early-warning tools for floods and fires in the region. It was attended by participants from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Peru, along with representatives from Ecuador, France, Mexico, Spain, Venezuela and ESA. 7. Three years after the launch of Argentina's Earth-observing satellite SAC-C and the formation of the Morning Constellation, consisting of SAC-C and Landsat 7, Earth Observing-1 and Terra of the United States, the researchers met to present their project findings in Buenos Aires from 3 to 5 December. Participation in international initiatives 8. CONAE acceded to the open initiative of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and ESA on the use of space technologies to support the Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage at a ceremony in Paris on 16 July, and is already designing two projects connected with the Iguazú National Park and the Inca Trail (Qhapac Ñan). 9. CONAE acceded to the International Charter on Cooperation to Achieve the Coordinated Use of Space Facilities in the Event of Natural or Technological Disasters at a ceremony held in Paris on 16 July. CONAE participates by providing SAC-C satellite images (multispectral medium-resolution scanner, high-sensibility and high-resolution technological cameras) and the services of the Cordoba terrestrial station when necessary. Through the Gulich Institute, it also allows for the participation of researchers from the agencies forming the federal emergency system. 10. CONAE presented a project proposal for the development of early-warning tools related to emergencies and health at the meeting of the Education, Science and Technology Working Group of the Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation held in San José on 11 and 12 August. 11. Argentina also participated in the Earth Observation Summit on 1 August in Washington, D.C. CONAE is a member of the ad hoc Group on Earth Observations. 1. The accession of Cuba as a full member of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in late 2001, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 56/51 of 10 December 2001, was an incentive for all organizations and institutions working on the development of space activities in the country. 2. The space research and applications carried out in Cuba in 2003, described below, have provided a valuable contribution to progress in the country's sustainable development. 1. Space meteorology 3. In November 2001, a Swiss high-resolution picture transmission/geostationary operational environmental satellite (HRPT-GOES) Skyceiver station was installed at the Institute of Meteorology of the Ministry of Science, Technology and the Environment to receive signals from circumpolar and geostationary satellites. This new acquisition represents a remarkable technological advance that has revolutionized the reception and processing of satellite images. 4. Cuba can now obtain images with a spatial resolution of 1 kilometre and a temporal resolution of 15 minutes, which permits high-precision tracking and monitoring of weather systems. Images are currently received from the satellites of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the United States of America and the geostationary operational environmental satellites, which provide an extensive range of data. 5. The images produced by this new technology have made it possible to diagnose and monitor weather systems and to track their movements in greater detail. The spatial and temporal resolution achieved by the new Skyceiver station has significantly improved knowledge of the morphology and structure of weather systems and has provided the information necessary to identify their position, morphology, intensification, weakening, direction and speed of travel. This ensures the preparation of high-quality daily forecasts and special warnings. 6. The new images were successfully used to monitor tropical cyclones during the cyclone season of 2002/03 and provided decisive diagnostic and forecasting information at crucial times during those events. 7. The images also improved the conditions under which frontal systems could be monitored and made it possible to establish factors associated with increased or diminished activity and to predict future movements. 2. Remote sensing 8. The images received at the installed HRPT-GOES Skyceiver station have been very useful for important activities such as Earth remote sensing and environmental monitoring and control. 9. Forest fires can be identified 24 hours a day and their size and movement determined by calibrating channel 1 and 3 images, with the result that the area involved can be defined with greater accuracy and hot spots in the images can be detected with relative precision. 10. During 2002 and 2003, a large number of forest fires were detected. This provided the forest ranger corps with timely and accurate information, permitting rapid detection and extinction and thus preventing substantial financial loss and environmental damage. 11. Satellite imagery was also used to monitor dust storms originating in the Sahara, which move westward over the Atlantic. By determining their speed of travel, it was possible to predict the time of their arrival in the Lesser Antilles and their movement until they reached the east coast of Cuba. 12. A system has been acquired for the specific determination of solar radiation by means of low-resolution images, and software is currently being developed to measure solar radiation with high-resolution images, which will make it possible to plot maps of this magnitude. 13. Work is also being carried out on developing software to detect the dumping of hydrocarbons in the vicinity of Cuba by means of satellite images obtained with the new equipment. 14. In 2003, work proceeded on enhancing the use of satellite imagery for topographical and thematic purposes through the assimilation of new types of images and specially designed software and on devising basic methodologies and technologies that can be used by industry, teaching bodies and scientific institutes to address geoscientific and engineering tasks. 15. The airborne video system and video map production technology have been developed as low-cost alternatives for various operational studies. Methodologies have been devised for producing space maps and orthoimages and updating medium-scale topographical maps, all of which improve the remote-sensing services available and extend their field of application. 16. Work is being undertaken on technologies for space-time studies of hydrographic basins and specific applications have been carried out in support of precision agriculture, as well as studies of forest cover and integrated mountain development. 17. Progress was made in the training of specialists, through bachelor's and master's degree courses and the inclusion of remote sensing in some engineering curricula. Work began on establishing a national project aimed at introducing this specialization in agronomy study programmes. 18. In 2003, work continued on the characterization of the space-time variability of the surface temperature in waters of the continental shelf and seas adjacent to Cuba using space images with greater space and time coverage from the advanced very-high-resolution radiometer on board the NOAA-12 and NOAA-14 satellites. 19. With the use of images from the Landsat 7 satellite, space maps of the south Cuban platform, covering the Canarreos and Jardines de la Reina archipelagos, have continued to be generated with a view to determining the location of coral reefs. 3. Space sciences 20. In the area of space sciences, the Institute of Geophysics and Astronomy of the Ministry of Science, Technology and the Environment continued its optical and radioastronomical observations of the Sun and its monitoring of the ionosphere and geomagnetic field in Cuba. The data obtained continued to be relayed to centres around the world. 21. By accessing the many databases posted on the Internet containing astronomical observations carried out in various countries, several major comets have been studied using existing visual observations. 22. Some characteristics of the Hyakutake (1996), Hale-Bopp (1997), S4 (LINEAR) (1999) and A2 (LINEAR) (2001) comets were determined. In the case of the latter, its light curve was defined on the basis of 758 observations in 25 countries, including Cuba. Its absolute magnitude was found and from this value the maximum size of its nucleus was calculated at 7 plus or minus 2.5 kilometres. For all the objects analysed, there was a significant change in the rate of brightening, a phenomenon that occurs at a distance of between 1.5 and 4 astronomical units from the Sun. This moment, known as the point of water outgassing, determines the star's apparent subsequent brightness. 23. During the period under review, research continued on the relationship between the Sun and the Earth and, in particular, on coronal mass ejections (CMEs), solar phenomena that are responsible for most of the perturbations in geospace. 24. CMEs, which may be classified in various ways, were analysed when occurring at short time intervals and resulting from the same magnetic scenario, namely, successive emissions (components) of a single event. The CMEs with successive emissions that were studied provided information of fundamental importance in the diagnosis and forecasting of the climate of circumterrestrial space. 25. In the area of the Earth-Sun relationship, research continued on solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. With the use of non-linear analysis techniques, time series of component z of the interplanetary magnetic field and component x of the solar wind flow velocity were studied during the occurrence of magnetic clouds and in the hours before their arrival. The results obtained made it possible to estimate the predominant physical mechanism during the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling (in particular magnetic reconnection and viscous interaction) and to analyse plasma dynamics during the occurrence of each event. 26. The variations in the equatorial and low-latitude ionosphere in parts of the Americas and Asia-Oceania were studied using data obtained by vertical sounding from Earth at the F2 layer critical frequency from 14 ionospheric stations located within an American sector at around 75° W between latitudes 36.6° S and 32.2° N and from 19 ionospheric stations in the region of Asia (11) and Oceania (8) close to meridian 120° E and in the latitude range from 34.7° S to 49.6° N. The variability indices were calculated in accordance with the recommendations of the 2002 International Reference Ionosphere Task Force Activity. The study made it possible to establish the variability behaviour of foF2 (the highest frequency which will reflect from the main (F2) layer of the ionosphere on a vertical propagation path) in the regions examined. 4. Distance learning 27. Distance learning has become more widely established in Cuba through the broadcasting of courses on television on a number of subjects at different educational levels and through lectures specializing in various topics, which help to improve the general knowledge and culture of the population at large. This has been aided by the distribution of televisions and video recorders to all primary and secondary schools in Cuba. 5. World Space Week 28. World Space Week was marked in Cuba by a large number of activities, including the official opening ceremony at the National Museum of Natural History under the auspices of the Ministry of Science, Technology and the Environment, the showing of films and videos on space with commentaries by experts from the Institute of Geophysics and Astronomy, the organization of night-time observations with manual telescopes by local amateur groups and the holding of the Second National Workshop on Outer Space and Its Peaceful Uses at the national capitol. [Original: English] 1. Administration 1. The Finnish bodies involved in space activities and the new Finnish space strategy are fully described in document A/AC.105/788. 2. There are 50 companies and research units in Finland that do business in satellite equipment supply chains or study space technology. There are seven universities in Finland that study remote sensing or space science. Navigation technology and new services are developed by 30 companies and 7 research units in Finland. More information can be obtained by accessing the following websites: www.tekes.fi/eng/publications/Space_Directory_2003.pdf www.tekes.fi/eng/publications/Mobile_Location_Directory_Finland.pdf 2. Outlook 3. The history of Finland's space activity and its outlook are fully described in document A/AC.105/788. 3. Budget trend 4. The Finnish space budget has remained the same since 1995, although the share devoted to European Space Agency (ESA) programmes has increased. The contribution of ESA accounted for the main part of the budget in 2003. State parliamentary elections were held in March 2003. For the next few years, the Finnish space budget will remain at a constant level. 5. Finnish space funding comes mainly from the National Technology Agency (Tekes). Its contribution amounted to 19 million euros (Euro) in 2003. Several other ministries also fund space activities. 4. National activities 6. Finland's main interests in space are described fully in document A/AC.105/788. 7. Finland participates in the joint ESA-European Union (EU) Galileo programme. Navigation and location-based services are expected to play a key role in third-generation mobile telecommunication network services. Finland's financial contribution to the development of the European satellite navigation constellation is about Euro15 million, allowing for significant industrial participation in the satellite and ground segments of Galileo. In addition to investments in Galileo, large investments are foreseen in the development of end-user technologies and applications, taking full benefit of the interoperability of the Global Positioning System (GPS) and Galileo. 8. The Antares space science programme is described in document A/AC.105/788. The total cost of the programme is about Euro17 million. 9. AVALI is a space technology programme pushing Finnish industry into commercial space in the sectors of satellite navigation, telecommunications and remote sensing. Spin-offs, namely, on-ground applications of space technology, are important aspects of this programme, which started in 2002 and will continue until 2005. The total cost of the programme is at least Euro15 million. 10. New programmes are being planned in the fields of satellite remote sensing and space science. 5. Ongoing international programmes and projects 11. Finnish involvement in ongoing international space programmes and projects is shown in the table below. Finnish involvement in international space programmes and projects Organization or country Finnish involvement European Space Agency Atmospheric dynamics mission -- Aeolus Power supply units, instrument electronics Cluster II Power supply units, two instruments CryoSat Power supply units Environmental satellite Participation in global ozone monitoring by occultation of stars instrument: global ozone measurement equipment data processor upgrade and ground segment Galileo (Global Navigation Satellite System-2) Participation in pre-development Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Mission On-board software Herschel Primary mirror polishing Huygens Saturn's Titan moon lander: radio altimeter and atmospheric instrumentation Integral Participation in the Joint European X-ray Monitor (2 detector units), flight software validation Mars Express Power supply units, participation in instruments Meteosat Second Generation On-board software validation MetOp-1 Power supply units for global ozone measurement equipment Planck Participation in low-frequency instrument; cryostat control unit Rosetta Primary structure, power distribution system's units, contributions instruments Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology Space potential, electron and dust experiment instrument; demonstration of a compact imaging X-ray spectrometer/X-ray solar monitors Soil Moisture and Ocean Salinity Participation in radiometer instrument Solar and Heliosphere Observatory Two instruments: Costep-Erne particle analysis collaboration and solar wind anisotropies Venus Express Power supply units, participation in the energetic neutral atoms analyser instrument X-ray Multi-Mirror Mission Newton Telescope tube structure and mirror thermal control unit Belgium/ESA Space debris detectors and their data-processing units on project for on-board autonomy mission Canada Radarsat, etc.; remote-sensing-related collaboration Denmark On-board data handling unit for Roemer spacecraft Sweden Microwave instrument on the Odin satellite France/ESA Participation in NetLander Mars landers for the Centre national d'études spatiales (CNES) 2009 mission; mission cancelled by CNES; work also discontinued in Finland Netherlands/United States of America (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) (NASA) Ozone-monitoring instrument on the NASA Earth Observing System Aura spacecraft Italy X-ray instrument hardware for the X-ray astronomy satellite United States/NASA NASA two wide-angle imaging neutral-atom spectrometer mechanisms NASA Cassini mechanisms, participation in the Cassini plasma spectrometer instrument NASA high-energy transient explorer II X-ray instrument International Space Station debris instrument NASA Contour; instrument participation: mission failure after launch in 2002 NASA near Earth asteroid rendezvous X-ray instrument: mission ended successfully in 2001 NASA Stardust instrument participation NASA magnetospheric multiscale instrument participation Japan International Space Station X-ray instrument Russian Federation Silicon X-ray array for spectrum-X-gamma: project in hibernation Radioastron very-long-base interferometry instrument: project in hibernation MetLander Mars landers China, France, Germany, Italy, Russian Federation, Spain, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States Alpha magnetic spectrometer; particle physics experiment on the International Space Station (search for antimatter) Finland: silicon tracker, ground support and data handling 12. Finland's space debris research activities are fully described in document A/AC.105/817. Goals and Strategies 2003, the German Aerospace Centre's publication on its current research and development activities and programmes, published in June 2003, will be distributed during the forty-first session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to be held from 16 to 27 February 2004. 1. There are three entities involved in the governing of space activities in Hungary, which share tasks as follows: (a) The Hungarian Space Office, an independent government office established in 1992, presently under the supervision of the Minister for Informatics and Communications. Apart from the coordination of national space activities, the Office is in charge of conducting and coordinating the international space activities of Hungary, namely, relations with the European Space Agency (ESA), bilateral relations and relations with the United Nations, the European Union and the Space Agency Forum; (b) The Hungarian Space Board, an inter-ministerial body to help the work of the Minister in charge of supervising space activities. The Board drafts the cornerstones of Hungarian space activities; (c) The Scientific Council on Space Research, an advisory body of the Hungarian Space Office that provides scientific background on all Hungarian space activities. 2. Overview 2. Space activities in Hungary started during the 1950s, and then with the establishment by the Soviet Union of the Intercosmos programme, those activities evolved in a special direction. Hungary has been a member of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space since the establishment of that body in 1959. During the 1980s, Hungary started bilateral cooperation activities with Western European countries, mainly in the field of space science. 3. After the termination of the Intercosmos programme, Hungary entered into a general framework agreement with ESA, and with that ESA became the main focus of the country's space activities. 4. In 1998, Hungary became a full member of the Scientific Experiment Development Programme of ESA. In 2003, Hungary was granted European Cooperating State (ECS) status by ESA, which is a step towards gaining full membership in ESA after a preparation period. With its ECS status, Hungary can participate indirectly in almost all ESA programmes. Apart from its relations with ESA, Hungary has a government-level cooperation agreement with the United States of America and the Russian Federation and an agency-level cooperation agreement with the Indian, Polish, Romanian and Ukrainian space agencies. 5. With its new ECS status, the Hungarian Government has already increased its space budget, and now the ESA contribution accounts for the main part of that budget. The Hungarian space budget is funded by different sources: the ESA contribution comes from the Ministry of Informatics and Communications and the national activities are financed from the budget of the Ministries of Education, Agriculture and Informatics and Communications. 4. National and international scientific and technological activities 6. Space activities are mainly carried out by university departments and research institutions. Following are the main areas of work and the key activities conducted in each area: (a) Earth observation: (i) Remote sensing primarily in the area of agriculture and environmental protection/nature conservation; (ii) Remote sensing for yield estimation; (iii) Receiving and archiving the digital information from Meteosat and the satellites of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the United States to provide weather forecasters with the derived products and to carry out research and development work in the field of satellite meteorology; (iv) Synergistic use of synthetic aperture radar images and microwave radiometer data; (b) Navigation: (i) Terrestrial applications of the Navigation Satellite Timing and Ranging (Navstar) Global Positioning System in navigation, geodesy and geodynamics; (ii) Interference measurement of the satellite-based navigational system; (c) Science: (i) Participation in international very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) and space VLBI projects and exploration of space VLBI applications in the fields of geodesy and astrometry; (ii) Whistler and Trimpi research; (iii) Aeronomy (physics of the upper atmosphere); (iv) Physics of the magnetosphere; (v) Planetary exploration and studies; (vi) Non-linear analysis of the geomagnetic records of different time resolution; (vii) Investigation of the "fossil cosmic dust" of interstellar origin that occurred globally in the geological formations of the Permo-Triassic transition time; (viii) Space physics related to the magnetosphere of the Earth, the heliosphere, the interaction of solar wind with non-magnetic bodies and exploration of the magnetosphere of Jupiter and Saturn; (ix) Solar-terrestrial relationship; (x) Space-related solar research; (xi) Space astrophysics; (d) Technology: (i) Lander power subsystem; (ii) Advanced materials for neutron optics; (e) Life sciences: (i) Use of visual working ability tests in hypobaric hypoxia; (ii) Cardiovascular adaptation and readaptation in complex and simulated circumstances of stress; (iii) Investigation of changes in sensory functions due to readaptation following simulated and real space flight; (iv) The problem of optokinetic nystagmic disturbances in the model of microgravity; (v) Antiorthostatic position modelling microgravity; (vi) Changes in the brain's electric activity in the visual field and vestibular receptor stimulation; (vii) Investigations of adaptive mechanisms of striated muscle tissues in relation to space life sciences; (viii) Studies of adaptive changes of the motor control system, including related elementary neural mechanisms; (ix) Alterations of perceptual processes in a simulated hypoxic state; (x) Studies of the gravitational effect at the cellular level; (xi) Preparation of samples from uracil, bacteriophage T7 DNA and bacteriophage T7 suitable for flight on the International Space Station; (xii) Development of evaluation methods for changes induced by space parameters; (xiii) Aeromedical diagnostic and qualification work on the development of new examination methods and scientific research activity in the fields of space psychology and space medicine; (xiv) International Space Station dosimetry programme; (f) Microgravity: (i) Heat conductivity measurement system upgrade; (ii) Universal multizone crystallizator modular upgrade; (iii) Microstructure formation in casting of technical alloys under diffusive and magnetically controlled convective conditions; (iv) Modelling and study of nucleation and phase selection in magnetic and refractory alloys. 5. Educational and outreach activities 7. Apart from the scientific and technological activities, education and outreach are of the utmost importance in Hungary at the moment. The Hungarian Astronautical Society is in charge of the basic organizational work, namely the annual space camp, student essay contest and other conferences. The Hungarian Space Office deals with the dissemination of information on ESA educational programmes. It also organizes the annual national Space Day and the annual Space Youth Forum. Every year the Office publishes a book containing the annual reports, and every two years it publishes a version of that book in English. 1. Ministry for Foreign Affairs 1. The Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Latin America and the Caribbean was established in response to a recommendation by the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE-82, held in Vienna) and in response to General Assembly resolution 50/27 of 6 December 1995. In 1992, following a series of assessments, the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs recommended the establishment of two sites, one in Brazil and the other in Mexico, to serve as headquarters for the Centre in Latin America. 2. The signing of the agreement between the Governments of Mexico and Brazil on the establishment of the Centre took place on 11 March 1997, in Brasilia. The Mexican Senate ratified the agreement on 29 April of that year and the decree promulgating the agreement was published in Mexico's Official Gazette in 1998. 3. In both countries, the Centre is viewed as the institution offering the best possible education, research projects and applications, and opportunities and experience to participants in all its programmes. The main objective of both offices is the development of skills and knowledge among university educators, the development of scientific research and applications on the basis of rigorous theory, research, applications and practice in the field, together with pilot projects in such aspects of space science and technology as may contribute to sustainable development in the two countries. 4. The Mexico campus of the Centre was established in 2002 through the headquarters agreement between the Government of Mexico and the Centre and a cooperation agreement between the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the National Institute of Optical and Electronic Astrophysics and the National Council for Science and Technology. Mexican experts have finalized the curricula for master's degrees in remote sensing and geographical information systems. Courses will start at the Mexico campus in March 2004. 5. The legal infrastructure of the Centre was finalized in 2003. One significant step was the signing of the cooperation agreement between the United Nations and the Centre on 11 June 2003, following approval of the regulations of the Governing Board and the General Secretariat in August 2002. 6. On 23 October 2002, the Government of Mexico and the Centre also signed an agreement concerning the Centre's operations in Mexico. The agreement was approved by the Mexican Senate and entered into force on 16 August 2003. The agreement covers a number of issues, including the privileges and immunities required for the Centre to operate in Mexico. 7. In 2003, the General Secretariat submitted a project entitled "space education, research and applications in Latin America and the Caribbean" to the Special Multilateral Fund of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development and the Inter-American Agency for Cooperation and Development of the Organization of American States (OAS) with a view to obtaining funding for Centre activities in 2004. Mexico supports the plan submitted by Brazil to strengthen the Centre's two campuses. 8. The fourth meeting of the Centre's Governing Board, which was held in Mexico on 31 October and 1 November 2003, took some important decisions concerning the strengthening of the Centre and its two campuses in respect of academic activities as well as funding for those activities. The regulations governing the activities of the Advisory Committee were also approved. As to the question of extending the membership of countries participating in the Centre, it was agreed that an evolutionary approach should be adopted. 9. The first information and outreach seminar on the Centre's activities was held in Mexico on 16 and 17 December 2003. Experts in space science education and research from Central America and the Caribbean took part. 10. At the Third Meeting of Ministers of Education of the Inter-American Council on Integral Development, held in August 2003, Mexico and OAS signed an agreement offering member countries free use of the EDUSAT network. 11. Mexico supports the project entitled "distance education via satellite for training teachers: education and human development in rural areas of the hemisphere", proposed by Belize for incorporation in the OAS partnership for development programme. 12. Recognizing that international cooperation is a mechanism for strengthening peace, security and the promotion of human development by means of the peaceful uses of outer space, Mexico and the Russian Federation have agreed upon a programme of technical and scientific cooperation to be carried out in 2003-2004 in support of a project on the design and construction of small satellites to monitor the Earth's surface. 2. National Autonomous University of Mexico 13. Given the close link between development and space activities, including the application and peaceful uses of space technologies and their role in strengthening peace, security and the promotion of human development through the peaceful uses of outer space, the National Autonomous University of Mexico takes part in programmes and projects relating to: (a) Space law; (b) Natural disaster prevention; (c) Environmental protection and support for sustainable development; (d) Education, research and development in space science, technology and applications. 14. In view of the importance of the principles that should govern State activities in the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, the University's Institute of Geophysics observed World Space Week 2003. 3. Federal Telecommunications Commission 15. The Federal Telecommunications Commission (COFETEL) reported that in the period 2001-2002 it continued the process of international coordination on a number of satellite projects in accordance with the provisions of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) radio regulations, the intention being to conclude negotiations with a number of other countries. The most notable aspects of this negotiation process are described below. Orbital positions 109.2° W and 114.9° W with Canada 16. The orbital arc between 103° W and 123° W of the geostationary satellite orbit was the subject of trilateral negotiations between Mexico, Canada and the United States of America, with the result that in 1988 Mexico was able to occupy and operate orbital positions 109.2° W, 113° W and 116.8° W. The satellites operated by Mexico were Solidaridad 1 at 109.2° W, Solidaridad 2 at 113° W and Morelos 2 at 116.8° W. Key developments since then are described below. 17. The first coordination meeting with Canada, which marked the formal inauguration of the coordination process to replace the Morelos 2 satellite, was held in July 1997. Since then, the Governments of Canada and Mexico have held a series of meetings to oversee progress in negotiations between the two countries' operators, with a view to reaching agreement on operational coordination. 18. In 1999, the operators Satmex, of Mexico, and Telesat, of Canada, reached an agreement to create capacity for the new Satmex 5 network, which became operational in January 1999. The agreement also covered new Canadian projects at the positions 107.3° W and 111.1° W (Anik F1 and Anik F2 respectively). In May 2000, at the operators' request, the administrations of Mexico and Canada signed an administrative coordination agreement to provide back-up for the agreement reached between the operators. 19. On 29 August 2000, the Solidaridad satellite (109.2° W) became inoperable. The Satmex company took action to replace the satellite as quickly as possible with one that was planned to become operational in April 2003 at the same orbital position of 109.2° W. Satmex proposed total coverage of the territory of the United States, with a satellite considerably more powerful than the former Solidaridad 1. 20. In order to accommodate Solidaridad 1's replacement (Satmex 6), Satmex informed the Mexican administration of the need to embark on a process of international coordination, both with ITU and bilaterally, including coordination with Canadian networks. 21. Accordingly, a high-level meeting took place between Canada and Mexico on 16 and 17 January 2003, attended by representatives of Industry Canada and Telesat for the Canadian side and the Under-Secretariat of Communications, COFETEL and Satmex for the Mexican side. At the meeting, the Canadian administration offered to exchange the position 114.9° W, then held by Canada, for the Mexican position 109.2° W. 22. The meeting resulted in a document entitled "Statement by the Department of Industry of Canada and the Secretary of Communications and Transportation/Federal Telecommunications Commission and agreement in principle between Satmex and Telesat", which established conditions for the exchange of the positions 114.9° W and 109.2° W between the two administrations, as well as containing various undertakings by the operators on the definition of the technical and operational parameters to be observed in drawing up a new coordination agreement. 23. Following the signing of the statement, the two administrations proceeded to draw up a formal memorandum of intent with the aim of designating the orbital positions to be used by each country, establishing power levels and maximum operational parameters in each of the designated positions and coordinating the operations of the respective satellite networks for the positions thus assigned. Orbital position 105° W with the Netherlands 24. Another aspect of COFETEL activities on international coordination in the satellite field relates to the process of coordination of orbital position 105° W. For that purpose, two satellite coordination meetings were held in Mexico City and The Hague on 9 and 10 January and from 13 to 16 May 2002 respectively. At those meetings, the Governments of Mexico and the Netherlands agreed that, in order to achieve satisfactory coordination as fast as possible, the operators of the two countries' satellite systems should embark on the process of drawing up operational agreements to coordinate their respective satellite networks situated in the orbital arc and to move towards the establishment of administrative arrangements providing Mexico and the Netherlands with satellite capacity from the space station at the position 105° W. Orbital position 77° W with Canada, Cuba and the United States 25. Another relevant international coordination procedure is that of the MEX-TDH1A and 1B satellite network in the orbital position 77° W. On 22 April 1996, the ITU Radiocommunication Bureau received an application from the Mexican Government to modify the Region 2 Plan with regard to the MEX-TDH1A and 1B satellite network, which was intended to occupy the geostationary orbital position 77° W. A satellite coordination process with the administrations of Canada, Cuba and the United States was undertaken on that basis. 26. As a result of this process, the Canadian administration informed Mexico on 5 April 2000 of full coordination of the network in question, given that coordination with the administrations of Cuba and the United States had been completed in October 2001. 1. At the fortieth session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which was held in Vienna from 17 to 28 February 2003, the members of national delegations were informed about the special activities of the institutes in the Slovak Republic in the use of space technologies for medical sciences and public health. A representative of Slovakia made a scientific presentation to the Subcommittee entitled "results and methods of research of vestibular function in space are useful in clinical practice". 2. In order to strengthen and extend friendly relations and to establish mechanisms that would facilitate cooperation between scientific institutions in Slovakia and Austria, the Slovak Commission for Research and Peaceful Uses of Space (the Slovak Space Agency) initiated the Austrian-Slovak Space Cooperation Talks at the Austrian Space Agency (ASA) in Vienna on 24 September 2003. Several topics for cooperation opportunities were presented at the meeting. It was decided that ASA and the Commission would coordinate efforts for cooperation and would sign a memorandum of understanding. Several bilateral agreements on cooperation on research in space physics, meteorology and medicine were signed by institutions in the two countries. 3. Several research projects in the field of space activities are currently being implemented at the universities and institutes of the Slovak Academy of Sciences (SAS), within the framework of wide international collaboration. 4. The activities of the Slovak Hydrometeorological Institute (SHMI) focus on satellite information applications for flood forecasting, nowcasting and monitoring support. Central European Initiative nowcasting project 5. This international project of the Central European Initiative is led by Austria and involves the participation of Croatia, Hungary, Slovakia and Slovenia. The project focuses on cooperation in the exploitation of meteorological satellites, radar and other distance measurements in the field of nowcasting and very-short-range forecasting. 6. The main goals of the project are exchange of knowledge, know-how and nowcasting and very-short-range forecasting algorithms based on remote measurements. The satellite data, especially those from Meteosat-7 and Meteosat Second Generation, data from radar measurements and outputs from numerical weather prediction models are considered to be the basic inputs of those methods and techniques. 7. Products useful in the interpretation of remote measurements, the automatic detection of convective cells and their tracking and forecasting are some of the essential and substantial results of the cooperation. The contribution of Slovakia has been the development by SHMI of the method of automatic detection and tracking of convective cells in radar measurements and the needed software. 8. At the meeting of the project partners in Slovakia in March 2003, SHMI presented the results achieved in the work on cell detection and tracking systems since the previous meeting. Those results include the adaptation of the tracking software from radar to Meteosat-7 satellite data, the adaptation of the system for optimal parameter tuning on the statistical set of data and the development of a universal visualization tool for the display and utilization of tracking outputs functional for satellite and radar data and also Thunderstorm Identification, Tracking, Analysis and Nowcasting (TITAN) method outputs. 9. During their meeting in Hungary in March 2003, the project partners presented individual results of the evaluation of developed nowcasting methods by means of the common evaluation tool. The results of the evaluation showed the advantages and disadvantages of each method, and the methods were discussed and compared. In SHMI, the following methods and products have been implemented at this stage of the project: atmospheric motion vectors, forecasted satellite images, convective cell detection and, for radar, testing of Weather Decision Technologies nowcasting software. Continuation of hydrology project preparation 10. The hydrology project has been carried out in cooperation with the European Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) since 2001. In 2003, EUMETSAT established the Satellite Application Facility Hydrology Framework Working Group, which involved the cooperation of EUMETSAT member States and cooperating States, including Slovakia, Hungary and Poland, with a mandate to establish and define the new Satellite Application Facility project. According to the working group, a long-term vision reflecting user needs, scientific perspectives and relationships to numerical weather prediction should be defined. Current outcomes from the discussions of this working group are the importance of time and space scales for flood forecasting, the important new developments on the European flood alert system and the development of monthly and seasonal forecasts. 11. On 6 July 1999, the agreement between EUMETSAT and the Slovak Government on the status of Slovakia as a cooperating State for a period of five years was approved. The examination of cooperation and the possible accession of Slovakia as a full member State after five years is one of the important parts of this agreement. 12. The procedures for accession to EUMETSAT were initiated in September 2003 by SHMI. 13. The accession of Slovakia to EUMETSAT will bring new opportunities for the exploitation of satellite data in Slovakia and their application in meteorological and hydrological services and scientific research. 14. Participation continued in the Image and Coordination of Information on the Environment Land Cover 2000 project. The aim of this project is to update the CLC90 database to 2000, as well as to identify land cover changes in Slovakia for the years 1990 to 2000 through the application of satellite data. About 55 per cent of the total area of Slovakia has been covered (the Institute of Geography of SAS in Bratislava and the Slovak Environmental Agency in Banská Bystrica have participated in this project). 15. Under the coordination of the Research Institute for Pedology and Protection of Soil in Bratislava, the preparation of an integrated administrative control system and its parts has continued, together with the registration of parcels (production blocks) of agricultural land, control of subsidies linked to agricultural land and crop yield forecasting by remote-sensing data. Remote-sensing activities of the Forest Research Institute in Zvolen continued through the national cooperative programme on assessment and monitoring of air pollution effects on forests, using Landsat enhanced thematic mapper data. Ikonos data were used for thematic mapping of stand and structural types of forest through the national project on researching methods of mountain forest management on the principles of sustainable development. 3. Space physics and technology 16. Several institutions are involved in space physics research in Slovakia. Among them are the SAS Institute of Experimental Physics in Košice in collaboration with the Technical University and P. J. Šafárik University in Košice; the Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics of Comenius University in Bratislava; the SAS Astronomical Institute in Tatranska Lomnica; and the SAS Geophysical Institute in Bratislava. 17. Measurements of energetic gamma rays and neutrons are carried out by SONG-M spectrometer (the Institute of Experimental Physics jointly with Moscow State University) on-board a low-altitude, high-inclination CORONAS-F satellite, which was launched in July 2001. More than two years of measurements of neutral emissions from the Sun allowed the observation of several tens of solar flares with hard X-rays and gamma rays. A strong emission of gamma rays was analysed in the flare of 25 August 2001. This flare also produced neutrons observed at the same time on CORONAS-F and on the ground. The flares of 28 October 2003 were also observed in gamma rays by the SONG-M spectrometer on CORONAS-F. 18. At the Institute of Experimental Physics, the results have been presented in a series of papers and contributions at various international conferences. The topics cover the dynamics of energetic particles within the magnetosphere and near its borders, both from high-apogee satellites (Interball satellite data compared with United States Polar satellite measurements, statistical and case studies, comparison with Solar and Heliospheric Observatory data via collaboration with specialists in Hungary and Ireland) and low-altitude orbits (CORONAS-I measurements statistically analysed and compared with United States SAMPEX research satellite measurements, active particle data dynamics and Mir Space Station measurements). New data from CORONAS-F have been analysed as well. The relationship of cosmic rays and cosmic energetic particles to space weather effects has been studied. The development of a neutral atom imager for the Double Star mission continues with the participation of the Institute. 19. At the Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics of Comenius University, the cooperative studies on cosmic ray product computations continue jointly with laboratories in the United States of America and other countries. 20. At the Astronomical Institute, studies continue into solar and heliospheric processes, along with cometary and cosmic dust research, using satellite data from available foreign experiments. The international conference entitled "Solar variability as an input to the Earth's environment" was held from 23 to 28 June 2003 in Tatranska Lomnica, by scientists from the Institute in cooperation with other institutions (e.g. the Institute of Experimental Physics and the Geophysical Institute). 21. At the Geophysical Institute, space geophysics is being investigated with an emphasis on quantification, classification and forecasting of space weather. The topic is of dominant interest to the solar-terrestrial physics community. In the field of geomagnetism, magnetic storm modelling is established on the basis of the international project on solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. The participation of the Geophysical Institute in the project made it possible to directly discuss possible contributors to the storm-time magnetic disturbances with participants from Germany, the Russian Federation, the United States and other countries. 4. Space biology and medicine Postembryonic development of Japanese quails in conditions of hypodynamy 22. This project is being undertaken at the SAS Institute of Animal Biochemistry and Genetics in Ivanka pri Dunaji. 23. The project is an extension of previous research in the embryogenesis of Japanese quails under conditions of microgravity, which was successfully performed from 1972 to 1999. 24. The first study of quail behaviour under microgravity conditions until the fifth day of post-hatching development raises a new issue in cosmic biology: the adaptation of the newly hatched organism, which has no previous sensory or motor experiences, in a similar environment. This problem represents a case of primary adaptation to the environment, which in principle does not correspond to genetically coded stereotypes of orientation and motor behaviour. For solving this problem, it is important to establish an experimental model for the study of the postembryonic development of Japanese quails under hypodynamy conditions until their maturity. 25. The aim of the present study was to observe the effect of simulated weightlessness (hypodynamy) on some physiological parameters of blood plasma in Japanese quail chicks from hatching to adulthood. Hypodynamy was achieved by suspending the quails in individual beds. 26. The results obtained represent the first study of potential differences in the intermediary metabolism of Japanese quail reared under simulated hypogravity conditions. They indicate increased concentrations of uric acid and plasma cholesterol levels and decreased lipid concentration in plasma in the hypodynamic quail. Accumulation and persistence of cytogenetic damage induced by radiation and other factors of space flight 27. The research on this project is undertaken at the Institute of Biological and Ecological Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, of P. J. Šafárik University in Košice. 28. On the basis of previous findings by the Institute of Biological and Ecological Sciences on the trans-generational transfer of directly detectable and latent radiation genomic damage to intact and regenerating liver from irradiated rat males to their progeny, the possibility of eliminating damaged cells through mitotic death during ontogenesis was studied. The elimination of cells was investigated in embryonic tissues and intact livers of irradiated rat male progeny at various stages of intrauterine and postnatal development by analysing chosen cytogenetic and molecular biological indexes (e.g., proliferating activity, apoptotic fragmentation of DNA and frequency of chromosomal aberrations). The directly detectable radiation changes quickly disappeared in embryos and newborns during the course of ontogenetic development, so they were nearly absent in seven-day-old offspring. These findings suggest that the trans-generational transfer of the latent damage to the liver reflects a radiation-induced increase in genomic instability. Changes in the function of the neuroendocrine system during exposure to simulated microgravity and hypergravity 29. This project is performed in conjunction with the Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, the Institute of Animal Biochemistry and Genetics and the Institute of Measurement Sciences, all at SAS in Bratislava. 30. The goal of this project is to undertake a series of experiments with rats exposed to hypokinesia or hypergravity for various time periods, with the blood sampled during hypokinesia or hypergravity being placed in a special centrifuge using a canula, which is used to determine plasma levels of hormones, neurotransmitters and metabolites. At selected time intervals, the investigators plan to measure, in isolated organs and tissues, the content of neurotransmitters and hormones, the production of hormones, the activity of enzymes involved in the production of neurotransmitters and the expression of genes for coding those enzymes. The results will be used to evaluate the capacity of the organism to overcome several stress loads. For studies of the effects of hypergravity, the electronic equipment for multiple blood withdrawal with telemetric control from small experimental animals has been developed and tested. The equipment consists of a telemetric transmitter (placed outside the room containing the centrifuge) and a receiver. Both transmitter and receiver are equipped with microcomputers. Before the start of the experiment, it was possible to programme the time schedule (sequence) of blood withdrawal for every animal. It was also possible to measure the instantaneous gravitational force by means of an accelerometric transducer placed near the box using telemetric data transmission. The preliminary tests on the functioning of the equipment were completed and the necessary quantity of equipment was provided by the Institute. Mechanisms of neuroendocrine, cardiovascular and metabolic adaptation to simulated microgravity 31. This project was undertaken by the Institute of Experimental Endocrinology in Bratislava and the Faculty of Medicine in Lyons, France, in collaboration with a wide international contribution under the long-term bed rest project of the European Space Agency (ESA). Previous studies have shown that microgravity during space flight induces changes in physiological functions that affect astronauts' health and performance and the neuroendocrine and metabolic responses to various stressors. Space flight simulations such as short-term or prolonged head-down bed rest can mimic some of these changes and provide study conditions that are more accessible than those during space flight. Therefore, ESA, the Centre national d'études spatiales of France and the National Space Development Agency of Japan are performing extensive studies using long-duration bed rest. The Institute is involved in studies of the changes in plasma hormone levels during bed rest. 32. The aim of the participation of the Institute has been to investigate neuroendocrine response, especially the response of the sympathetic nervous system, to stressors during bed rest of various durations. The results of the investigations have shown that plasma levels of the typical stress hormone epinephrine were reduced during prolonged head-down bed rest and that exercise during the bed rest had no significant effect on plasma epinephrine levels. Plasma norepinephrine levels did not show significant changes during head-down bed rest in either control or exercised probands. An elevation of plasma levels of catecholamines was noted after head-down bed rest. These findings are consistent with urinary excretion of norepinephrine, which was highly elevated. 33. The purpose of the further study was to evaluate how a bout of endurance training would influence endocrine response after a short bed rest. There were differences in the response of several stress hormones to physical load -- treadmill exercise after head-down bed rest and endurance training failed to completely prevent changes in the endocrine response to stress loads seen after short head-down bed rest, but exercise has been shown to diminish the negative effect of bed rest on growth hormone release and to augment the release of cortisol. These data demonstrate that the simulation of hypogravity during head-down bed rest or prolonged bed rest during the treatment of chronic illness could affect the neuroendocrine response to stress stimuli. 34. The data are consistent with the Institute's previous results obtained by exposing human subjects to real gravity during space flights, which indicated activation of the sympathoadrenal system mainly during the readaptation period after landing. These data also support the view that the simulation of hypogravity during head-down bed rest is a good model for studying the effects of microgravity in human subjects. The scientists from the Institute applied to participate in the next head-down bed rest trial to be performed on women, organized by ESA. Influence of simulated microgravity on human postural responses to sensory stimulation 35. The goal of this project, which was performed at the Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology of SAS, in Bratislava, was to investigate the role of altered sensory interaction in postural instabilities after space flight. 36. It is known that during space flight visual influence on body orientation is increased. In 2003, the Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology investigated the modification of postural responses to somatosensory stimuli by visual scene motion. 37. The Institute organized the Third Posture Symposium, entitled "Human posture control: physiology, disorders, modelling and balance rehabilitation", with 57 participants from 18 countries. 1. Scientific and Research Council of Turkey: Information Technologies and Electronics Research Institute 1. The Information Technologies and Electronics Research Institute (BILTEN) research satellite project was finalized in 2003. A flight readiness review was held on 3 June and the satellite was launched on 27 September from the Cosmodrome at Plesetsk, Russian Federation. The satellite was placed in a Sun-synchronous orbit at an altitude of about 686 kilometres, where it initiated sending images. The satellite has been designed to test some experimental payloads and software. In addition, the images acquired by the satellite will be used for various scientific studies, including ecology, geology, forestry, urban studies and disaster management. 2. A satellite control ground station and various facilities required for the design and manufacture of a small satellite, weighing up to 500 kilograms, have been established within the framework of the BILTEN project. 3. Research and development projects have been initiated to develop a flight computer, power storage and the real-time image processor GEZGIN in the Turkish remote-sensing satellite BILSAT, to be used in future satellite projects. Studies on charge-coupled device electronics, which were initiated with the development of the multi-spectral camera COBAN, are also part of the ongoing research and development. 2. Turkish State Meteorological Service 4. The Turkish State Meteorological Service is a founding member of the European Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) and participates in all its activities, including satellite construction, launch, operation of satellites, data acquisition and product retrieval. Presently, the Service has 206 automatic weather stations observing the weather, which transmit data to the Ankara station by very small aperture terminals through the Turkish communications satellite TURKSAT. 5. The Service plans to implement the Meteosat Second-Generation EUMETSAT satellite ground reception station in Ankara at the beginning of 2004. 6. The Service, along with the World Meteorological Organization and EUMETSAT, organized a regional workshop on satellite meteorology in Alanya. Ten countries participated in the workshop, which was held from 22 to 25 September 2003. In 2004, the Service intends to organize a workshop with EUMETSAT in Alanya. 7. The Service participates in MetOp, the European polar-orbiting satellite dedicated to operational meteorology, along with EUMETSAT and the European Space Agency. In addition, the Service plans to join the Jason mission of France and the United States of America to investigate ocean resources by means of satellite data. 3. Aegean University 8. Astronomical research is being carried out at the Astronomy and Space Sciences Department of Aegean University. In this context, astrophysics, celestial mechanics, variable stars, stellar structure and stellar and solar magnetic activities are being carried out. In particular, the department has worked on stars that are somewhat older than the Sun and that show solar-like magnetic activity. 9. Due to the lack of Turkish scientific satellites, observations that support theoretical work have been made by ground-based telescopes at the Aegean University Observatory. In addition, data obtained by scientific satellites from other countries have been provided and have been combined with data obtained from telescope observations. Timekeeping is accomplished and the coordinates of the observatory can be determined by Global Positioning System equipment connected to telescopes at the Aegean University Observatory. 4. Istanbul Technical University 10. A satellite ground receiving station was established by Istanbul Technical University and was active in 2003 in order to receive images from various satellite systems to be used for scientific purposes. It has started receiving data from the French SPOT and the Canadian RADARSAT Earth observation satellites and has started providing scientific support, especially for mapping and city planning. 5. Establishment of a Turkish space agency 11. A need has arisen in Turkey for a space agency to coordinate and control all civil and military space activities and direct all the activities within this field, in line with national policy. In this context, a draft bill for the establishment of a Turkish space agency was prepared in 2003. The Turkish Parliament is expected to approve the bill in 2004, thereby activating the national space agency. 12. Studies on the preparation of a draft national space policy have been initiated to coordinate the national space activities in the period leading to the establishment of the Turkish space agency. 6. Fairs and conferences 13. In order to accelerate space activities in Turkey, the following activities took place in Turkey in 2003: (a) The International Space Technologies Exhibition and Conference, SPACEAN 2003 was held in Ankara from 6 to 8 May; (b) The International Conference on Recent Advances in Space Technologies, RAST 2003, was held in Istanbul from 20 to 22 November. 