%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|AFGHANISTAN|PAKISTAN|AFGHANISTAN SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/53/391 S/1998/860 16 September 1998 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH GENERAL ASSEMBLY SECURITY COUNCIL Fifty-third session Fifty-third year Agenda item 45 THE SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY Identical letters dated 16 September 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to forward herewith an official note dated 15 September 1998 addressed to you from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic State of Afghanistan. I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 45, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Ravan A. G. FARHÂDI Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page ANNEX Note dated 15 September 1998 from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic State of Afghanistan presents its compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and, in the light of the latest development in central Afghanistan, has the honour to inform him of the following: On 12 and 13 September 1998, following months of food blockade, the city of Bamyan in central Afghanistan came under carpet bombing by Pakistani warplanes stationed in the Afghan Sheberghan airport. The air raids, involving eight Pakistani jet bombers, predominantly targeted residential sites in the city and continued throughout Saturday, 12 September. However, on Sunday, 13 September, eight hours of intensive carpet bombing culminated in major destruction of military targets and civilian residential areas. An all-out ground assault by a joint Pakistani military and Taliban mercenary force, preceded by a descent of Pakistani commandos involving 20 helicopters on the surrounding high-points, eventually led to the bloody occupation of the city. The occupying forces, advised by Pakistani military intelligence officers, have deliberately killed thousands of civilians, just as in other occupied areas across the country, in this case ethnic Shi'ite Hazaras in their homes on 13 September, the first day following their military takeover of the city. The occupying forces have indiscriminately slaughtered as many as 350 wounded inhabitants, mostly women, children and elderly, who as casualties of the early bombardments by Pakistani warplanes were under medical treatment in local medical centres. The occupying forces have taken away to an unknown place as many as 2,500 young men. The occupying forces have plundered people's property and have set houses on fire. The occupying forces have ordered civilians out of their homes and have taken significant numbers away to a desert called Dasht -e- Bakwaa, west of Kandahar Province in southern Afghanistan. In addition, as many as 12,000 household members are being rounded up outdoors awaiting an unknown destiny. The outcry of these people has been that "it is best we die here, but our blood will guarantee resistance". It is the earnest expectation of the Islamic State of Afghanistan that the above-mentioned factual accounts will definitely free the international community of any doubt about Pakistan being the occupying power and aggressor in Afghanistan and therefore responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity, according to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949. The Islamic State of Afghanistan is urgently calling, once again, upon the United Nations to send a fact-finding mission to investigate and verify the facts. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic State of Afghanistan avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Secretary-General of the United Nations the assurances of its highest consideration. 