%%%OBSERVER STATUS|INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

Fifty-ninth session Second Committee Agenda item 85 (b) Sustainable development: further implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States Accreditation of an intergovernmental organization to the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States Note by the Secretariat 1. The Secretariat has received a request from the Commonwealth Foundation, an intergovernmental organization, to be invited to participate as an observer in the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. This organization does not receive a standing invitation from the General Assembly or the Economic and Social Council to participate in the capacity of observer in the sessions and work of international conferences convened under their auspices. 2. In accordance with rule 63 of the draft rules of procedure of the International Meeting, representatives of other intergovernmental organizations invited to the International Meeting may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the International Meeting, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committees or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. 3. Information on this organization is provided below. Commonwealth Foundation Marlborough House Pall Mall, London SW1Y SHY Tel. +44 (0)20 7930 3783 Fax: +44 (0)20 7839 8157 E-mail: geninfo@commonwealth.int Web site: www.commonwealthfoundtion.com Established: 1965 Summary of organizational focus and activities. The Commonwealth Foundation has a twofold mission: (a) Civil society: to strengthen the ability of citizens and civil society organizations to work together, with government and the private sector, towards the achievement of fundamental Commonwealth purposes and values, especially those relating to good governance, people-centred sustainable development and poverty eradication; (b) The people's Commonwealth: to facilitate pan-Commonwealth and intercountry connections between people, their associations and communities, at all levels, to encourage and enable mutual learning in the fields of personal, professional and community development, as well as arts and culture, and to recognize and celebrate achievements in these fields. 