%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|DRUG CONTROL|DRUG TRAFFIC|TERRORISM|NARCOTIC DRUGS|

Third Committee Summary record of the 9th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 12 October 2004, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) later: Ms. Groux (Vice-Chairman) (Switzerland) Contents Agenda item 96: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)* Agenda item 97: International drug control (continued)* * Items which the Committee has decided to consider together. The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m. Agenda item 96: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) (A/59/77, A/59/123-E/2004/90, A/59/175, 187, 203, 204, 205, and A/59/383-S/2004/758; A/C.3/59/L.3-9) Agenda item 97: International drug control (continued) (A/59/188 and A/59/124-S/2004/532; A/C.3/59/L.10-12) 1. Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan), speaking on behalf of the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), noted that the Committee was meeting against a backdrop of increasing global terrorism, and that one of the main reasons for that increase was the drug traffic, which affected all sectors of the population. Despite the international community's efforts to solve the drug problem, its pervasiveness and its connection to transnational organized crime, money-laundering and arms trafficking continued to cause profound concern. Efforts made at the international, regional and bilateral levels had failed to produce results. 2. The countries of the CIS supported the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) as the central coordinating body for efforts to strengthen drug-control measures, and welcomed its efforts to promote international cooperation, to help States implement international conventions on drugs and to facilitate regional progress. They wished to affirm their commitment to the Political Declaration adopted at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, and to state their determination to resolve the international drug problem through the comprehensive and balanced implementation of national and international strategies aimed at reducing the demand for illicit drugs, as well as their production and sale. 3. Regional cooperation was one of the most effective approaches. The countries of the CIS had taken the necessary measures at all levels to harmonize and coordinate joint actions, including strengthening legislation and regional cooperation and concluding bilateral and multilateral treaties. The main goals of that cooperation were to expand and enhance the legislative basis for their efforts, to harmonize national laws, to coordinate prevention efforts and to increase cooperation in the areas of scientific expertise and training. Because the flow of drugs from Afghanistan had assumed a global dimension, measures to stem the flow must be taken both within Afghanistan and beyond its borders. It was essential to create new security zones, and to give priority to the work of UNODC in Central Asia, especially through the regional plan of action to control the flow of drugs. There was also a need to increase subregional cooperation in order to combat drug trafficking and reduce smuggling. 4. The countries of the CIS hoped that the General Assembly would take important decisions at the current session to enhance United Nations efforts to fight drug trafficking, and stood ready to facilitate that process. They believed that their expertise could be of assistance to other States, and looked forward to cooperating with the United Nations and its Member States. 5. Mr. Idoko (Nigeria) said that Nigeria was determined to honour its obligations under the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances, as well as under various extradition treaties signed with other countries. Its national mechanisms in that regard included the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency, an inter-agency taskforce on extradition matters, and the Ministry of Justice. However, the positive results achieved by Nigeria had placed additional burdens on its neighbours, since traffickers who had previously operated in Nigeria now operated through those countries to transfer illicit goods to other continents. It was therefore vitally important to strengthen subregional mechanisms. Two examples in that context were the West African Joint Operation and the fruitful exchange of intelligence and cross-border operations between Nigeria and its regional partners. 6. Nigeria was firmly convinced that the drug problem could be successful only if efforts were made to reduce demand, as well as supply. In an effort to reduce demand, public education campaigns had been launched in schools and colleges, and procedures had been introduced for the rehabilitation of addicts. Money-laundering and financial crimes were highly destructive to the health of national economies, as well as to the global economy. Nigeria was tackling those problems and had made several successful prosecutions and drastically reduced business fraud. Moreover, several institutions had been penalized under the law on money-laundering. It had also set up a financial- intelligence unit, in line with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering. 7. Mr. Elkadiri (Morocco) said that the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice and the Millennium Declaration had both established action plans to guide Member States in the formulation of national laws in the areas of crime and criminal justice. However, those plans could not be successful without sustained international cooperation and appropriate technical assistance. Morocco was currently bringing its laws into line with the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, which it had ratified in 2002, and it had also signed the 2003 United Nations Convention against Corruption. Furthermore, Morocco was aware of the vital need to strengthen international cooperation and technical assistance in the prevention of terrorism. It had signed and ratified most international conventions in that area, had introduced a law against terrorism, and had concluded cooperation agreements on international judicial assistance and requests for extradition. In March 2004 it had organized, together with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), a regional conference on strategies for modernizing judicial administration in the Arab States. The Political Declaration adopted at the twentieth special session and the Ministerial Declaration adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs were important benchmarks, which confirmed the commitment of the international community to combat the trafficking and abuse of drugs. 8. Despite the results achieved, however, much remained to be done. The problems of drug trafficking, organized crime, violence and terrorism were more closely linked than ever. Morocco had introduced an important institutional mechanism for coordinating the actions of the relevant departments with a view to implementing the national strategy to combat trafficking in narcotics. It had also made strenuous efforts to bring its laws into line with its international commitments, resulting in the adoption of a new Criminal Code and a new Code of Criminal Procedure. Furthermore, a survey on cannabis production in Morocco had revealed that the illicit growing of cannabis was fuelled by the constant increase in international dealers, hence the need to base international cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking on the principle of shared responsibility. Moving regional economies away from cannabis production required alternative solutions, and Morocco had introduced several major projects in that area. 9. Morocco would work actively to ensure the success of the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in 2005. Moreover, it hoped that the African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders would be provided with the necessary resources and administrative support in its efforts to combat national and international crime. 10. Ms. Tincopa (Peru), speaking on behalf of the Andean Community of Nations (CAN), said that the Andean countries were working tirelessly to combat the global problem of illicit drugs and related crimes, which generated political and social costs for their populations. In accordance with the Political Declaration adopted at the twentieth special session, they had argued that the world's response should not be limited to the issues of supply and demand, but should be broadened to include all the various phases of the drug trade. Because of the global nature of the problem, CAN was in favour of greater international cooperation, through bilateral and multilateral mechanisms. 11. In that regard, the heads of State and Government of the countries of the subregion had recently reaffirmed their joint commitment to deal with the drug problem and welcomed the positive impact of programmes implemented jointly with the European Union to combat the production of and trafficking in drugs. Also notable in that context was the joint meeting of the heads of State and Government of CAN and the European Union, held in May 2004, at which participants had considered the situation of the Andean subregion and welcomed the broadening of the regional programme to include social and security issues. CAN had also been cooperating for many years with the United States to eradicate the illicit cultivation of and trafficking in drugs, and worked closely with UNODC. As a result of those efforts, drug production in the subregion had fallen by 20 per cent since 1998. 12. Within the context of the hemisphere, CAN wished to express its firm support for the efforts of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission of the Organization of American States (OAS), especially its Multilateral Evaluation Mechanism for the objective evaluation of the situation of OAS countries, which was certainly among the most important achievements of the anti-drug effort in the hemisphere. CAN had also been helping to establish a global system to monitor the cultivation of cocaine, heroin and marijuana, and had been working with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) to set up a global database. 13. CAN wished to reaffirm its commitment to continue the fight against the scourge of drugs, and urged consumer countries to take effective measures to control the demand for drugs. 14. Ms. Groux (Switzerland), Vice-Chairman, took the Chair. 15. Ms. Bethel (Bahamas) said that the Bahamas remained fully committed to the fight against narcotic drugs. Although it was neither a producer nor a major destination, it had unwittingly become a transit point for drugs due to its geographical position. Consequently, there had been a rise in addiction levels and crime, since drug trafficking had increasingly been accompanied by arms trafficking. In an effort to meet that challenge, the Bahamas had become a party to all the major international drug conventions and was committed to their full implementation, as well as to the outcome of the twentieth special session. International cooperation remained one of the most important tools in that regard, and the Bahamas welcomed the support provided by UNDCP to the Caribbean Task Force on Crime and Security. It called on all States to maintain their commitment to a balanced approach to drug control that encompassed strategies for reducing supply and demand. 16. The Bahamas was an active participant in regional prevention mechanisms, and had also matched its commitment at the international and regional levels with forceful action in the domestic sphere, by criminalizing narcotic drugs, facilitating international cooperation and preventing money-laundering. With respect to the financial-services industry, she noted that the Bahamas remained one of the world's leading offshore banking centres, and was determined to ensure that its banks and financial entities were well regulated and in compliance with international norms. 17. Moreover, it devoted almost 20 per cent of its budget to national security, especially law enforcement and drug prevention. It cooperated closely with its neighbours, notably through Operation Bahamas and Turks and Caicos, which brought together law-enforcement agencies of the United States, the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos. The Bahamas National Drug Council was responsible for organizing and coordinating national efforts in the areas of prevention, education, treatment and rehabilitation, in order to reduce demand for narcotic drugs. All national actions in drug control for the next five years would be carried out under the Bahamas National Anti-Drug Plan 2004-2009, which represented a comprehensive multisectoral and balanced approach, enabling the Bahamas to step up its efforts to meet its national and international obligations. 18. Ms. Hastaie (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that the growth in illicit drug cultivation, production, trafficking and consumption, which extensively affected the countries of the Middle East, had given rise to drug-related criminal activities. During 2004, poverty, unemployment, food scarcity and general insecurity had played an important role in the increase in drug production in Afghanistan. Opium-poppy cultivation had created a vast transnational network of drug dealers, which provided the means for massive trafficking in people and small arms and a fertile environment for terrorist activities. However, drugs were a global problem and the international community had a responsibility to help Afghanistan emerge from years of war, destruction and drug production and realize the people's wish for peace, security and development. For its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran was ready to offer its cooperation at all levels. 19. In 2003, Iranian forces had seized nearly 200 tons of illicit drugs, and a review of the drug-trafficking situation in the country during 2004 showed that the influx of opium through its eastern border posed a serious threat. Iran had therefore deployed over 30,000 anti-drug personnel in the area and invested more than one billion dollars to fortify the border. Moreover, it should be noted that, over the past 25 years, Iran had lost more than 3,300 law-enforcement personnel in the war with drug traffickers. 20. In trying to strike a balance between prevention, treatment and law enforcement, Iran had deemed that demand reduction was as important as supply reduction and had paid special attention to creating effective prevention programmes targeting youth and high-risk groups. Efforts involved civil society and all sectors of the country and represented a solid commitment to building a common front based on the principles of shared responsibility and multilateral assistance. In that respect, Iran attached great importance to cooperation on drug-control issues with the relevant regional and international agencies. It had concluded memorandums of understanding with other countries and had implemented them by establishing joint committees, exchanging information and participating in training courses for law-enforcement officers. At the request of the Conference of Drug Liaison Officers, Iran had established the Regional Information Exchange Centre, which provided detailed, up-to-date information on the drug situation in the region. 21. To decrease consumption and eradicate supply, it was necessary to act on the basis of mutual confidence and assistance, with full respect for domestic and international law. In that context, the Narcotic Reduction Unitized Programme of UNODC had provided constructive assistance to combat illicit drugs, and Iran hoped that the scope of assistance could be extended to include new areas of cooperation, including crime prevention. 22. Mr. Popkov (Belarus) said that his delegation attached great importance to the efforts to combat transnational organized crime under United Nations auspices, especially the technical assistance to States provided by UNODC for the implementation of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols. 23. Belarus was continuing to develop its national structures to combat organized crime and to cooperate at the international level, in addition to its ratification of the Convention and its protocols. Trafficking in women, credit-card theft and other crimes using sophisticated technology were growing problems in Belarus. A national programme to combat trafficking in persons had been established, which involved close cooperation with law-enforcement agencies and non-governmental organizations of neighbouring countries. It hoped to strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations Global Programme against Trafficking in Human Beings. Because of its geographical location and its transportation infrastructure, Belarus was frequently used as a transit point for illegal migration to Western Europe. It was taking all possible steps to stop the flow of illegal migrants, and called for more active cooperation with its European neighbours. Belarus had signed the 2003 United Nations Convention against Corruption and was preparing for its ratification. 24. The international drug problem required a collective solution. Belarus was well aware of the problems of transit countries: over the past 15 years, crime related to drug trafficking had grown enormously. Belarus was located on the transit routes for drug trafficking between Afghanistan and Western Europe. Accordingly, it was prepared to do everything possible to strengthen the legal framework within the United Nations system to combat the illicit drug trade. 25. Mr. Iskandarov (Azerbaijan) said that Azerbaijan supported the principles adopted at the twentieth special session, which affirmed that the fight against global crime and drug problems required a balanced approach between the reduction of supply and demand, and a comprehensive strategy combining alternative development, poverty eradication, law enforcement, treatment, rehabilitation and education. In keeping with its belief in the importance of global responses to such challenges, Azerbaijan was a party to the principal international instruments for combating crime and drugs, and earlier in 2004 had signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 26. Border control and security was of utmost importance in order to combat trafficking in persons and goods and, in 2002, Azerbaijan had created an independent State Border Service. It was the first among the former Soviet countries to introduce an automated information-search system at border checkpoints to control migration flows. Special attention was also being paid to enhancing border-control capacity at sea as well as air surveillance. 27. To combat crime and drugs, Azerbaijan combined measures taken at the national level with broad regional and international partnerships. It also coordinated counter-terrorism and anti-drug-trafficking activities with the other countries of the region. 28. Unresolved conflicts continued to undermine efforts to combat international crime and drug trafficking, because, at times, they resulted in the emergence of areas outside the control of Governments or the international community. In recent years, many such areas had resulted from their illegal seizure by separatist movements or their occupation by another country's military forces, and the first people to exploit such situations were international criminals or drug traffickers. 29. For example, Azerbaijan believed that the part of its national territory occupied by Armenian military forces was being used for drug production and trafficking, and also as a safe haven for international criminals. Indeed, Armenian aggression against Azerbaijan was facilitated by support from foreign criminal elements and terrorist organizations. Consequently, international commitment to preserve the territorial integrity of Member States and to restore internationally recognized borders should be among the core activities to combat the global proliferation of crime and drugs. The activities of UNODC in the region were appreciated, but more targeted involvement, including sending fact-finding missions to the occupied territories, would help highlight such obstacles to the fight against crime and drugs. 30. It was only recently that Azerbaijan and other former Soviet countries had had to face the challenges posed by international crime and illicit drugs, because, previously, they had been sheltered by the "iron curtain". Consequently, they needed international expertise and assistance, particularly to develop legal instruments and strengthen their means of combating the new types of criminal activities. To that end, his Government reiterated its invitation to UNODC to open a regional office in Baku. 31. Mr. Massamba (Congo) said that drug control had always been a concern of the Congolese authorities. Owing to its geographical location, the Congo was used as a transit country by several Central African countries and it faced serious problems related to the circulation of and trafficking in drugs. Cannabis was produced locally, and seizures by the police and customs authorities had confirmed the entry, circulation and consumption of drugs such as cocaine and heroin. 32. Supply, demand and trafficking had increased extensively. The absence of maritime surveillance and the insufficiency of airport controls encouraged the cross-border transit of drugs throughout Central Africa. Socio-political crises combined with the economic crisis that had affected most States in the subregion had induced many young people to use drugs, which had led to an exacerbation of the armed conflicts. 33. The Congo did not have appropriate legislation or adequate means to combat the problem. Nevertheless, it had expressed its intention of joining the struggle against consumption and trafficking by participating in the subregional strategy for Central Africa, established by the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) in collaboration with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP), in 1991. It had also acceded to the three principal international anti-drug conventions and had undertaken efforts to control the importation and sale of illicit drugs. 34. The enthusiasm and determination that had followed the establishment of national anti-drug structures in the subregion had been undermined by the said socio-political crises. He therefore invited UNDCP to reinitiate anti-drug programmes in Central Africa and help the States resume their efforts, including the adoption of standardized legislation to combat illicit drugs in the subregion. 35. Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) noted the growing alliance between drugs and crime; indeed, international terrorist networks were obtaining significant financial resources from drug trafficking. The flow of illicit drugs was one of the major threats to regional and international security, and drugs in transit towards Russia and Europe, particularly those produced in Afghanistan, had to pass through Central Asia. The problem could not be resolved without adequate political support and funds from the international community; consequently, Uzbekistan considered that it should remain a priority. The success of international efforts to build peace in Afghanistan and overall security and stability in Central Asia depended largely on resolving that problem. Furthermore, since the fight against drug trafficking should be addressed in a balanced manner, giving demand reduction as much attention as supply reduction, it would be logical that the countries where the demand for drugs originating in Afghanistan was greatest should play a more active role in helping Afghanistan and the Central Asian countries tackle the problem. 36. In recent years, Uzbekistan's law enforcement bodies had seized more than 50 tons of narcotics in transit through the country. UNODC was playing a significant role in assisting Central Asian countries, particularly with efforts to improve border control. Uzbekistan was working closely with international agencies; however, several projects being implemented under the auspices of such agencies were not sufficiently coordinated and lacked adequate funds. During a meeting with the Secretary-General in 2002, the President of Uzbekistan had suggested the establishment of a Central Asian regional information and coordination centre on transborder crimes as a practical way of approaching the issue. Uzbekistan hoped that the international community would support an undertaking of that nature. 37. Mr. Saranga (Mozambique), said that the problems of transnational crime, illegal trafficking, corruption and terrorism impaired sustainable development and posed a grave threat to the political, social and economic fabric of societies; accordingly, the legal instruments for fighting them deserved greater attention from the international community. 38. UNODC must respond to the challenges of organized crime by broadening technical assistance to all law-enforcement practitioners to enable them to make good use of those instruments. In that connection, his delegation duly noted the Office's efforts to undertake studies on the impact of drugs and the relation between drugs, crime and development in Africa, and commended the strengthened technical-cooperation programmes. However, resource allocation and political will were vital for their successful outcome. 39. Welcoming the recent visit by a UNODC team to his country to assess its technical-assistance needs, he stressed that each country's and region's specific needs and circumstances should be taken into account, while shared international experience would also help crime prevention. He urged the United Nations to continue to support countries, especially developing countries, put effective systems and fair criminal justice in place so as to reinforce sustainable development and lasting peace. In that connection, his delegation pledged its support for a multilateral approach. 40. His country's ongoing public-sector reform programme, designed to afford individuals and society alike better enjoyment of their economic, political, social and cultural rights, was gaining momentum and moving towards its expected goals. In addition, the Constitution was being reviewed to bring it into line with domestic and international developments. The new draft Constitution -- submitted for public debate -- expanded the scope of fundamental and individual rights and freedoms and provided for the establishment of an ombudsman. The Penal Code was also being amended in order, inter alia, to speed up criminal proceedings and bring them into line with human-rights practices. In addition, his Government had recently approved rules for the implementation of the Money-Laundering Law. 41. In keeping with the Government's steadfast commitment to the global fight against transnational organized crime, it had signed the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and its protocols. In accordance with the Convention, Mozambique was about to designate a central authority for mutual judicial and legal assistance. It was also a signatory to the United Nations and African Union Conventions against Corruption, both of which it would soon ratify. 42. At the regional level, Mozambique continued to play an important role in the Southern African Regional Police Chiefs Cooperation Organization. Its regular meetings to discuss root causes of the illicit trafficking in drugs, firearms and persons, immigration and customs policies had enabled its members to harmonize their working methods and practices. 43. It was his delegation's hope that the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice would find new ways to combat crime. His Government would continue to support international measures for strengthening crime prevention, criminal justice and drug control, thereby promoting the rule of law, a prerequisite for peace, stability and sustainable economic development. 44. Ms. Nepal (Nepal) observed that organized crime, corruption and terrorism continued to threaten the fabric of civilized society worldwide, disrupted States' efforts at sustainable development, peace and justice and enticed young people into the criminal world. Trafficking in drugs and human beings, corruption, arms smuggling and terrorism had severely harmed individuals and societies across the world and called for concerted international action; Nepal was ready to work with other States to attain that objective and defeat those menaces brought about by globalization. 45. Investment of half of the enormous proceeds from corruption in the world would suffice to improve the socio-economic conditions of its poor. Nepal had signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which it was preparing to implement. The Government had launched a highly visible anti-corruption drive, amended its relevant legislation to widen the scope of the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority, and accorded high priority to good-governance initiatives. 46. As a signatory to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, her country welcomed the entry into force of the Convention and two of its protocols. It was studying all three protocols with a view to acceding to them. Her delegation endorsed the Secretary-General's appeal for contributions to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, and called on the international community to support national efforts to strengthen institutional capacity and the regulatory framework for fighting corruption, money-laundering and transfer of illicit funds. 47. Nepal, a party to the 1949 United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, condemned all forms of trafficking, especially trafficking in persons. It called on the international community to treat the victims humanely, providing them with shelter and helping them return home. 48. Nepal supported the Secretary-General's recommendation to implement the outcome of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly. She emphasized the need for demand reduction, supply control, prevention and treatment. Stringent law enforcement must be accompanied by the provision of alternative means of livelihood for poor farmers and the treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts. Again, the international community must provide technical assistance for national anti-narcotics activities. 49. Nepal, afflicted by the violence of self-styled Maoists, was fighting terrorism with firm resolve and urged the United Nations and the international community to redouble their efforts to combat that scourge. It had fully cooperated with the Counter-Terrorism Committee established by the Security Council. It was a party to many international anti-terrorism instruments. Technical cooperation was essential if developing States were to monitor, identify and control the movement of suspected terrorists and trace the transfer of funds and weapons. 50. She looked forward to the convening of the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in Bangkok in April 2005. It would enable Member States to exchange views on a wide range of issues and on ways to combat all forms of transnational organized crime. 51. Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia), said that his country, committed to fight transnational organized crime, was a party to nine of the 12 United Nations conventions and protocols against international terrorism and cooperated closely with the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee. Armenia had been the fortieth State to ratify the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, thus bringing it into force in 2003, and had also ratified two of its protocols. 52. The Commonwealth of Independent States and Eastern European countries were beset by trafficking as countries of both origin and transit. In order to take away the cover that labour migration provided for trafficking, the Government had established a Migrants Service Point, which supplied information on legal conditions and labour opportunities in foreign countries, ensuring safe labour migration and helping to prevent trafficking. Likewise, the Government had recently approved the 2004-2006 National Action Plan for Prevention of Trafficking in Persons, containing measures for legal reform, awareness-raising, victim protection, return and reintegration, and, together with UNDP, had launched an anti-trafficking programme. 53. To fight corruption, was a priority of the Government, which was currently institutionalizing its Anti-Corruption Strategy, recently developed in collaboration with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, with direct involvement of civil society and funding from the World Bank. Consideration was also being given to accession to the Convention against Corruption. 54. On the subject of the international drug problem, Armenia, a party to the major pertinent international instruments, had incorporated the relevant provisions into its new Criminal Code, and, the previous year, the President had signed the Law on Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. His Government set great store by comprehensive and coherent measures to reduce both demand and supply and to raise awareness among vulnerable groups. It greatly appreciated the South Caucasus Anti-Drug Programme, elaborated and implemented by the European Commission and UNDP and aimed at institutional anti-drug capacity-building in three South Caucasus countries. 55. In its fight against transnational organized crime and terrorism, the country had developed effective multilateral cooperation, had entered into many bilateral agreements, and worked closely with various regional and international organizations in a variety of related areas. Globalization had increased vulnerability to transnational organized crime and international terrorism, the scope and magnitude of which necessitated concerted actions and cooperation at all levels. Such cooperation should become a major focus of UNODC, which, ideally placed to coordinate international efforts, deserved to be strengthened. In that regard, he welcomed its growing cooperation with his country. Efforts to establish an effective system for preventing and combating such crime were bound to fail without a comprehensive strategy and all-inclusive approach towards the region. 56. In conclusion, he regretted that the delegation of Azerbaijan had once more felt the need publicly to criticize Armenia. It was regrettable that the UNODC mission has been prevented from visiting Nagorny Karabakh during its visit to the region because of obstacles the Government of Azerbaijan had put in its way. The authorities of Nagorny Karabakh were ready to receive an international monitoring mission to study the situation on the ground and provide an objective report and so preclude further speculation. 57. Ms. Pires (Cape Verde) said that one of the negative effects of globalization had been the spread of organized crime, illegal trafficking, corruption and terrorism. Trafficking in drugs and human beings affected not only individual lives, but threatened international peace, security and stability. Her Government, attaching great importance to crime prevention and anti-corruption, had ratified three international drug conventions and the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and two of its protocols, and had acceded to the Convention against Corruption. It had also adapted national legislation to the international legal framework, and was involved in the African Union's 2002-2006 Action Plan on Drug Control and the Economic Community of West African States' Action Plan on Drug Trafficking. 58. Situated at the crossroads of three continents and, given its vast territorial waters and fragile economy, Cape Verde was attractive to organized criminal groups and networks, which seriously hampered drug control. Poverty reduction and job creation were crucial to drug control, since drugs caused many young people to drop out of school and reduced them to unemployment and poverty. Her Government had adopted a Poverty-Reduction Strategy and had proposed alternatives for youth occupation. In that connection, there had been a successful volunteer pilot experiment to reduce youth unemployment and land degradation, developed with United Nations assistance. 59. The national drug-control strategy, supervised by the inter-ministerial committee for drug control, with the involvement of seven non-governmental organizations, had achieved some results in supply and demand reduction and through preventive education. The Government had taken a number of initiatives, with the support of civil society, and encouraged collaboration and coordination among the judicial services. Successful operations had been conducted in the previous three years in the context of bilateral, regional and international treaties. Since, despite its financial constraints, the country was also striving to strengthen its institutional capacity, she invited Cape Verde's development partners to join it in the common struggle by attending the round table on drug control later that week. 60. She appealed to the international community to continue to support the African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in an effort to combat corruption. Welcoming the forthcoming Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in Bangkok in April 2005, she reiterated her Government's commitment and pledged to cooperate with the international community in order to make the world a better place. 61. Mr. Gallegos (Ecuador) said that the problems created by organized crime and corruption threatened international peace and security and used vast quantities of State resources, threatening stability and sustainable development. The entry into force of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols was an indication of a renewed spirit of cooperation in that area. His Government had made combating transnational organized crime a priority, and had established a commission involving representatives from every ministry and from civil society to draw up a national plan. It had also submitted reforms of the legal codes governing criminal matters, children and adolescents, health and tourism to the legislature to bring the codes into line with its obligations under the Convention and its protocols. 62. Corruption fed crime, terrorism and other threats to security and posed a significant obstacle to the eradication of poverty. It undermined public and private institutions and the rule of law, affecting the Government's capacity to respond to other security threats. The adoption of the United Nations Convention against Corruption in 2003 demonstrated the desire of the international community to work together against that evil. Corruption had become a transnational phenomenon which affected all societies and economies, and thus international cooperation was required to combat it. Ecuador was in the process of ratifying that instrument. Meanwhile, at the regional level, it had become a party to the Inter-American Convention against Corruption of the Organization of American States. It urged all States to ratify those instruments with a view to ensuring their full implementation. 63. Mr. Esipila (Kenya) said that, with globalization, such criminal activities as drug trafficking, money-laundering, arms trafficking, cyber-crime and trafficking in persons were no longer confined within national boundaries. Unless those problems were addressed comprehensively, efforts at poverty reduction and sustainable development would not yield results. 64. His delegation reaffirmed its commitment to international cooperation in addressing the drug menace, and to that end called for increased technical assistance and additional financial resources to aid developing countries. Kenya was proud to announce its ratification of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and it was also a party to a number of United Nations conventions on drug trafficking. 65. Corruption threatened economic growth, social development and the consolidation of democracy. It eroded morality and reduced confidence in the public sector. The global effects of corruption had culminated in the adoption in 2003 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Kenya had demonstrated its commitment to fight corruption by being the first country to sign and ratify that convention, and it urged other States to do so in order to ensure its timely entry into force. 66. At the domestic level, Kenya had embarked on an ambitious reform programme aimed at promoting good governance and the rule of law by putting an end to impunity. It was finalizing legislation on the proceeds of crime and money-laundering, as well as the Act on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control. It was also active in regional bodies to combat money-laundering and drug trafficking. 67. Mr. Gappoev (Russian Federation) said that transnational organized crime and illicit drug trafficking were multifaceted threats undermining economic and social development and the rule of law, providing fertile ground for the spread of terrorism. Their scope and urgency called for the United Nations to coordinate international efforts against such criminal activity. A global strategy based on international law was needed, and his Government attached great importance to the practical steps being taking to combat transnational organized crime, as demonstrated by its ratification of the Convention and its protocols. The adoption of the Convention against Corruption represented another important step forward. The provision allowing proceeds of illicit activities to be returned to their countries of origin represented major progress. 68. Given the dangers of international drug trafficking, his Government advocated closer cooperation in that area, especially with its partners in the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to combat trafficking in the vast expanses of Central Asia were particularly appreciated. Drugs produced in Afghanistan still represented a global threat, and a system of socio-economic and law-enforcement measures within the country and a security perimeter along its borders to stop drug exports and prevent the import of precursors were needed. 69. Mr. Iskandarov (Azerbaijan), speaking in exercise of the right of reply, said that it was unfortunate that Armenia had used the current forum to deny the obvious fact that territory under the control of unrecognized regimes, which the Executive Director of UNODC had referred to in his introductory statement as "black holes", attracted criminals and criminal activity of all sorts. It was not true that Nagorny Karabakh was governed by elected authorities, as the elections had been held under an occupying military government in an area which had been ethnically cleansed of its original inhabitants. No fact-finding mission had been able to visit the region, although such a visit would be in the interests of all. His delegation urged that an independent fact-finding mission should be dispatched to the occupied Azerbaijani territory without delay. 70. Ms. Martirosyan (Armenia), speaking in exercise of the right of reply, said that in 1992, the Helsinki meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe had referred to Nagorny Karabakh as a subject of negotiation to be represented by its elected authorities. 71. Mr. Iskandarov (Azerbaijan) recalled that the elections referred to had been condemned and had not been recognized internationally by such bodies as the European Union and the Council of Europe. 72. Mr. Vitteri (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)) said that the commitment shown by the almost universal ratification of the international instruments against terror and the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols was very encouraging. The United Nations Convention against Corruption had received 93 ratifications; only 10 more were needed for its protocol concerning firearms to enter into force. He hoped that goal could be achieved before the second meeting of the Conference of States Parties. The discussions in the Committee had reaffirmed the validity of the outcome of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly and the balanced approach towards drug control. The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 