%%%INTERNATIONAL SALE OF GOODS|ABSTRACTS|MODEL LAWS|TREATIES|

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCITRAL Digest of case law on the United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods* Article 12 Any provision of article 11, article 29 or Part II of this Convention that allows a contract of sale or its modification or termination by agreement or any offer, acceptance or other indication of intention to be made in any form other than in writing does not apply where any party has his place of business in a Contracting State which has made a declaration under article 96 of this Convention. The parties may not derogate from or vary the effect of this article. General issues and requirements 1. Article 12 recognizes that some States consider that it is important that contracts or their modifications or termination by agreement be in writing. Therefore, article 12 enables a Contracting State to make a declaration under article 96 to prevent the application of any provision of article 11, article 29 or Part II of the Convention which allows a contract of sale or its modification or termination by agreement or any offer, acceptance, or other indication of intention to be made in any form other than in writing where any party has his place of business in that Contracting State. It must be pointed out, however, that according to article 96 of the Convention only those Contracting States are allowed to declare an article 96 reservation whose legislation requires contracts of sale to be concluded in or evidenced by writing. 2. As set forth both in the legislative history and case law, article 12, unlike most provisions of the Convention, cannot be derogated from. Sphere of application and effects 3. In light of the legislative history, it appears that, as the operation of article 12 is confined to articles 11 and 29 and to Part II of this Convention, it does not encompass all notices or indications of intention required under the Convention but only those which relate to the formation of the contract, it modifications and its termination by agreement. 4. The effects of article 12 of the Convention lead to the principle of freedom from form requirements not being per se applicable where one party has its relevant place of business in a State that made an article 96 declaration. Opposing views exists as to the effects of the article 96 reservation. According to one view, the sole fact that one party has its place of business in a State that made an article 96 reservation does not necessarily mean that the form requirements of that State apply. Rather, it will depend on the rules of private international of the forum whether any form requirements have to be met. Thus, where those rules lead to the law of a State that made an article 96 reservation, the form requirements of that State will have to be complied with; where, on the other hand, the law applicable is that of a contracting State that did not make an article 96 reservation, the principle of freedom from form requirements laid down in article 11 applies, as repeatedly pointed out in case law. According to the opposing view, however, where one party has its relevant place of business in a State that made an article 96 reservation, the contract must be concluded or evidenced or modified in writing. 