%%%INTERNATIONAL SALE OF GOODS|ABSTRACTS|MODEL LAWS|TREATIES|

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCITRAL Digest of case law on the United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods* Article 25 A breach of contract committed by one of the parties is fundamental if it results in such detriment to the other party as substantially to deprive him of what he is entitled to expect under the contract, unless the party in breach did not foresee and a reasonable person of the same kind in the same circumstances would not have foreseen such a result. Purpose of the provision 1. Article 25 defines the notion of fundamental breach as used in various provisions of the Convention. A fundamental breach in this specific sense is a prerequisite for certain remedies under the Convention, such as the party's right to terminate the contract (articles 49 (1) (a) and 64 (1) (a); but see also articles 51 (2), 72 (1), 73 (1) and (2)), the right to require delivery of substitute goods presupposes a fundamental breach (article 46 (2)). A fundamental breach also has some bearing under the risk provisions of the Convention (article 70). In general article 25 defines the boarder line between the "normal" remedies for breach of contract -- like damages and price reduction -- and incisive remedies like termination and specific performance. Definition of fundamental breach 2. A fundamental breach requires first, that one party has committed a breach of contract. The breach of any obligation under the contract suffices irrespective whether the duty had been specifically contracted for or followed from the provisions of the Convention. Even the breach of any collateral duty can amount to a fundamental breach. For example, a manufacturer's duty to deliver goods under a certain trademark exclusively to the buyer has been held to have been fundamentally violated when the manufacturer displayed those goods at a fair for sale and kept them there despite a warning by the buyer. 3. In order to rank as fundamental a breach must be of a certain nature and weight. The aggrieved party must have suffered such detriment as to substantially deprive it of what it was entitled to expect under the contract. The breach must therefore nullify or essentially depreciate the aggrieved party's justified contract expectations. What expectations are justified depends on the specific contract and the risk allocation envisaged by the contract provisions, on customary usages and on the additional provisions of the Convention. For example, buyers cannot normally expect that delivered goods comply with regulations and official standards in the buyer's country. Therefore, e.g., the delivery of cadmium-contaminated mussels has not been regarded as a fundamental breach since the buyer could not have expected that the seller met the contamination-standards in the buyer's country and since the consumption of the mussels in small portions as such did not endanger a consumer's health. 4. Article 25 requires further that the violating party must have foreseen the result of the breach of the contract. However, the provision does not mention at which time the consequences of the breach must have been foreseeable. One court has decided that the time of conclusion of contract is the relevant time. Specific situations of fundamental breach 5. Courts have decided whether certain typical fact patterns constitute fundamental breaches. It has been determined on various occasions that the failure to perform a contractual duty constitutes a fundamental breach of contract unless the party has a justifying reason to withhold its performance. This has been decided in the case of final non-delivery as well as in the case of final non-payment. However, if only a minor part of the contract is finally not performed, e.g., one delivery out of several deliveries is not supplied, this remains a simple, non-fundamental breach of contract. On the other hand a final and unjustified announcement of the intention not to fulfil one's own contractual obligations has been found to constitute a fundamental breach. Likewise, the insolvency and placement of the buyer under administration has been held to constitute a fundamental breach under article 64 since it deprives the unpaid seller of what it was entitled to expect under the contract, namely payment of the full price. It has also been determined that non-delivery of the first instalment in an instalment sale gives the buyer reason to believe that further instalments will not be delivered and therefore a fundamental breach of contract was to be expected (article 73 (2)). 6. As a rule late performance(3/4)be it late delivery of the goods or late payment of the price(3/4)does not constitute in itself fundamental breach of contract. Only when the time for performance is of essential importance either if it is so contracted or if it is due to evident circumstances (e.g., seasonal goods) then delay as such can amount to a fundamental breach. But even if there is no fundamental breach, the Convention allows the aggrieved party to fix an additional period of time for performance; if the party in breach fails to perform during that period, the aggrieved party thereupon may declare the contract avoided (articles 49 (1) (b) and 64 (1) (b)). Therefore in case of a delay in the performance, but only in that case, the lapse of that additional period turns a non-fundamental breach into a fundamental one. 7. If defective goods are delivered, the buyer can terminate the contract when the non-conformity of the goods is to be regarded as a fundamental breach (article. 49, paragraph 1 (a)). It therefore becomes essential to know under what conditions delivery of non-conforming goods constitutes a fundamental breach of contract. Court decisions on this point have found that any non-conformity concerning quality remains a mere, non-fundamental breach of contract as long as the buyer(3/4)without unreasonable inconvenience(3/4)can use the goods or resell them even with a rebate. For example, the delivery of frozen meat which was too fat and too wet and consequently worth 25.5 per cent less than meat of the contracted quality according to an expert opinion was not regarded as a fundamental breach of contract since the buyer had the opportunity to resell the meat at a lower price or to otherwise process it. On the contrary, if the non-conforming goods cannot be used or resold with reasonable effort this constitutes a fundamental breach and entitles the buyer to declare the contract avoided. This has been held to be the case as well where the goods suffered from a serious and irreparable defect although they were still useable to some extent (e.g. flowers which were supposed to flourish the whole summer but did so only for part of it). Courts have considered a breach to be fundamental without reference to possible alternative uses or resale by the buyer when the goods had major defects and the buyer needed the goods for manufacture. The same conclusion had been reached where the non-conformity of the goods resulted from added substances the addition of which was illegal both in the country of the seller and the buyer. 8. Special problems arise when the goods are defective but repairable. Some courts have held that easy reparability excludes any fundamentality of the breach. Courts are reluctant to consider a breach to be fundamental when the seller offers and effects speedy repair without any inconvenience to the buyer. 9. The violation of other contractual obligations can also amount to a fundamental breach. It is, however, necessary that the breach deprives the aggrieved party of the main benefit of the contract and that this result could have been foreseen by the other party. Thus, a court stated that there is no fundamental breach in case of delivery of the wrong certificates pertaining to the goods if either the goods were nevertheless merchantable or if the buyer itself could(3/4)at the seller's expense(3/4)easily get the correct certificates. The unjustified denial of contract rights of the other party(3/4)e.g. the validity of a retention of title clause and the seller's right to possession of the goods or the unjustified denial of a valid contract after having taken possession of samples of the goods(3/4)can amount to a fundamental breach of contract. The same is true when resale restrictions have been substantially violated. 10. A special case is the delayed acceptance of the goods. A delay in accepting the goods will generally not constitute a fundamental breach, particularly when there are only a few days of delay. 11. The cumulated violation of several contractual obligations makes a fundamental breach more probable but does not automatically constitute a fundamental breach. Whether a fundamental breach exists depends on the circumstances of the case as well as on whether the breach resulted in the aggrieved party losing the main benefit of, and the interest in, the contract. Burden of proof 12. Article 25 regulates also to some extent the burden of proof. As far as foreseeability is concerned the burden lies on the party in breach. This party has to prove that it did not foresee the detrimental effect of its breach and that a reasonable person of the same kind in the same circumstances would not have foreseen such an effect. The aggrieved party on the other hand has to prove that the breach deprived it substantially of what it was entitled to expect under the contract. 