%%%INTERNATIONAL SALE OF GOODS|ABSTRACTS|MODEL LAWS|TREATIES|

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCITRAL Digest of case law on the United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods* Article 75 If the contract is avoided and if, in a reasonable manner and within a reasonable time after avoidance, the buyer has bought goods in replacement or the seller has resold the goods, the party claiming damages may recover the difference between the contract price and the price in the substitute transaction as well as any further damages recoverable under article 74. 1. Article 75 provides that an aggrieved party may claim recovery of the difference between the contract price and the price in a substitute transaction if the original contract has been avoided and if the substitute transaction was concluded in a reasonable manner and within a reasonable time after avoidance. The last clause of article 75 also provides that an aggrieved party may recover further damages under the general damage formula set out in article 74. The formula in article 75 is a familiar one and can be found in domestic sales laws. Relation to other articles 2. Article 75 sets out the first of two damage formulas applicable if the contract is avoided. Article 75 calculates damages as the difference between the contract price and the price of a substitute transaction, while article 76 calculates damages as the difference between the contract price and a market price when the aggrieved party does not enter into a substitute transaction. Article 76 (1) provides that an aggrieved party may not calculate damages under article 76 if it has concluded a substitute transaction. If, however, an aggrieved party concludes a substitute transaction for less than the contract quantity, both articles 75 and 76 may apply. Thus, one decision found that an aggrieved seller who resells only some of the contract goods to a third party may recover damages as to these goods under article 75 and damages as to the unsold goods under article 76. Where the aggrieved party failed to satisfy the conditions for application of article 75, one court applied the "abstract" calculation of article 76 instead. 3. The final clause of article 75 provides that an aggrieved party may recover additional damages under article 74. If the aggrieved party fails to satisfy the conditions for application of article 75, the aggrieved party may nevertheless recover damages under article 74. Even when it might recover under article 75, an aggrieved party may choose to claim damages under article 74 instead. Damages recovered under article 74 may be calculated in much the same way they would be calculated under article 75. 4. Damages recoverable under article 75 are reduced if it is established that the aggrieved party failed to mitigate these damages as provided in article 77. The reduction is the amount by which the loss should have been mitigated. See "Calculation of damages" below. 5. Pursuant to article 6, the parties may agree to derogate from or vary the formula set out in article 75. Several decisions implicitly rely on article 6 when finding that article 75 is not applicable. One decision found that where the parties had agreed that an aggrieved party was entitled to a "compensation fee" if the contract was avoided because of the acts of the other party, the aggrieved party was entitled to recover both the compensation fee and damages under article 75. Another decision concluded that a post-breach agreement settling a dispute with respect to a party's non-performance displaced the aggrieved party's right to recover damages under the damage provisions of the Convention. Conditions on application of article 75 6. Article 75 applies if the contract is avoided and if the aggrieved party concludes a substitute transaction in a reasonable manner and within a reasonable time after avoidance. - Avoidance of contract 7. Recovery of damages under article 75 is available only if the contract has been effectively avoided by the aggrieved party. Substitute transactions concluded before avoidance do not fall within the coverage of article 75. Notwithstanding the condition that the contract be avoided, one court has concluded that, with reference to the need to promote observance of good faith in international trade, the aggrieved party did not have to establish that it had declared the contract avoided when the other party made it clear that it could not perform within the time fixed. - Substitute transaction 8. An aggrieved party seeking damages calculated under article 75 must conclude a substitute transaction. If the seller is the aggrieved party, the substitute transaction is the sale to some other buyer of the goods identified to the avoided contract. An aggrieved buyer concludes a substitute transaction when it buys goods to replace those promised in the avoided contract. 9. Article 75 requires that the substitute transaction be entered into "in a reasonable manner and within a reasonable time after avoidance". There is no express requirement that the price in the substitute transaction be reasonable. Nevertheless, one decision concluded that where an aggrieved seller resold the goods for approximately one-fourth of the contract price the resale was not a reasonable substitute and the court calculated damages under article 76 rather than article 75. If there is a significant difference between the contract price and the price in the substitute transaction the damages recoverable under article 75 may be reduced pursuant article 77 because of the aggrieved party's failure to mitigate damages. - Substitute transaction -- reasonable manner 10. An aggrieved party must conclude the substitute transaction in a reasonable manner. An arbitral tribunal described the requirement that there be a "substitute" transaction as being one where the aggrieved buyer acts as a prudent and careful businessperson who sells goods of the same kind and quality, ignoring unimportant small differences in quality. A sale at market value on approximately the same freight terms was found to be a reasonable substitute sale. - Substitute transaction -- reasonable time 11. An aggrieved party must conclude the substitute transaction within a reasonable time after avoidance of the contract. What time is reasonable will depend on the nature of the goods and the circumstances. Noting that a reasonable time begins to run only when the contract is avoided, a court found that the aggrieved seller acted within a reasonable time when it resold shoes made for the winter season within two months where it was established that most potential buyers had already bought winter shoes by the time the contract was avoided. Another court found that an aggrieved seller who resold the printing press within six months after the additional period given the buyer to perform was within a reasonable time. These decisions assume that the aggrieved party must conclude the substitute transactions within the reasonable time but one decision has apparently construed the reasonable time requirement to mean that a reasonable time must elapse after avoidance before the substitute transaction may be concluded. Calculation of damages 12. If the conditions for application of article 75 are satisfied, the aggrieved party may recover "the difference between the contract price and the price in the substitute transaction". This amount may be adjusted by adding further damages recoverable under article 74 or by deducting the loss that could have been avoided if the aggrieved party had mitigated its damages in accordance with article 77. Most courts have had little difficulty applying the damage formula set out in article 75. 13. Several decisions have awarded additional damages under article 74 to compensate for incidental damages arising from the breach. There will, of course, be no additional recovery if further damages are not established. 14. Several decisions have reduced the aggrieved party's recovery under article 75 because the aggrieved party failed to mitigate its losses. An aggrieved seller who resold the goods to a third party at a price significantly below not only the original purchase price but also a modified price proposed by the buyer failed to mitigate its damages and the seller was consequently entitled to recover only the difference between the purchase price and the proposed modified price. There is no reduction if there is no failure to mitigate. In particular, an aggrieved seller who has the capacity and market to sell similar goods may resell the goods intended for the defaulting buyer to a third party and the aggrieved party need not reduce its damages on the ground that the resale was mitigation pursuant to article 77. Burden of proof; consideration of evidence 15. Although none of the damage formulas in articles 74, 75 and 76 expressly allocates the burden of proof, one court has concluded that the Convention recognizes the general principle that the party who invokes a right bears the burden of establishing that right and that this principle excludes application of domestic law with respect to burden of proof. The same opinion concluded, however, that domestic law rather than the Convention governs how a judge should reach its opinion (e.g. the weight to be given evidence) as this was a matter not covered by the Convention. 