%%%DEVELOPING ISLAND COUNTRIES|CONFERENCES|CONSULTATIONS|ELECTION OF OFFICERS|REPRESENTATIVES' CREDENTIALS|REPORTING PROCEDURES|

* A/CONF.207/1. Item 6 of the provisional agenda* Organization of work, including the establishment of the Main Committee Note by the Secretariat 1. In paragraph 2 of its resolution 58/213 A, the General Assembly, inter alia, approved the provisional rules of procedure of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. The Commission on Sustainable Development acting as the preparatory meeting for the International Meeting, which met from 14 to 16 April 2004, approved the provisional agenda for adoption by the International Meeting and had before it the provisional organization of work (E/CN.17/2004/L.3). The proposals contained herein are based on the aforementioned documentation and the proposed organization of work will be transmitted to the International Meeting for adoption. I. Pre-conference consultations 2. In paragraphs 1 to 3 of its resolution 58/213 B, the General Assembly decided that the International Meeting should be held from 10 to 14 January in Mauritius, and that, if deemed necessary and taking into account paragraph 7 of its resolution 58/213 A, two days of informal consultations should be held at the same venue on 8 and 9 January 2005 to facilitate the effective preparation of the International Meeting. In paragraph 3 of the same resolution, the General Assembly took note of the appointment of a Facilitator for the process of informal consultations on the outcome documents, who will report progress thereon to the Bureau of the International Meeting, when constituted. 3. Informal consultations are also required to reach final agreement on all aspects of procedural and organizational matters at the opening meeting of the International Meeting, including the election of officers, the composition of the General Committee, the distribution of posts in the General Committee among regional groups, the adoption of the rules of procedure, the adoption of the agenda and organization of work, the appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee and arrangements for the preparation of the report of the International Meeting. It is proposed that the informal consultations on these issues be conducted under the chairmanship of the head of the delegation of the host country. II. Election of officers 4. Rule 6 of the provisional rules of procedure for the Conference (A/CONF.207/2) provides that: "The International Meeting shall elect from among the representatives of participating States the following officers: a President, 14 Vice-Presidents, from among which shall be selected a Rapporteur-General, as well as a Chairman for the Main Committee established in accordance with rule 46. These officers shall be elected with a view to ensuring the representative character of the General Committee. The International Meeting may also elect such other officers as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions." 5. Pursuant to rules 6 and 11, the International Meeting would thus have a General Committee composed of the President, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General and the Chairman of the Main Committee. In accordance with standard practice, the Presidency of the International Meeting would go to the host country. III. Adoption of the rules of procedure 6. The International Meeting will have before it for adoption the provisional rules of procedure which were approved by the General Assembly in paragraph 2 of its resolution 58/213 A (A/CONF.207/2). IV. Adoption of the agenda 7. The provisional agenda for the International Meeting is contained in document A/CONF.207/1. V. Organization of work, including the establishment of the Main Committee of the International Meeting A. Organization of work 8. The organization of work for the International Meeting will be dealt with on the basis of informal consultations mentioned in paragraph 3 above. The International Meeting will have before it a proposed organization of work, which could be set out as follows: (a) The plenary will commence with the opening of the International Meeting and will hold organizational and procedural meetings, as required, to be followed by statements by representatives of United Nations specialized agencies, organizations and programmes and of intergovernmental organizations, not exceeding a time limit of five minutes each, and the report of the Civil Society Forum; (b) The Main Committee and its working groups, if any, will meet from 10 to 12 January to consider all outstanding matters relating to the draft outcome documents of the International Meeting; (c) The high-level segment of the International Meeting will be held on 13 and 14 January and will hold a general debate focusing on a comprehensive review of the implementation of the Programme of Action; (d) Prior to and during the high-level segment, special events, in the form of panel discussions and round tables, will be organized in the plenary, focusing on the environmental, social and economic vulnerabilities of small island developing States. B. Allocation of items 9. It is proposed that items 1 to 8 and 10 of the provisional agenda be considered directly in plenary meeting, and that item 9 be initially allocated to the Main Committee, which upon the conclusion of its work will submit a report to the plenary for its adoption. C. High-level segment 10. The high-level segment of the International Meeting will consider agenda item 8, "Comprehensive review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States", on 13 and 14 January 2005. A time limit of five minutes will be established for statements. D. Establishment of the Main Committee of the International Meeting 11. The Main Committee of the International Meeting will meet from 10 to 12 January. Its Chairman will be elected by the International Meeting in accordance with the provisions of rule 6 of the provisional rules of procedure of the International Meeting. In accordance with the provisions of rule 50, the Main Committee will elect its own officers, with the exception of the Chairman. It is proposed that the Main Committee elect four Vice-Chairmen on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, one of whom would be designated to assume the additional functions of Rapporteur. It is recommended that agreement be reached on the slate of candidates for posts falling within the ambit of the Main Committee before the opening of the International Meeting, thus permitting elections by acclamation. E. Timetable for the work of the International Meeting 12. The proposed timetable for the work of the International Meeting is contained in the annex to the present note. It is understood that the Main Committee will adjust its organization of work as required. F. Organization of meetings 13. The resources available to the International Meeting permit the holding of a maximum of two simultaneous meetings in the morning and two in the afternoon, with interpretation facilities. Interpretation facilities can be provided to regional or interest-group meetings only when they are held in place of formal meetings. 14. In accordance with the provisions of rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure, the International Meeting may establish such committees and working groups as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions. Subject to the decision of the plenary of the International Meeting, the Main Committee may also set up subcommittees and working groups. It should be noted, however, that committees, subcommittees and working groups can be established only to the extent permitted by the conference-service facilities available at the International Meeting site. 15. Meetings will normally be held from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., except during the high-level segment, when they will be held from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m. In order to ensure the most efficient utilization of available resources, it is essential that all meetings start promptly as scheduled. VI. Credentials of representatives of the International Meeting: appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee 16. Rule 4 of the provisional rules of procedure provides that there shall be a Credentials Committee of nine members appointed at the beginning of the International Meeting and that its composition shall be based on that of the Credentials Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations at its fifty-ninth session. 17. At the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, the Credentials Committee was composed of the following States: Benin, Bhutan, China, Ghana, Liechtenstein, the Russian Federation, Trinidad and Tobago, the United States of America, and Uruguay. VII. Report of the International Meeting 18. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations conferences, it is recommended that the report of the International Meeting consist of the decisions of the International Meeting; summaries of the panel discussions and round tables; a brief account of the events leading to the convening of the International Meeting and its proceedings; and a repertorial account of the work of the Main Committee and the action taken on its recommendations in plenary meetings. Annex Proposed timetable for the work of the International Meeting A. Pre-conference consultations/informal consultations Date/time Programme Saturday, 8 January a.m. and p.m. Informal consultations Sunday, 9 January a.m. B. Plenary meetings Agenda item Monday, 10 January 10 a.m.-1 p.m. l Opening of the International Meeting Election of the President Adoption of the rules of procedure Election of officers other than the President Adoption of the agenda: accreditation of intergovernmental organizations and major groups Credentials of representatives to the International Meeting 7 (a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee 7 (b) Report of the Credentials Committee Comprehensive review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States Statements by representatives of United Nations specialized agencies, organizations and programmes and of intergovernmental organizations, and report of the Civil Society Forum 3-6 p.m. Panel discussion 1: "The environmental vulnerabilities of small island developing States" Tuesday, 11 January Panel discussion 2: "The special challenges of small island developing States in trade and economic development" 3-5 p.m. Panel discussion 3: "The role of culture in the sustainable development of small island developing States" 5-7 p.m. Panel discussion 4: "Addressing emerging trends and social challenges for the sustainable development of small island developing States" Wednesday, 12 January Panel discussion 5: "Building resilience in small island developing States" Thursday, 13 January 9 a.m.-1 p.m. Opening of the high-level segment: general debate High-level segment: general debate (continued) Round table 1: overall theme: "The way forward" 7 p.m. Closure of the list of speakers for the general debate on item 8 Friday, 14 January High-level segment (continued) Round table 2: overall theme: "The way forward" High-level segment (conclusion) Adoption of the final outcomes of the International Meeting Adoption of the report of the International Meeting Closure of the International Meeting a.m.1 Election of officers Organization of work Consideration of the final outcomes of the International Meeting Consideration of the final outcomes of the International Meeting (continued) Action on all outstanding matters Completion of the work of the Main Committee 1 Beginning immediately after the adjournment of the organizational part of the first plenary meeting of the International Meeting. 