%%%LANDMINES|MILITARY TECHNOLOGY|

GROUP OF GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS OF CCW/GGE/IX/WG.2/WP.1 THE STATES PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION 11 November 2004 ON PROHIBITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS WHICH MAY BE DEEMED TO BE EXCESSIVELY INJURIOUS OR TO HAVE INDISCRIMINATE EFFECTS Original: ENGLISH Ninth Session Geneva, 8-16 November 2004 Item 8 of the agenda Working Group on Mines Other Than Anti-Personnel Mines Sensitive Fuzes in Mines Other than Anti-Personnel Mines (MOTAPM) Prepared by the Delegation of the United Kingdom Introduction 1. Following the Eighth Session of the Group of Governmental Experts in July, the UK indicated that it wished to re-examine the issue of sensitive fuzes, with a view to furthering discussions on a Best Practice Annex to a possible future Protocol to the CCW. The area of sensitive fuzes is not one where prescriptive regulation is appropriate. 2. The UK believes that the aim of such a Best Practice Annex would be to encourage the design of fuzes so as to make it very unlikely that Mines Other than Anti-Personnel Mines (MOTAPM) would be activated by the presence, proximity or contact of a person, without setting such stringent requirements as to impede the military effectiveness and utility of MOTAPM. Reducing a mine's sensitivity excessively could have this result. 3. The definition of Sensitive Fuzes, which will form the basis of this discussion, is as follows: Sensitive Fuzes are those fuzes which, although designed to be activated by the presence, proximity or contact of a vehicle, are highly likely to be activated by the presence, proximity or contact of a person. In some cases, the sensitivity is due to the inherent characteristics of the fuze where the design cannot be amended so as to be less sensitive. In other cases, whether a fuze is sensitive or not depends on the detail of the design and manufacture; fuzes designed according to best practice are less likely to be activated by a person, whereas poorly designed or manufactured fuzes of all known types might be sensitive. Whatever the reason for the sensitivity, the UK regards fuzes that are highly likely to be activated by the presence, proximity or contact of a person as unacceptable. 4. This approach to best practice for sensitive fuzes is not capable of dealing with the issue of distinguishing civilian from military vehicles. Indeed, civilian vehicles may be the same as those used for military purposes. No fuze can reasonably be expected to make this distinction, so a different approach is needed to deal with the threat to civilians in vehicles from mines on roads laid for military purposes sometimes years before. 5. The UK wishes to express its support for the categorisation of sensors outlined by Germany in its paper at the Eighth Session (CCW/GGE/VIII/WG.2/WP.3). This paper divided sensors into three categories: Firstly, those which could not be designed not to be excessively sensitive, secondly, those which could be so-designed but are best used in conjunction with other sensors, and, thirdly, those sensors which can be designed not to be excessively sensitive. The UK believes that these categories provide an excellent basis for addressing the interaction between humanitarian and military requirements for MOTAPM. Furthermore, it notes that military and humanitarian needs are not necessarily in conflict, as a MOTAPM that is detonated by a person has failed to fulfil its military purpose. 6. The intention of this paper is to build on the work done by Germany by considering some of the more important fuze-types and their categorisation in more detail. The discussion will focus on magnetic influence sensors, acoustic sensors, seismic sensors, pressure sensors and trip wires, tilt rods and break wires. Magnetic Influence Sensors 7. Magnetic influence fuzing systems are used in many modern MOTAPM. Germany's paper categorises these sensors as being capable of being designed not to be excessively sensitive and not needing to be used in conjunction with other sensors. While agreeing with the sentiment of the German conclusion, the UK wishes to point out that this category, perhaps more than any other, depends on the detail of the design. Badly designed magnetic influence sensors may make mines highly sensitive, whereas well designed magnetic influence sensors may achieve the appropriate balance between military and humanitarian requirements. 8. If the sensor is designed to detect only changes in one component of the magnetic field, as is the case with many such fuzing systems, it is impossible to distinguish between a small amount of metal very close to the sensor, such as a bayonet, and a large amount of metal, such as a tank, at a greater distance, when the latter is clearly the intended target. Magnetic influence is proportional to the inverse of the cube of the distance from the sensor (1/r³), which serves to illustrate that the signature of a very small amount of ferromagnetic material could provide one similar to that of a large amount far away. The sensor is therefore unable to distinguish, at least in theory, between a person carrying a small amount of magnetic material and the intended target, ie. a vehicle. In practice, single axis magnetic sensors are mostly used on scatterable and remotely delivered mines. These are normally short lived (i.e. have a self destruct or self neutralisation (SD/SN) capability) and are laid on the surface, making them highly visible. 9. Magnetic sensors can be designed to detect change in magnetic field in 3 axes. The UK does, however, see several problems in such a development. Firstly, the complexity of such technology inevitably involves a very high cost. Furthermore, whilst detection in 3 axes would minimise the humanitarian risk, it would render the mine extremely easy to clear by enemy forces, as the risk of the mine detonating when lifted is very small. This would significantly reduce the military utility of the mine. 10. UK research suggests that magnetic influence sensors might be best used in conjunction with other sensors to reduce the risk of inadvertent detonation by a person. A seismic sensor could be added, for example, which would alert the mine only if the signal matched that of a vehicle. However, for remotely delivered or scatterable mines that are short lived, especially when they are deployed in an area where civilians are not likely to be present, the UK does not consider magnetic sensors to pose an unacceptable risk to persons (as opposed to vehicles). Best practice should nevertheless ensure that sensors are no more sensitive to small amounts of metal in their immediate vicinity than is required for the effective functioning of the mine against its intended target. Acoustic Sensors 11. Currently acoustic sensors represent an essential capability as a wake-up sensor, conserving power in MOTAPM. The technology presently used is probably not capable of being made significantly more discriminatory and so it is appropriate to categorise acoustic sensors as being best used in conjunction with other sensors. The UK, however, is of the opinion that future developments in the technology of acoustic sensors could see them used as the principal fuzing system in a MOTAPM. Thus they could eventually be placed in the category of fuzes that can be designed to operate satisfactorily on their own, although the available technology has not reached this stage yet. Particularly if several acoustic sensors were networked together, it may be possible to determine accurately the signal of an approaching target. Furthermore the technology involved would not be so complex as to invoke high costs. As with many MOTAPM fuzing systems, external factors, in this case wind direction, must be taken into account, but there is evidence that a high level of accuracy may be achieved. Seismic Sensors 12. The UK is in full agreement with the German paper in placing seismic sensors in the category of sensors that are best used in conjunction with others. Whilst it may be possible to design them not to be excessively sensitive, they are best used in a multiple-fuze system. The operation of seismic sensors depends greatly on soil-type. Whilst they are excellent at detecting a potential target approaching and alerting the mine, they cannot alone be relied upon to distinguish the correct target. Pressure Sensors 13. The UK shares the German view that pressure sensors may be designed not to be excessively sensitive and can be used on their own. Mines detonated by the pressure of a vehicle are very common and remain among the most cost-effective and reliable options for MOTAPM. However, they have proved among the most controversial in the extensive discussion of sensitive fuzes that have taken place in this forum. The reason for this is that it has not proved possible to specify a single number (or small range) that can satisfactorily capture best practice. The downward pressure exerted at any one point by a wide tank track means that the activation threshold cannot be set too high or a mine will not function against its intended target. A soldier carrying full kit may under some circumstances, particularly if running or jumping, exceed this threshold. The design of the mine therefore has to be a compromise, especially as in practice the sensitivity of these sensors shows considerable variability. 14. One type of best practice that may be considered is ensuring that the mine will not detonate at a pressure that is significantly lower than that required to engage its intended target. Thus a mine that would always be detonated by the weight of an average person, say 40-80kg, is not acceptable. 15. Another approach to best practice is to incorporate additional features that make it more likely that the mine will only be detonated by a vehicle and not a person. One way to do this is for a time characteristic to be added so that the mine will only detonate when a certain pressure is applied over a period of time. This could prevent detonation by a person, for example jumping on the mine. Another way would be to a displacement system, requiring pressure to be exerted over an area greater than that of a human foot. 16. Although best practice is not easy to define for pressure sensors, the UK believes that a high level of discrimination can be achieved with relatively unsophisticated technology and without invoking high costs. Trip wires/ Tilt Rods/ Break wires 17. The UK agrees with the German delegation that the only 3 fuzes which cannot be designed to be less sensitive are trip wires, tilt rods and break wires. None of these fuzes can be reset and none can easily form part of a multi-fuze system. Tilt rods require only a relatively small amount of force, certainly much less than that exerted by a person walking, near the end of the rod to detonate the mine. In practice, if left alone tilt rods become hidden by growing vegetation, which can only increase the risk of inadvertent detonation by a person. 18. Some delegations have argued that break wires should be excluded from the category of fuzes that cannot be designed not to be excessively sensitive. The UK, however, continues to believe that break wires are not acceptable because if they are to be militarily effective - difficult to detect and activated by tracked or wheeled vehicles - the wire must necessarily be thin and fragile. Conclusions 19. This paper has explored the way in which various types of sensor can be used in anti-vehicle mines in such a way as to keep the humanitarian risk to a minimum without losing military capability. It reveals that the majority of sensors can be used in this way, either independently, or as part of a multiple fuze system. Tilt-rods, trip wires and break wires, however, cannot. The humanitarian hazard presented by these fuzes greatly outweighs their military utility. 