%%%CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS|CONSULTATIONS|TREATY COMPLIANCE|CONFERENCES|

GROUP OF GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS OF CCW/GGE/VIII/WP.1 THE STATES PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION 5 August 2004 ON PROHIBITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS WHICH MAY BE DEEMED TO BE EXCESSIVELY INJURIOUS OR TO HAVE INDISCRIMINATE EFFECTS Original: ENGLISH Eighth Session Geneva, 5-16 July 2004 Item 10 of the agenda CCW FRAMEWORK CONVENTION: ADDITIONAL ARTICLES ON CONSULTATIONS AND COMPLIANCE Submitted by South Africa Article 7 BIS Consultations of High Contracting Parties 1. The High Contracting Parties undertake to consult and co-operate with each other on all issues related to the operation of this Convention and its annexed Protocols. 2. For this purpose, the Depository shall convene a Conference of High Contracting Parties within one year after the entry into force of this Article. Subsequent Conferences shall be held as agreed to by a majority, but not less than eighteen, of the High Contracting Parties. 3. Participation in the Conference of High Contracting Parties shall be determined by their agreed Rules of Procedure. 4. The work of the Conference shall include: (a) review of the operation and status of this Convention and its annexed Protocols; (b) consideration of matters arising from reports by High Contracting Parties according to paragraph 5 of this Article; (c) preparation for review conferences; and (d) consideration of international co-operation and assistance to facilitate the implementation of this Convention and its annexed Protocols. 5. The High Contracting Parties, shall provide reports to the Depository, who shall circulate them to all High Contracting Parties in advance of this Conference, on any of the following matters: (a) dissemination of information on this Convention and its annexed Protocols to their armed forces and to the civilian population; (b) steps taken to meet the relevant technical requirements of this Convention and its annexed Protocols and any other relevant information pertaining thereto; (c) legislation related to this Convention and annexed Protocols; (d) measures taken on technical co-operation and assistance; and (e) other relevant matters. 6. The cost of the Conference of High Contracting Parties shall be borne by the High Contracting Parties and States not parties participating in the work of the Conference, in accordance with the United Nations scale of assessment adjusted appropriately. Article 7 TER Compliance 1. Each High Contracting Party shall take all appropriate steps, including legislative and other measures, to prevent and suppress violations of this Convention and its annexed Protocols by persons or on territory under its jurisdiction or control. 2. The measures envisaged in paragraph 1 of this Article include appropriate measures to ensure the imposition of penal sanctions against persons who, in relation to an armed conflict and contrary to the provisions of this Convention and its annexed Protocols, wilfully kill or cause serious injury to civilians and to bring such persons to justice. 3. Each High Contracting Party shall also require that its armed forces issue relevant military instructions and operating procedures and that armed forces personnel receive training commensurate with their duties and responsibilities to comply with the provisions of this Convention and its annexed Protocols. 4. The High Contracting Parties undertake to consult each other and to co-operate with each other bilaterally, through the Secretary-General of the United Nations or through other appropriate international procedures, to resolve any problems that may arise with regard to the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Convention and its annexed Protocols. 