%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|

CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT 1737 15 June 2004 Original: ENGLISH NOTE VERBALE DATED 4 JUNE 2004 FROM THE PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARIAT OF THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT TRANSMITTING THE TEXT OF THE CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT AFTER THE FIRST ANNIVERSARY PROLIFERATION SECURITY INITIATIVE MEETING, THAT WAS HELD IN KRAKOW, POLAND ON 31 MAY TO 1 JUNE 2004 The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations at Geneva presents its compliments to the Secretariat of the Conference on Disarmament and has the honour to transmit the text of the Chairman's Statement after the First Anniversary Proliferation Security Initiative Meeting, that was held in Krakow, Poland on 31 May - 1 June 2004. The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations at Geneva should be grateful if the Statement could be issued and circulated as an official document of the Conference on Disarmament. Kraków, 31 May - 1 June 2004 Chairman's Statement The First Anniversary Proliferation Security Initiative (the PSI) Meeting took place in Kraków, on 31 May - 1 June 2004. The Meeting was to commemorate the first anniversary of launching the Initiative by the US President, George W. Bush in his speech at the Wawel Royal Castle in Kraków, on 31 May 2003. Thus, the Proliferation Security Initiative will also be known as the Cracow Initiative. The meeting brought together senior representatives from over 60 countries. The participation of a broad representation of countries across the globe in the Anniversary Meeting confirms the growing awareness of the danger of proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, related materials and their means of delivery. It also highlights the worldwide support of the PSI and its Statement of Interdiction Principles. The meeting was conducted under the patronage of Aleksander Kwaśniewski, President of the Republic of Poland. During the meeting the Addresses by the President of the Republic of Poland, Aleksander Kwaśniewski and President of the United States of America, George W. Bush, were transmitted. The aims of the meeting included emphasising the PSI as a global initiative, further development of international support for the aims and objectives of the PSI, and promotion of broad international co-operation and participation in PSI activities. The Cracow Initiative is not about structure and organisation, but operation and cooperation. During one year the Proliferation Security Initiative has been transformed from a vision into an active network of partnership and practical cooperation. Common principles have been defined. Interdiction capabilities developed and tested. Regional activities undertaken. During the meeting, a series of presentations on the nature of PSI, its prospects, character, future development and outreach efforts were made. A special emphasis was made on the extensive exercise program where many countries have actively participated. It was stressed that the Proliferation Security Initiative is an important element in responding to the growing challenge posed by the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), their delivery systems, and related materials to or from states and non - state actors worldwide. It was further stressed that the PSI activities had to be consistent with national and international law and frameworks. The PSI builds on efforts by the international community to prevent the proliferation of WMD, their delivery systems or related materials and complements existing treaties and regimes. It is consistent with newly adopted United Nation's Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004. The UN Security Council Resolution states that the Council is "gravely concerned by the threat of illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery, and related materials". It calls upon all states "to take co-operative actions to prevent illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, their means of delivery and related materials" . The transparent nature of the PSI activities was reiterated and the contributions from countries that share PSI concerns, principles and goals were welcomed. An emphasis was made that the PSI is a global endeavour with an inclusive nature. It relies on the widest possible co-operation between states around the world. This meeting showed the willingness of strengthening and expanding this co-operation. The meeting confirmed the importance of continued outreach efforts to build the PSI and make it harder for proliferators to engage in this deadly trade. States participating were welcomed to engage in such co-operation as well as to undertake national action to identify law enforcement authorities and other tools or assets that could be brought to bear against efforts to stop proliferation facilitators. 