%%%ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|

Second regular session 2004 20 to 24 September 2004, New York Item 3 of the provisional agenda South-South cooperation Third cooperation framework for South-South cooperation (2005-2007)* Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-3 2 Development context for South-South cooperation in a globalized world . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 A. Gains and reverses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-8 3 B. The readiness to engage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9-15 4 C. Drivers of South-South cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 6 D. Lessons to build on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17-18 7 Strategic considerations and directions for 2005-07 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7 A. Strategic considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20-24 8 B. Elements of a programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 9 B1. Policy support to global efforts to enhance South-South cooperation . . . . . . . . 26-28 9 B2. Backstopping country initiatives to scale up South-South cooperation. . . . . . . . 29-42 10 B3. Mainstreaming South-South cooperation in the work of UNDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43-45 13 Management arrangements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 14 A. Programme management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46-48 14 B. Resource mobilization targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 14 V. Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 14 The collection of data required to present the Executive Board with the most current information has delayed submission of the present document. Introduction 1. In accordance with Executive Board decisions 2003/10 and 2004/33, the third cooperation framework for South-South cooperation (2005-2007) has been formulated within the established mandate of the UNDP Special Unit for South-South Cooperation and based on lessons learned from the implementation of its earlier programmes. Further to the report submitted to the Executive Board at its annual session in June 2004, the current framework details a forward-looking agenda for the use of resources available - and to be mobilized - under the UNDP multi-year funding framework (MYFF) for 2004-2007. Beyond this, it is hoped that the framework will provide the overall parameters for stimulating South-South initiatives more broadly within the United Nations and beyond. 2. This strategic framework is positioned in the context of a dramatic deepening in recent years of South-South alliances between states, civil society and the private sector, and is motivated by the significant contributions that South-South cooperation can make towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The framework capitalizes on the manifold drivers of South-South cooperation that have emerged in recent years and that have created the opportunities to scale up such cooperation in the future. It responds to the evident demand for a multilateral window that can help enrich South-South partnerships based on reciprocity, facilitating the successful integration of developing countries into the global system. To this end, the framework elaborates the context, strategy and directions for broadening the landscape of South-South cooperation through: (a) policy support to global efforts to enhance South-South cooperation; (b) backstopping country initiatives of South-South cooperation undertaken by individual or multiple `prime mover' countries; and (c) mainstreaming South-South cooperation within the work of UNDP. 3. In preparing this framework, the Special Unit has benefited substantively from rich consultations with member states, UNDP staff members in country offices and at headquarters, development partners, and United Nations system organizations. The document also gained from views expressed by members of the Executive Board at its annual session in June 2004, and during subsequent consultations. Recommendations made by representatives of TCDC pivotal countries at meetings held in Hangzhou, China in November 2003, and in Marrakech, Morocco in December 2003, have been key to defining the kind of support that might be sought by and offered to countries of the South. Dialogue with representatives of least developed countries (LDCs) also brought many insights to bear in the preparation of the framework. Meetings in early 2004 between the Special Unit and the African Union as well as with UNDP resident representatives, business executives and government officials in several regions have all contributed greatly to rethinking interregional exchanges. II. Development context for South-South cooperation in a globalized world 4. Since the end of the Cold War, globalization has gathered pace to become a force of defining influence. The careful integration of societies into international domains has become essential for building an inclusive brand of globalization and deriving its benefits. Countries that are able to integrate successfully are faring better than those that have remained isolated or marginalized from global systems. The task before the international community is therefore to enable integration in a way that promotes peace, security, prosperity and human development. A. Gains and reverses 5. In recent years, several countries in the South have achieved tremendous advances in human development, sometimes under difficult circumstances. They have combined effective policy frameworks with decades of investment in education, science and technology, building world-class capacities and deepening networks of interdependence within and across borders. Significantly, a common feature in all of the more successful developing countries has been their careful opening up to globalized domains. The performance of these countries in terms of trade, investment and growth has been described as "a quiet transformation" and as producing a "new geography of trade and economics". Significantly, countries integrating in a prudent manner are able to foster a greater sense of well-being and security among their populations. The combination of these experiences has helped produce important breakthroughs in poverty reduction and economic growth, supported by innovative responses to a wide range of environmental and social challenges. 6. As we look forward, projections indicate that several countries in the South are poised to make further advances in the coming decades. Indeed, over the next few years the gross domestic product of developing countries is expected to grow up to twice as fast as that of developed countries. In terms of economic size and growth, demographics, patterns of global demand and currency movements, some developing countries are set to match those displayed by the developed economies of today. 7. Nevertheless, performance across the South has been uneven. Many countries, especially among the LDCs, have experienced alarming reverses in human development, with costs falling disproportionately on the poor in general, and on women, children and minorities in particular. Many of these countries have found it difficult to turn their implicit comparative advantages into tangible benefits that leverage the opportunities of globalization. Countries, particularly those in Africa, that are beset by conflict, health crises and debt, have found it particularly difficult to achieve and sustain momentum. 8. The gains and reverses are exemplified in both narrow economic and broader developmental terms: while global income has grown by an average of 2.5 per cent a year since 1990, the number of people living in poverty has actually increased by nearly 100 million in the last decade. While the latest data show that net capital inflows to developing countries are increasing, net resource outflows also continue to rise and stood at $192 billion in 2002. The balance sheet of human development in the South over the past decade has therefore registered both significant gains and worrying reverses. 9. The need for South-South cooperation, under these circumstances, has never been clearer. The interest in deepening such cooperation is, at least in part, stimulated by the emergence of a differentiation in capacities and performance among countries of the South, which makes possible beneficial exchanges among them, as pointed out in the Marrakech Declaration on South-South Cooperation. 10. This interest is being reinforced by the willingness of emerging countries to step forward to become the new `prime movers' of South-South cooperation. The concept of the prime movers is an evolution of the notion of `pivotal country' in South-South cooperation and was proposed in a High Level meeting of these countries in Hangzhou, China in late 2003. While the introduction of pivotal countries led to a stronger promotion of the modality of South-South cooperation, and to a number of beneficial bilateral exchanges of expertise and experiences among developing countries, the prime mover concept is designed to replace such limited support with larger, systemic and holistic cooperation based on reciprocity. Accordingly, several countries have offered to act as prime movers in specific areas of expertise, including agro-processing, distance learning using ICT, and action programmes to deal with crises such as the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Also, prime mover countries would act collectively, in a multilateral framework, ensuring that the benefits of their experiences and expertise are made more broadly available. 11. Today, therefore, South-South cooperation is poised to deliver scaled-up and tangible results. Three potent and inter-related fundamentals may be said to be responsible for this favourable development. The first of these fundamentals is economic. South-South trade has been growing at 11 per cent a year for the past decade, with trade in services also registering a rise. Africa's trade with Asia has grown from around $6 billion to just under $18 billion in the last decade; India and South American Common Market (MERCOSUR) have recently established ties to deepen trading opportunities, and China and several African countries have prepared to establish a joint business council. These patterns are underlined by investment, transfer of technology and enterprise-level interaction at the regional as well as inter-regional levels. While the bulk of foreign direct investment continues to originate from developed economies, outward foreign direct investment from developing countries accounted for over one-tenth of total world stock and some six per cent of total world flows in 2003 ($0.9 trillion and $36 billion, respectively). Between 1980 and 2002, the average annual rate of growth in exports of goods and services was greater in developing countries than in developed countries. Today, the world's poor wield the greatest potential consumption power for goods and services over the coming decades. `The market at the bottom of the pyramid', as it has become known, stands as the next frontier of growth and prosperity. 12. The second fundamental that has contributed to 21st century South-South cooperation is the rich tapestry of natural, social, institutional and digital networks that underpin globalization. There is growing recognition in the South that networks can empower stakeholders by forging new types of interdependence. Evidence of this abounds: people-to-people networks and action from civil society and non-governmental organizations in both South and North is growing; and new iterations of regional solidarity such as the African Union, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the East African Community and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) are commonplace. The power of ICT has allowed networking in the South to grow in influence. Developing countries added three times more Internet users than developed countries during 2002. The number of Internet users in the Arab states increased by 116 per cent in 2002; in Brazil by 79 per cent; in China by 75 per cent; and in India by 136 per cent. Many developing countries have become leading hubs of ICT and have devised their own ICT-based solutions connecting people to services that have helped to overcome local development challenges. 13. The third changing fundamental is that, beyond economics and technology transfer, developing countries - the state, civil society and private sectors - have become increasingly active in international affairs in a variety of other significant ways. For instance, developing countries have become large contributors of personnel to United Nations peacekeeping and peace-building efforts and are amassing considerable command and operational expertise in the process. In 2002, 89 countries contributed more than 39,000 personnel to 15 active United Nations missions around the world, with Pakistan and Nigeria among the top contributors. Bangladeshi non-governmental organizations have been active in supporting livelihoods as far afield as Afghanistan and Kosovo, with the Grameen Bank approach to microfinance being replicated in 44 countries. Again in 2002, a company based in Zimbabwe became one of the world's leading providers of demining services, winning more than 130 contracts around the world worth over $1 billion. 14. In keeping with the expanded potential of South-South cooperation, there has been a growing sophistication in the way developing countries are partnering together. The bilateral South-South modalities of the past are being replaced by tripartite match-ups and, beyond this, multilateral arrangements between regions. Examples include the India Development Initiative, the partnerships between Africa and Thailand, and between Brazil and the Portuguese-speaking world. The emergence of multi-state groupings such as IBSA (comprising India, Brazil and South Africa) and the Group of 20 has also advanced the prospects for more inclusive globalization. Such developments have drawn a positive response from Northern development partners. These trends suggest that the experience, capacities and political will of the South can be combined with the long-standing efforts of Northern development partners to pursue shared goals. The growing maturity and expansion of markets in the South offer new frontiers for trade and cooperation between South and North, paving the way for what has been called `North-South-South cooperation'. 15. This diagnosis serves to illustrate that a fundamental shift in the political economy of development cooperation could be taking place. While North-South cooperation certainly remains an important anchor, it is clear that countries in the South are becoming increasingly engaged and are using their efforts to `round the circle of globalization' through deepening and more diversified partnerships of their own. 16. Clearly, then, this `quiet transformation' can have far-reaching consequences for peace, security, prosperity and human development. But to understand what brought South-South cooperation to where it is today, it is worth looking at the factors that appear to be driving the promise of such cooperation, including the increase in capacities and achievements in several developing countries. There are at least seven identifiable `drivers'. Education. Years of investment in the primary, secondary and tertiary education of both women and men have led to the accumulation of a growing stock of expertise. This is being mobilized for growth and development in the South, and can offer LDCs relevant development alternatives. Indeed, many developing countries now possess `world-class' institutions of education - such as India's institutes of technology - that are enabling them to take advantage of the opportunities presented in an inter-connected global economy. Effective policy frameworks. Political and economic continuity has allowed countries to pursue sustained economic growth and tackle human poverty in new ways. The outstanding performance of such countries in developing effective governance solutions and economic strategies is ready to be shared with other countries of the South facing their own obstacles to progress. Science and technology. Research and new tools, in areas as varied as agriculture and health, have underpinned the emergence of many developing countries as technically proficient societies in the globalized arena. Many developing countries have become hubs of scientific innovation and ICT, and they are speedily creating a knowledge-based labour force. New opportunities for online collaboration have opened up a new frontier for South-South cooperation. Institutional capacity. Tried and tested capacities are now at the disposal of countries in the South. Many developing countries today can claim to be host to world-class capacities active in the state, civil society and private sectors. The capacities are manifold and are at the forefront of the emerging profile of the South as a provider of development cooperation across the globe. These capacities enable South-South cooperation to leap beyond its traditional forms into rewarding partnerships between counterparts. Networks of interdependence. There is a growing recognition in the South, as elsewhere, that network logic can help individuals, communities and societies understand their development challenges and work towards equitable opportunities for all. This realization is bringing new relevance to formal and informal associations, deepening integration and partnering at sub-national, national, regional and international levels. Graduated opening to globalization. A number of developing countries with the ingenuity to adapt or innovate have managed gainfully to take advantage of globalized domains on terms conducive to human development. For countries seeking to take this step, South-South cooperation provides a meeting place to exchange experiences and develop strategies to increase flows of investment and expertise, create jobs and wealth, manage resources sustainably, increase per capita income and reduce human poverty. Support of the North. While much of the potential of the South can derive from Southern experience and expertise, the willingness of partners in the North to see this potential turn into the opening of markets and effective development is vital. Northern development partners have underscored their support for South-South cooperation through their encouragement of triangular partnerships. There is also a growing consensus that growth and development in the South can produce benefits for all by advancing shared priorities in peace, security, prosperity and human development. D. Lessons to build on 17. 17. The scene appears to be set for South-South cooperation to deliver tangible results of widening variety and deepening value. This unfolding reality reveals four central lessons: The political will and aspirations captured in inter-governmental resolutions of the past 25 years can be increasingly translated into operational partnerships for results. This paves the way to a significant scaling up of efforts from earlier stages of South-South cooperation. A number of emerging countries that have fared well in economic and developmental terms are willing to step forward to serve as the prime movers of South-South cooperation; this interest is being reciprocated by developing countries that are intent on overcoming their own obstacles to growth, development and integration into global domains. Discrete but ad hoc programmes of the past can now be upgraded into more ambitious, integrated, and wide-ranging forms of South-South cooperation of a multilateral nature. The role of the United Nations in general, and the UNDP and Special Unit in particular, can be key by helping states, civil society and private sectors connect with one another, foster understanding, establish norms and standards, and thus transform the willingness to cooperate in action-oriented arrangements. 18. These lessons form the basis upon which a strategy and directions for South-South cooperation for the next few years can be constructed. These are introduced in the following section. III. Strategic considerations and directions for 2005-2007 19. For the period 2005-2007, this framework will serve as the key policy document and strategic management instrument through which the Special Unit will seek to enhance its support to South-South cooperation. This framework is intended to provide least-developed countries, emerging countries in the South, and traditional development partners from the North, with an integrated multilateral platform to stimulate further growth and extend development effectiveness across the societies of the South in pursuit of the MDGs. A. Strategic considerations 20. Over the past year, several countries have called upon the UNDP Special Unit for support in deepening and extending the range of their South-South initiatives, and for assistance in implementing commitments made at various United Nations conferences, most recently, at the High Level Conference on South-South Cooperation held in Marrakech in December 2003. While the desired areas of focus in South-South cooperation have been expressed at these conferences, the initial thrust of UNDP activity has been to concentrate direct support to those areas in which prime mover countries are undertaking immediate, catalytic initiatives. In so doing, UNDP is leveraging its network of country offices to assist developing countries in convening, encouraging and facilitating dynamic coalitions and partnerships, as well providing them with operational, policy, and analytical support. Further, the Special Unit hopes to build on various specific platforms it has developed, such as the Asia-Africa Business Forum. The strategic considerations of this framework, described below, are derived from tangible and specific demand for the unique competencies of UNDP in the following functions and areas. 21. First, the focus of the framework will be on areas of cooperation where the demand expressed by developing countries is greatest; where the commitment to work in multilateral arrangements to achieve agreed objectives is strongest; and where the likelihood of involvement and support by state, civil society, and private sector partners in both South and North is highest. In each case, the Special Unit will seek to mobilize UNDP and other organs within the United Nations system and beyond, in keeping with its role as facilitator and catalyst. 22. Second, it has become clear that a number of key countries in the South (considered in the current programme to be prime movers) can offer credible solutions for scaling up development efforts in other countries. The effectiveness of such initiatives depends on the receptiveness of developing countries to cooperation with their Southern counterparts. The Special Unit will work to bring potential partners together by establishing lines of communication, facilitating the sharing of information and best practices, and providing other types of support necessary to foster practical relationships that contribute to human development objectives. As part of this approach, special attention will be given to the needs of LDCs, and vulnerable groups within such as women, children and minorities. 23. Third, the framework will serve as the Special Unit's main instrument for resource mobilization. The objective is to mobilize, across a broad front, financial, technical, institutional, social, and intellectual resources to pursue growth and development through South-South cooperation, in addition to those required for supporting the core functions and catalytic efforts of the Special Unit during 2005-2007. 24. These strategic considerations inform the directions contained in the rest of the framework, the elements of which are introduced below. In most cases, they emerge out of existing undertakings of the Special Unit but have been amplified to match demand and the ambition for the scaling up of South-South cooperation. The first element, which relates to policy support, seeks to build on the Special Unit's established function of supporting the countries of the South, but with a significantly more sophisticated range of services. The second represents enhanced support to areas of mutual interest to developing countries and the prime movers. The third element revitalizes the agenda for mainstreaming South-South cooperation into UNDP policies and the work of its country offices. While each element of the framework is distinct, they are to be viewed as the inter-related and complementary dimensions of a strategic framework that defines the work of the Special Unit for the period 2005-07. B. Elements of a programme B.1 Policy support to global efforts to enhance South-South cooperation 25. One of the core functions of the UNDP Special Unit has always been to promote and facilitate effective South-South programmes and initiatives. This function has assumed particular importance given the recent emergence of South-South cooperation as a critical paradigm in global development. UNDP will therefore need to provide a broad range of sophisticated and essential services to the development community in respect of South-South activities, encompassing strategic research and analysis, knowledge sharing, and promotion of policy dialogue among key development practitioners and policymakers. This framework envisages the following three central components. Strategic research and analysis 26. The framework proposes the undertaking by the Special Unit of comprehensive research and analysis of all aspects of South-South cooperation by engaging directly in such programmes as well as by pooling and synthesizing the work produced by other United Nations organizations and independent `think tanks' such as the Third World Network and the World Trade University. This standing function will facilitate strategic forecasting, trend analysis, monitoring and enhanced reporting to United Nations inter-governmental bodies and, more broadly, to the international development community. In this connection, it is proposed that an annual report on South-South cooperation be produced to present a regular analytical review of the most significant achievements as well as emerging issues and opportunities. Knowledge sharing 27. The enhancement of South-South cooperation globally requires the effective identification, codification, dissemination and overall management of knowledge assets in the developing world, particularly as they relate to best practices in the design and implementation of South-South programmes. Information and communications technology will be used to support this function and build on the experience of the Special Unit in identifying needs and capacities, and in the establishment of its web of information for development (WIDE). The system will be further improved to enhance access to information concerning the expanding pool of expertise in the South in a wide variety of disciplines. Support to policy dialogue 28. The Special Unit will continue to serve inter-governmental groups, including the Group of 77 in particular, in carrying out policy dialogue and discussions relating to emerging trends in South-South cooperation. Accordingly, support will be provided to convene and organize conferences and forums essential to the formulation of common positions and on South-South activities that contribute to achieving the MDGs. Specific technical assistance will be provided in facilitating follow-up to the recommendations of the first South Summit held in 2000, the 2003 Marrakech High Level Conference and the second South Summit scheduled to take place in 2005. B.2 Backstopping country initiatives to scale up South-South cooperation 29. The second part of the framework proposes support to a set of key initiatives that, as stated in paragraph 20, are being undertaken by prime mover countries with the operational support of the Special Unit and the involvement of a broad range of partners, to help developing countries scale up and achieve tangible results during the period 2005-2007. Given the rapidly evolving terrain for South-South cooperation, it is expected that the areas of cooperation will be expanded and will continue to mature for the duration of the framework. Both established and emerging initiatives will be driven by stakeholders in the South, with the support of the Special Unit and the combined resources of UNDP and the United Nations system. 30. The initiatives described below represent the immediate areas in which specific catalytic programmes are being pursued or proposed by Southern countries. They represent areas in which UNDP has broad expertise, or in which the Special Unit may already be active, thus rendering them effective vehicles for facilitating such cooperation. Promoting trade and investment 31. As stated in paragraph 5, a new geography of trade and economics has emerged, accompanied by overall increases in foreign direct investment. International trade negotiations continue to represent a critical area through which further liberalization and opening of the international economy are being achieved. Developing countries therefore have an important stake in the outcome of global trade debates and in enhancing development-oriented foreign investment. This has created a pressing need, particularly on the part of LDCs, to develop stronger and more sophisticated capacities to participate effectively in global trade negotiations. UNDP has maintained a significant programme in this area, with its clear relevance to South-South cooperation, by promoting collaboration among developing countries in strengthening their trade-related competencies in such areas as free trade zones, customs unions, common markets, economic unions, and regional or sub-regional integration. Further to the Eleventh United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD XI), a new round of trade negotiations has been initiated under the Generalized System of Trade Preferences. This is an important aspect of South-South cooperation and will need continued support in collaboration with UNCTAD. 32. While there has been an overall rise in foreign direct investment, it continues to be limited to a relatively small set of countries. For most developing countries, stimulating new capital investments is crucial. In this connection, the Marrakech declaration specifically requested the UNDP Special Unit to undertake a study of the prospects for intensifying interaction between business agents in developing countries, both from the private and public sector, and to propose recommendations to fully exploit the potential for joint ventures, to be presented to the second South Summit in 2005. Accordingly, analytical support for the promotion of foreign direct investment will constitute an important component of the cooperation framework. Promoting high-quality enterprise development 33. The establishment and strengthening of well-functioning and commercially sustainable private enterprises has emerged as a vital element of the development strategies of many countries, particularly LDCs in Africa. The Commission on the Private Sector and Development, established by the Secretary-General, recently published a report entitled Unleashing Entrepreneurship: Making Business Work for the Poor, which includes strong recommendations in this regard. The emergence of strong private sectors in several countries of Asia and Latin America provides an opportunity to establish programmes of support to interregional joint ventures, particularly with Africa. 34. The Special Unit has undertaken a number of activities in this area. One of the Special Unit's flagship programmes has been the Asia-Africa Business Forum, which seeks to encourage the formation of direct commercial joint ventures between businesses in the two regions. Assessments of the experience with this forum suggest that it could become a major vehicle to advance private sector development if transformed from an event-driven initiative to an ongoing support process to business generation in Africa. A current programme to promote the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in development has similar potential. 35. Countries that have successfully established competitive and profitable private ventures will be called upon to provide comprehensive support to their counterparts who are seeking to achieve similar successes. Such support may include help in identifying those industries or sectors that, based on resource endowments and other factors, hold the greatest promise for commercial success. It might also involve direct assistance to existing companies, including through technology transfer, advice in the expansion of product lines and new market diversification, and support for establishment of joint production facilities. A programme of capacity building in modern management techniques and practices would also be essential. The development of inter-regional cooperation along these lines would constitute an important component of this cooperation framework. Mobilizing the resources of the global South 36. It is well known that expatriate communities from the South resident in industrialized countries of the North have been expanding significantly in recent years. Such communities have been referred to in development literature as the `global South' and, as they become more prosperous and acquire a new and modern skill base, are increasingly viewed by the international community as a resource for development. Indeed, some countries have sought to promote and seek the expertise of their émigré populations for their own national development, by making better use of latent human, institutional, and financial resources available both within and beyond borders. The Special Unit will seek to build on initial exchanges with interested governments and multilateral development partners who have called upon the Special Unit to help achieve better utilization of the resources of the global south as part of an extended form of South-South cooperation. Such cooperation can take two forms: investment resources based on financial contributions, and capacity development through skills transfer. 37. Facilitating remittances and diversifying application. In 2002, émigré communities transferred approximately $150 billion in formal and informal remittances to developing countries. With 15,000 money remittance corridors across the world today, the already huge flow of remittances is expected to grow to $177 billion by 2006. This has implications for the MDGs, since financial resources typically directed towards families and extended kinship groups for private consumption, health and education, can generate significant spin-off social benefits. Flows of remittance can be increased by reducing transaction costs and simplifying processes, building education and awareness, and linking remitting populations to new vectors of economic activity and ethical investments in the pursuit of human development. A number of regional development banks have expressed an interest in working with the Special Unit to facilitate South-South sharing of experiences that can improve the development dividend of remittances. 38. Skill development through émigré expertise and capacities. Expatriate populations have in many cases acquired modern technological skills that can help developing countries leapfrog into the information economy. Such investment can, in turn, stimulate further investments in domestic education, technological transfer and venture capital projects. Accordingly, the sharing of best practices in this area would be most useful to developing countries. Building on the UNDP experience with the Transfer of Knowledge Through Expatriate Nationals (TOKTEN) programme, particular areas of interest include promoting country linkages through expatriate networks, focusing on established professionals, early-career professionals and students; fostering incentives to attract expatriate investment; and exploring expatriate recognition programmes and related policy measures. South-South solutions to combat HIV/AIDS 39. The threat that HIV/AIDS poses to human development across the world is well known, and several international programmes to deal with the crisis are underway. Responding to HIV/AIDS represents one of the five UNDP practice areas and efforts to combat it are a major developmental goal under the UNDP multi-year funding framework. 40. Recently, several initiatives based on South-South principles have emerged, ranging from sharing experiences in the development and implementation of comprehensive action plans to making antiretroviral drugs both accessible and affordable. The recently launched Southern African Capacity Initiative (SACI) of UNDP could serve as a vehicle for these efforts. SACI focuses on regenerating national capacities in one of the worst affected regions of the world, including by re-engineering government for new challenges and forging South-South partnerships. Food security 41. Improving household food security is another outcome the Special Unit proposes to pursue. This initiative builds on several years of facilitating triangular cooperation between developing countries in Africa and Asia, and Japan. It has popularized high-yielding and disease-resistant rice varieties such as New Rice for Africa (NERICA), researched and developed in Africa, and integrating them into production systems across the continent. Related initiatives will facilitate transfer of technology and expertise from Asia and Latin America to help build agro-based industries in Africa. Other emerging priorities 42. This document is intended to serve as a dynamic and live framework allowing the incorporation of other emerging priorities for South-South cooperation as determined by competent intergovernmental bodies. Programme development along these lines will reflect the unique competencies of UNDP and the tangible value that could be added by the Special Unit. B.3 Mainstreaming South-South cooperation in the work of UNDP 43. At the heart of this strategic framework will be a robust effort to mainstream South-South cooperation into the work of UNDP, which is the operational arm of the United Nations system. The Administrator has repeatedly stressed the importance of mainstreaming South-South cooperation and has set up a number of ways to achieve it. 44. The current UNDP MYFF sets forth the vision, directions and strategies for the organization during the period 2004-2007. It contains five goals and comprises 30 service lines embodying the substantive directions of the organization's work. These areas of focus were established based on anticipated programme country demand and are expected to accommodate effective South-South cooperation. 45. In support of its goals, UNDP has adopted a number of strategies to improve its organizational effectiveness. Among them are what UNDP refers to as its `five drivers of development effectiveness', which are cross-cutting issues applicable to all the UNDP goals and service lines. These drivers are integral to the results UNDP strives to achieve at the country, regional and global levels. South-South cooperation represents a possible addition to these drivers, and its explicit introduction into the principal policy framework of UNDP as a strategic management tool will be indicative of its potential contribution to development effectiveness. In practical terms, such an introduction will enable UNDP to generate both substantive and operational guidance so that its programmes can draw on South-South cooperation, as appropriate. The approach will receive the full attention of the UNDP policy and regional bureaux, with the Special Unit providing support to the mainstreaming effort. A. Programme management 46. The Special Unit will be restructured and capacities built to enable the implementation of this framework. It will work in internally matrixed arrangements with UNDP's country offices, regional centres and headquarters to ensure its implementation. In accordance with the mainstreaming priorities of the framework, the Special Unit will contribute to UNDP decision-making and substantive forums to optimize the application of South-South arrangements. 47. South-South initiatives are to be owned and pursued, in the first instance, by a broad base of actors with the resources, expertise and political will to pursue intended outcomes. The partnering function of the Special Unit is central to the success of this framework, both for the pursuit of results and to mobilize resources and stimulate the next generation of South-South initiatives. The Special Unit will collaborate with centres of excellence in the South and other partners from the state, civil society and the private sector, together with the United Nations system, to formulate and implement programmes under the framework. Technical and substantive backstopping will be the responsibility of the Special Unit, working in close collaboration with UNDP country offices, regional centres and headquarters-based services. 48. To gauge the organizational effectiveness of the Special Unit, the implementation of the framework will be subject to mid-term and final reviews. B. Resource mobilization targets The resource mobilization targets for the period 2005-2007 are: Source Amount (in thousands of dollars) UNDP regular resources Estimated carryover into 2005 TRAC line 1.5 Sub-total core resources Other resources South-South Cooperation Trust Fund Third-party cost-sharing Other funds Sub-total non-core resources Total Conclusions This document describes the strategy and directions for significantly scaling up and mainstreaming South-South cooperation, and provides a framework for the use of resources to achieve results. The Administrator seeks the guidance and endorsement of the Executive Board with respect to this proposed framework and urges the provision of the required resources to implement it fully. 