%%%SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|FRESHWATER|SANITATION|SUSTAINABLE ENERGY|OCEANS|COASTAL AREAS|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|WATER RESOURCES|SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION|CLEANER PRODUCTION|

* E/2004/100. ** E/CN.17/2004/1. *** Submission of the report is delayed in order to reflect the latest activity undertaken within the framework of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination to enhance inter-agency cooperation and coordination in the follow-up to the World Summit on Sustainable Development. Economic and Social Council Substantive session 28 June-23 July 2004 Item 13 (a) of the provisional agenda* Economic and environmental questions: sustainable development Commission on Sustainable Development Twelfth session 14-30 April 2004 Item 5 of the provisional agenda** Other matters Inter-agency cooperation and coordination in the follow-up to the World Summit on Sustainable Development Report of the Secretary-General*** Summary The present report outlines the decisions taken and work being carried out within the framework of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) to enhance inter-agency cooperation and coordination in the follow-up to the World Summit on Sustainable Development, focusing on collaborative arrangements relating to freshwater, water and sanitation, energy, oceans and coastal areas, and to changing unsustainable patterns of consumption and production. While the arrangements are being tailored to the different requirements of each thematic area, the key cross-cutting objectives include strengthening inter-agency participation and involvement, and enhancing system-wide synergy in support of the follow-up to the Summit and the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development. The High-level Committee on Programmes, on behalf of CEB, will keep under review the overall contribution of the United Nations system to Summit follow-up and will seek to ensure mutual reinforcement between that effort and inter-agency processes in the follow-up to other global conferences and the United Nations Millennium Declaration. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and implications for the United Nations system Decisions of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination/High-level Committee on Programmes Freshwater and water and sanitation Energy Oceans and coastal areas Changing patterns of unsustainable consumption and production Conclusions 1. In paragraph 152 of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation), as reiterated by the Economic and Social Council in paragraph 18 of its resolution 2003/61, the Secretary-General was requested to utilize the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB), including through informal collaborative efforts, to further promote system-wide cooperation and coordination in the follow-up to the Summit. The Summit recognized the need to strengthen United Nations inter-agency coordination and to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of system-wide activities through increasing synergy, and limiting overlap and duplication. 2. At its eleventh session, the Commission on Sustainable Development reaffirmed the importance of coordinated follow-up action. It decided, inter alia, to organize its future work in two-year implementation cycles and requested the Secretary-General to prepare a report on inter-agency cooperation and coordination activities for the Summit follow-up, taking into account the ongoing process of United Nations reform. Pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61, the present report has been prepared for submission to both the Council and the Commission to provide an update on the actions taken to date in achieving United Nations system-wide coordinated follow-up to the Summit. 3. CEB, with the support of its High-level Committee on Programmes (HLCP), began addressing the Summit follow-up at its fall 2002 session, continued to give orientation to the elaboration of inter-agency collaborative arrangements during 2003, and will finalize consideration of outstanding issues at its spring session in 2004. Other coordination bodies, such as the United Nations Development Group (UNDG) and the Environment Management Group, are actively contributing to inter-agency cooperation to advance integrated follow-up to the Summit and other global conferences, within the overall framework developed by CEB. As the activities are ongoing, the information provided in the present report will be supplemented when the Commission on Sustainable Development considers this issue at its twelfth session, under agenda item 5. II. Outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and implications for the United Nations system 4. At its second regular session in 2002, shortly after the conclusion of the Summit, the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination addressed the implications of the outcomes of the Summit for the United Nations system. Representatives of CEB member organizations welcomed the emphasis on implementation, and committed their organizations to contribute to integrated and coordinated follow-up. The representatives agreed that strategic and programmatic frameworks to advance implementation should be flexible and action-oriented, and requested HLCP to make suggestions on the steps required to maximize United Nations system support for a sustained follow-up. 5. In addressing the implications of the Summit outcomes for inter-agency work, HLCP highlighted the responsibility of the United Nations system to assist Governments in focusing sharply on implementation -- based on a coherent framework of action tied to the agreed goals of the Millennium Summit of the United Nations, the International Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable Development -- and to promote enhanced inter-agency coordination and collaboration at all levels, particularly in the field, building synergy with the outcomes of other United Nations conferences. HLCP stressed the need for the plans of United Nations system agencies for the implementation of Summit outcomes to be consistent with country development and poverty eradication strategies, to have demonstrable results and to be focused on long-term sustainability. HLCP also called for a renewed effort to enhance implementation through the regional commissions and the regional frameworks of the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system. It recognized the need for all relevant stakeholders to be actively engaged in the follow-up to the Summit, based on a determination of the comparative advantage of the United Nations system and other development actors. Members of HLCP shared the view that there was a need to reorient system-wide collaborative activities at all levels in order to effectively advance those objectives. 6. HLCP recommended to CEB that United Nations system-wide support to the follow-up to the Summit should be guided by the following basic principles: (a) Coherence and consistency in the follow-up to United Nations conferences; (b) A unified thematic approach in order to avoid duplication; (c) A clear division of responsibilities among the various actors in the United Nations system; (d) Enhanced exchange of information and two-way communication; (e) Clear support for the Summit principle of integrating the three components of sustainable development, namely, economic growth, environmental protection and social development; (f) Full ownership of the follow-up process by Governments; (g) Enhanced focus on achieving specific goals, targets and time-bound measures; (h) A closer link between policy work at the global level, and operational activities at the regional and country levels. 7. With regard to implementation at the regional and subregional levels, HLCP placed special emphasis on the role of the regional commissions in cooperation with other regional and subregional organizations. At the global level, HLCP concluded that the task manager system, established after the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, should be recast to maximize policy coordination and programmatic coherence and consistency, and to allow individual agencies and organizations to contribute towards achieving specific goals and targets. It considered that future arrangements should be designed to achieve the following objectives: (a) Focus on implementation, with greater attention paid to specific sectors and goals, without prejudice to meeting requirements for reporting and supporting normative discussions; (b) Support and complement the follow-up mechanisms on the outcomes of other relevant United Nations conferences held during the last decade; (c) Promote stronger linkage between global intergovernmental deliberations and implementation measures at the country level; (d) Promote flexible, action-oriented, innovative and inclusive approaches for launching implementation initiatives, based on the comparative advantage of different United Nations institutions and the level of engagement of non-United Nations actors; (e) Apply the issue management approach, wherever possible; (f) Advance a genuine integration of the three components of sustainable development. 8. During its spring session, in 2003, CEB endorsed the overall approaches developed by HLCP for follow-up to the Summit. CEB particularly underscored the need for coherence and consistency at the operational, regional and global levels; country ownership of the follow-up process; and the importance of giving greater attention to the regional scope of Summit follow-up. It further requested HLCP to assist in identifying ways to streamline parallel processes and avoid duplicate reporting. CEB recalled that, in October 2000, it had decided to streamline its subsidiary machinery in order to replace standing inter-agency bodies, which operated according to an established pattern of meetings and formal reporting, with collaborative arrangements that would be more flexible, more result-oriented, would allow for continued substantive interactions among agency experts in different areas, and could be adapted to the differing requirements for coordination and cooperation relative to each area. The objective was to enable CEB and its new high-level committees to concentrate on key issues and matters of strategic concern, while encouraging, at the sectoral level, more dynamic methods of work to ensure concrete progress in the different areas of inter-agency concern, engaging, wherever appropriate, new stakeholders and other key external partners. It concluded that these more flexible, differentiated, function-based approaches were well suited, and should be applied, to the extent possible, to the new collaborative arrangements to be put in place for the follow-up to the Summit. 9. With regard to the substantive aspects of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, CEB observed that the areas of health, agriculture, biodiversity and ecosystem management, and adequate shelter, had a clear institutional focal point within the United Nations system, which should be drawn upon to steer follow-up actions and interactions with other partners, avoiding duplication at the international, inter-agency and secretariat levels. With regard to freshwater resources as well as water and sanitation, extensive work was under way within the United Nations system and a large number of collaborative arrangements were in place. There was, however, no institutional focal point in the United Nations system. CEB, therefore, requested that consultations on substantive inter-organizational requirements be pursued in order to guide the form and tasks of such arrangements, taking into account existing mechanisms and the need to secure organized inter-agency coordination in that area. With regard to energy, and noting the diversity of activities undertaken within the United Nations system, CEB advocated a similar approach whereby the identification of substantive tasks would guide consideration of appropriate mechanisms, including modalities for engagement with key non-United Nations system actors. It also underscored the need for more effective coordination relating to oceans and coastal areas. The specific proposals developed by HLCP for the follow-up arrangements are outlined in section III below. III. Decisions of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination/High-level Committee on Programmes A. Freshwater and water and sanitation 10. The United Nations Millennium Declaration commits Governments to halve, by the year 2015, the proportion of people without access to safe drinking water. The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation not only reaffirmed that goal, as contained in the Millennium Declaration, but also added the issue of access to basic sanitation. It adopted four major objectives with regard to water and sanitation, namely, (a) halve, by the year 2015, the proportion of people who are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water and the proportion of people who do not have access to basic sanitation; (b) develop integrated water resources management and water efficiency plans by 2005; (c) develop programmes for mitigating the effects of extreme water-related events; and (d) establish and/or further develop national monitoring networks and water resources databases. 11. Implementation of the water agenda emanating from the Summit and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation will require an effective response from all stakeholders to the four objectives mentioned above. For the United Nations system in particular, it is critical to formulate collaborative strategies for the effective follow-up to the Summit and to actively promote the implementation of existing agreements within the agreed time frames. In the same spirit, the United Nations system must contribute constructively to the programme of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development and its sessions in 2004 and 2005, which will focus on water, sanitation, and human settlements. 12. The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation calls for effective coordination and decision-making among various international and intergovernmental bodies and processes concerned with water-related issues, both within the United Nations system, and between the United Nations and international financial institutions, drawing on the contributions of other international institutions and civil society; and for close coordination in elaborating and implementing activities related to the International Year of Freshwater, 2003, and beyond. 13. Within the United Nations system, water is dealt with by a number of specialized agencies, programmes and other entities. Implementation of the complex and ambitious international agenda is a collective responsibility and challenge -- beginning with the United Nations system and involving other progressively non-traditional partners and stakeholders in the global, comprehensive effort. 14. Following its discontinuation in 2001, the members of the former Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Water Resources developed new networking arrangements to continue the activities of the defunct subcommittee. In October 2002, immediately after the Johannesburg Summit, they formed a body known as "UN-Water". UN-Water brought together the senior managers of the water-related programmes of 24 United Nations system entities, and was responsible for the preparation and publication of the first edition of the World Water Development Report in March 2003. The United Nations system-wide world water assessment programme, of which the Report is part, was created to provide the kind of global water assessment and policy advice called for by the Summit and by the Commission at its eleventh session. Its priorities are to lay the basis for implementing system-wide activities in support of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, the Millennium Development Goals concerning water and sanitation, and the work of the Commission. 15. UN-Water has also been gearing itself to manage new external partnerships, such as with the Global Water Partnership, the World Water Council, the Water Supply and Sanitation Council, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, and the private sector. It has constituted a subgroup that deals specifically with sanitation issues and is planning to create one on capacity development in the near future. It has also incorporated a task force on gender and water. 16. CEB, on the recommendation of HLCP, has decided to endorse UN-Water as the inter-agency mechanism for follow-up of the water-related decisions reached at the Summit and the Millennium Development Goals concerning freshwater. It has requested UN-Water to finalize its terms of reference and modalities of work, including arrangements for progressive and effective participation of non-United Nations actors in the Summit follow-up, bearing in mind relevant guidelines established by CEB (see para. 8 above). The International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR) was similarly requested to inform HLCP on progress achieved in developing programmes, in cooperation with UN-Water, for mitigating the effects of extreme water-related events (see Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, para. 26 (d)). B. Energy 17. Building on the outcome of the ninth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, the Summit identified five key areas as critical to achieving the goal of energy for sustainable development. The areas include (a) improving access to reliable, affordable, economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound energy services and resources; (b) improving energy efficiency; (c) increasing the proportion of energy obtained from renewable energy sources; (d) diversifying energy supply through advanced, cleaner, more efficient, affordable and cost-effective energy technologies; and (e) implementing transport strategies that promote sustainable development. 18. The economic, social and environmental goals of sustainable development, as expressed in the United Nations conferences and summits of the 1990s, cannot be achieved unless energy is produced, distributed and utilized in fundamentally different ways in the future. Emphasis needs to be placed on the development and application of new and renewable sources of energy. A combination of public policies and private-sector incentives, complemented by efforts at the local, national, regional and international levels, is essential to achieving a sustainable energy future. 19. The work of the United Nations system in the area of energy covers a wide array of activities and is undertaken by such organizations as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, the World Bank, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the World Meteorological Organization. The regional commissions also carry out significant energy activities. At the country level, most of the activities of the United Nations system focus on improved energy efficiency, renewable energy and clean fossil fuel technologies, including support for capacity development and policy dialogue. 20. Throughout the United Nations system, there is wide recognition that the issues of energy use and efficiency are closely linked to climate change. The mandates of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change are crucial for future work in this area, and should be fully taken into consideration. 21. A preliminary review by HLCP of the existing capacity in the United Nations system to undertake activities in the area of energy, has identified gaps in terms of the programmatic reach of the institutions and the financial resources available to them to implement their mandates. 22. Some of the specific gaps include: (a) Inadequate integration of energy-related aspects in the overall socio-economic development programmes and projects; (b) Inadequacies in the quality of information, statistics and indicators; information available to support decision-making varies in quality and there are different criteria for collection of data; the measurement of progress towards targets and goals requires more accurate, accessible and relevant information than is currently available; (c) Lack of guidance on deregulation and energy sector reform. The general trend towards market reform also holds true for the energy sector: developing countries face particular challenges and the United Nations system should be active in responding to them; (d) Need for better integration of the normative, analytical and operational activities of the United Nations in the field of energy; (e) Need for better balance between upstream activities dealing with policy advisory services and downstream activities dealing with operational activities at the country level; (f) Need for more effective means: (i) To translate global goals into country-level and sectoral action plans; (ii) To ensure mutually reinforcing collaboration and greater policy coherence between the various intergovernmental processes relevant to energy for sustainable development and to climate change. 23. No single entity in the United Nations system has primary responsibility for energy, and independent approaches have been taken by each entity within its respective mandate. As a result, a system-wide approach to addressing energy issues has not yet emerged. An adequate response to the call, embodied in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, for joint action on energy by the United Nations and other stakeholders will require more inclusive and broad-based arrangements than are currently in place. Other development actors, particularly in the private sector, have clear comparative advantages in that area and must be effectively engaged in the follow-up efforts. 24. The Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Task Force on Energy, which supported the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development at its ninth session and undertook joint activities related to the implementation of the world solar programme and the development of sustainable energy indicators, and facilitated cooperation among agencies on various partnerships launched during the Summit process, noted that a system-wide approach to energy and sustainable development should provide a reference framework for the energy-related activities of the United Nations system and the strategy should promote a balanced and mutually reinforcing approach to the economic, social and environmental aspects of sustainable energy development. 25. Owing to the complexity and interrelatedness of the issues within the broader sustainable development framework, and the diversity of mandates and approaches that currently exist, developing a coherent and coordinated response to the Summit follow-up in the area of energy presents a major and critical challenge to United Nations system efforts in support of sustainable development. 26. Guided by the above consideration, HLCP is actively pursuing consultations on the most suitable arrangements to advance collaboration and coordination in the area of energy, and will revert to the issue at its forthcoming session. HLCP is also guided by the recommendations of a subgroup of specific member organizations, which has been undertaking a review of current activities in relation to Summit mandates, and has been tasked to base its proposals on the experience to date at the inter-agency level, as well as to include provision for the participation of non-United Nations actors. 27. The findings of the subgroup will be reported to CEB at its spring session and will be made available to the Commission at its twelfth session. C. Oceans and coastal areas 28. The Summit emphasized that oceans, seas, islands and coastal areas form an integrated and essential component of the Earth's ecosystem and are critical for global food security and for sustaining economic prosperity. Recognizing the critical importance of those issues, the Summit adopted a number of concrete goals with regard to an ecosystem approach, fish stocks, biodiversity, protection of the marine environment, particularly from land-based activities, maritime safety, and improving the scientific understanding and assessment of marine and coastal ecosystems. 29. In adopting those goals, which cover a wide range of issues, the Summit recognized that ensuring sustainable development of the oceans will require a special effort to ensure effective coordination and cooperation, including at the global and regional levels, as well as among the relevant bodies. In that context, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation called for steps to establish an effective, transparent and regular inter-agency coordination mechanism on ocean and coastal issues within the United Nations system. The recommendation was subsequently endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/141, in which the Assembly invited the Secretary-General to establish an effective, transparent and regular inter-agency coordination mechanism on oceans and coastal issues within the United Nations system. 30. Prior to the restructuring of the CEB machinery, and since 1993, the Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Oceans and Coastal Areas was the principal inter-agency mechanism focusing on the issues of environmental protection and sustainable development -- a mandate derived from chapter 17 of Agenda 21. Issues related to international coordination and cooperation in that area were repeatedly raised during various intergovernmental meetings, particularly during the fourth and seventh sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development. The United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on oceans and the law of the sea was established and mandated to address, among other questions, the issue of inter-agency coordination, which was given particular attention during its third (2002) and fourth (2003) sessions. The Informal Consultative Process has pointed to a number of functions that need to be pursued through an inter-agency mechanism, including: (a) coordinating and harmonizing United Nations system activities related to oceans; (b) reviewing programmes and activities and identifying issues with a view to updating and enriching the relationship between the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and Agenda 21; (c) ensuring integrated ocean management at the international level; (d) coordinating inputs to the annual report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of the sea. 31. The sessions highlighted the need, fully shared at the inter-agency level, for dedicated but flexible processes to undertake joint activities that address emerging challenges and issues, such as the global marine assessment process, regional ocean governance and the development of guidelines for the application of the ecosystem approach. 32. HLCP recognized that the enhanced coordination of activities relating to oceans and coastal areas will require both review and harmonization of ongoing activities as well as the need to address emerging challenges and the launching of new joint initiatives. Collaborative arrangements that cover, inter alia, the political, legal, security, economic, social, and environmental aspects of the activities should include not only members of the former Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Oceans and Coastal Areas but also international financial institutions and other institutions like the International Seabed Authority and the secretariats of multilateral environment treaties, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 33. In the light of the above considerations, an open-ended network that engages all relevant programmes, entities and specialized agencies of the United Nations system and the secretariats of the relevant international conventions is now being organized to ensure a continuing exchange of information and views. A steering group, composed of senior representatives of the most directly involved organizations and programmes in the network, will meet, as required, to review ongoing activities, coordinate programmes, and harmonize support for relevant deliberations at the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process. The meetings will be scheduled according to the sessions of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process. 34. The development of new initiatives, in response to emerging challenges that may be identified by the network, will be entrusted to task-oriented groups with well-defined terms of reference, open to the participation of non-governmental organizations and other international stakeholders. A task force, for example, could be established to focus on the coordination, planning and implementation of the global marine assessment process or on regional ocean governance. 35. The approaches to collaborative arrangements will require: (a) the intensive use of electronic communication; (b) scheduling meetings in conjunction with related intergovernmental or expert meetings; (c) the establishment of cooperative agreements among heads of agencies or responsible managers; (d) an open dialogue with non-United Nations system actors and transparent communication with all partners, including through the use of a dedicated web site. The approaches will build on, and make full use of, the experience and existing inter-agency cooperative mechanisms or projects, including the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities, the Global International Water Assessment, the United Nations Atlas of the Oceans, the Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection, and the Global Oceans Observing System, among others. 36. CEB has approved the above-mentioned approach, including the creation of an oceans and coastal areas network, which is currently elaborating detailed terms of reference and a work programme. 37. CEB has also requested the Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the United Nations Secretariat to keep HLCP informed of progress achieved in the establishment, by 2004, of a regular process for global reporting and assessment of the state of the marine environment, as called for by the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the General Assembly in its resolution 57/141. D. Changing patterns of unsustainable production and consumption 38. The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation highlights the essential actions required to achieve fundamental changes in the way societies produce and consume, changes that will be indispensable for achieving global sustainable development. It also calls for a 10-year framework of programmes in support of regional and national initiatives to accelerate the shift towards sustainable consumption and production to promote social and economic development within the carrying capacity of ecosystems by addressing and, where appropriate, delinking economic growth and environmental degradation (see Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, para. 15). As follow-up to the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, a meeting of international experts was held in Marrakesh, Morocco, from 16 to 19 June 2003, to elaborate a 10-year framework of programmes for sustainable consumption and production on the basis of the outcomes of two expert-level preparatory meetings held in Argentina and Indonesia. 39. The Marrakesh process reaffirmed the existing inter-agency collaborative arrangements and produced a 10-year framework of programmes for sustainable consumption and production with a clear set of objectives and work modalities, including biennial meetings of experts to monitor, evaluate and guide the work of the United Nations system and other partners as follow-up to the Summit and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. The meetings will be supported by informal task forces or round tables. 40. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNEP are the principal organizations in the United Nations system responsible for sustainable consumption and production in general, while specific issues have been handled by a number of other organizations, such as UNIDO on cleaner production, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific on sustainable human settlements, UNCTAD on trade and sustainability, the Secretariat of the Basel Convention on waste management, UNESCO on education for sustainable development, and the International Labour Organization on working conditions. 41. Both the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNEP are involved not only with broad policy questions but also with specific issues. The activities of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs include environmental management accounting, national industrial strategies for sustainable production, national policies for sustainable public procurement, indicators of sustainable consumption and production and assessments of global trends. The activities of UNEP, on the other hand, include programmes that address consumer awareness and advertising, eco-labels, the life-cycle approach, cleaner production, procurement training, procurement by international organizations, partnerships with business and financial institutions, eco-design and a product service system. 42. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNEP will take the lead in convening the biennial international meetings and a regional consultative process, in collaboration with the regional commissions. In accordance with requirements, they will organize task forces, round tables and other expert-level meetings on specific issues, in consultation with other concerned organizations. 43. The Marrakesh process recognized the importance of intergovernmental and institutional communication and of inter-agency collaboration. It will also provide input into intergovernmental decision-making. It would thus appear that collaboration and coordination for follow-up to the Summit and the implementation of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation through the 10-year framework do not require the establishment of a formal collaborative mechanism: the principal organizations involved will take the lead in carrying out tasks associated with different aspects of the framework. 44. CEB endorsed the approach adopted by the Marrakesh process and requested the lead organizations, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNEP, in cooperation with other organizations concerned, in particular UNIDO and UNHabitat, to implement the framework and keep HLCP informed of further developments in this area. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNEP have been asked to consult on all aspects of work as well as to develop a joint web site to keep all interested parties fully informed, on a timely basis, of ongoing activities and other developments in the context of the framework. IV. Conclusions 45. The present report provides an account of the actions taken to date within the framework of CEB to organize inter-agency involvement in the follow-up to the Summit in key areas. At its twelfth session, the Commission on Sustainable Development will be informed of developments and of further actions taken since the issuance of the present report. 46. HLCP, on behalf of CEB, will oversee the overall contribution of the United Nations system to Summit follow-up and will seek to ensure mutual reinforcement between that effort and inter-agency processes in the follow-up to other global conferences and the United Nations Millennium Declaration. 47. Inter-agency arrangements for follow-up to the Summit have been designed so as to ensure well coordinated system-wide inputs to the work of the Commission in the different areas of concern, guided by the new programme of work adopted by the Commission at its eleventh session and endorsed by the Economic and Social Council. 48. The arrangements are being supplemented by inter-agency consultations, convened by the secretariat of the Commission in preparation of, and in conjunction with, the sessions of the Commission. 49. It is essential that a continuing dialogue be established between the Commission and the organizations of the United Nations system -- individually as well as collectively, directly as well as through the secretariat of the Commission -- to ensure that these arrangements respond to the overall policy framework that the Commission has established for Summit follow-up and to its requirements for well-coordinated inputs to its deliberations. 50. The United Nations system, through CEB and HLCP, is committed to providing coordinated support to maximize the capacity of the Commission to guide national, regional and international action for effective follow-up to the Summit, within the overall framework of the follow-up to global conferences and the United Nations Millennium Declaration. 