%%%CONSULTATIVE STATUS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

Substantive session of 2004 New York, 28 June-23 July 2004 Agenda item 12 Non-governmental organizations Letter dated 29 June 2004 from the Permanent Representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council As you know, on 21 May 2004, at the request of Viet Nam, the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations of the Economic and Social Council decided to suspend for three years the consultative status of the Transnational Radical Party (TRP) with the Economic and Social Council owing to the fact that TRP had wrongly and deliberately granted accreditation to Kok Ksor and the Montagnard Foundation, Inc. (MFI) to attend United Nations meetings and conferences. The above decision of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations is to be endorsed by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session in July 2004. I have the honour to enclose herewith for your kind attention an aide-memoire on the position of the Government of Viet Nam concerning the Transnational Radical Party's consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to which are attached the following six annexes: (i) Copy of the article "The forgotten army" downloaded from the MFI official web site describing the history of FULRO; (ii) Copy of the article "A synopsis of modern history", downloaded from the MFI official web site, depicting Kok Ksor and the MFI affiliation with FULRO; (iii) Copy of the first page of the article "Continuing the struggle for survival", downloaded from the MFI official web site, reflecting Kok Ksor and the subversive and separatist agenda of MFI; (iv) Copies of the "map", "national emblem" "national flag" of the so-called "Independent State of Degar", whose establishment Kok Ksor and the Montagnard Foundation, Inc. are soliciting in the Central Highlands of Viet Nam; (v) Copies of pictures taken of the weapons, money and equipment taken from the accomplices of Kok Ksor and MFI participating in the violent riots on 10 April 2004 in the Central Highlands of Viet Nam; (vi) Copies of pictures taken of the scenes of destruction caused by the violent riots on 10 April 2004 in the Central Highlands of Viet Nam. The aide-memoire explains why Viet Nam has had to request such a decision. Hoping this aide-memoire will be useful for members of the Economic and Social Council when considering endorsement of the above decision, I hereby request that this aide-memoire together with its six annexes be circulated as an official document of the substantive session of 2004 of the Council under agenda item 12 "Non-governmental organizations". (Signed) Le Luong Minh Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative On 21 May 2004, at the request of Viet Nam, the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations of the Economic and Social Council decided to suspend for three years the consultative status of the Transnational Radical Party (TRP) with the Council owing to the fact that TRP had wrongly and deliberately granted accreditation to Kok Ksor and the Montagnard Foundation, Inc. (MFI) to attend United Nations meetings and conferences. The above decision of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations is to be endorsed by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session in July 2004. This aide-memoire explains why Viet Nam has had to request such a decision. I. Kok Ksor and the Montagnard Foundation, Inc. are resorting to terror to pursue their subversive and separatist aim The Montagnard Foundation, Inc. (MFI) was established in 1992 in North Carolina, United States of America by Kok Ksor and some other remnants of FULRO -- Front Unifié pour la Libération des Races Opprimées or United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races -- who are now residing in the United States. FULRO was an armed organization created by foreign forces during the foreign wars of aggression against the Vietnamese people. After the war ended in 1975, and during the 1980s, FULRO continued to operate as a terrorist organization with armed activities causing heavy destruction of public and private property and civilian casualties in Viet Nam, especially in the Central Highlands. Kok Ksor himself, who used to be a soldier in the puppet army of the former South Vietnamese regime, joined the separatist FULRO in 1969, fled to Cambodia and then proclaimed himself "Major General" of FULRO. In 1974, he was sent to the United States by the founder and leader of FULRO, "General" Y-Bham Enoul, and has since remained in the United States. Kok Ksor and MFI of which he is President/Executive Director have been soliciting for the establishment of a so-called "Independent State of Degar" in the Central Highlands of Viet Nam. By the end of 1999, Kok Ksor formally announced the establishment of a so-called "Independent State of Degar" among Vietnamese exiles in North Carolina, United States of America and claimed himself as "President of the State", appointed former "Major General" Y Bhi Kbuor, former "Chief of Staff" of the FULRO "Prime Minister's Office", as "Prime Minister", and appointed five other former FULRO members as "Ministers" of Defence, Foreign Affairs, Justice, the Economy and Health Care and six others as "Provincial Chiefs". Kok Ksor drafted the "Guiding principles and instructions for the establishment of the Independent State of Degar" and sent them back to Viet Nam for his accomplices to implement. MFI on its official web site http://www.montagnard-foundation.org declares that "the implementation of the following FULRO goals offers the only chance for the survival of the indigenous people of Viet Nam: 1. The Degar people must be recognized as the legitimate owners of the Central Highlands. 2. The Vietnamese administration of the Central Highlands of Viet Nam must be dismantled, and the occupying military forces must be withdrawn. 3. The Degar people's sovereignty over the Central Highlands must be restored, and the independence of the Degar people must be guaranteed by the United Nations." Furthermore, the MFI Report 2002-2003 states: "Mr. Kok Ksor, an original member of FULRO movement since 1964 ... has never wavered from his original mission". Kok Ksor and MFI incited, prepared and commanded from afar the violent riots in the Central Highlands in February 2001 and other violent riots in Viet Nam. From his office in South Carolina, Kok Ksor and his MFI worked out the draft plan for the violent riots in the Central Highlands in April 2004. He instigated and instructed his followers, the extremist elements in the Dak Lak and Gia Lai provinces in the Central Highlands of Viet Nam, to induce, deceive and force local people to stage those violent riots. Two days before the riots took place where banners demanding the establishment of a "Degar State" were displayed, on Friday, 8 April 2004, from his office in South Carolina, Kok Ksor and MFI sent out the above-mentioned draft plan to many international media organizations including those of Vietnamese overseas informing them ahead of the riots, publicly claiming themselves as the organizers and calling for international support and attention. During the riots, under instructions from Kok Ksor and MFI, the extremist elements in Dak Lak and Gia Lai used dangerous weapons to beat on-duty officers, causing serious injuries, and destroyed local administration offices, public works and property. Ironically, TRP stated that "the 2001 and 2004 demonstrations were organized and carried out peacefully". II. The Transnational Radical Party's granting of accreditation to Kok Ksor and MFI constitutes an abuse of its consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and a violation of Council resolution 1996/31 MFI with Kok Ksor as its Executive Director/President is a terrorist group whose character is no different from that of those notorious terrorist groups operating in Asia, Europe and America that the international community is condemning and fighting against. Since the violent riots of 2001, the Vietnamese Government had kept warning the international community of Kok Ksor and the MFI's schemes for further violent riots in pursuit of their separatist agenda. The April 2004 incidents confirmed once again the ill intention of those thugs that TRP has admitted to its ranks. Kok Ksor and MFI are preparing for further violent riots in the Central Highlands and other localities in Viet Nam, threatening the security of Viet Nam and the safety of its people. The establishment of the so-called "Independent State of Degar" in exile with Kok Ksor as its "President" and the preparation for its formation inside Viet Nam are clearly acts of subversion and separation that threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Viet Nam, a Member State of the United Nations. Kok Ksor and the MFI's aims and activities are contrary to the spirit, purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and violate international law. The TRP's granting of accreditation to Kok Ksor and MFI means accreditation of a terrorist group that has been engaging in subversive, separatist activities against the State of Viet Nam. Such accreditation constitutes an abuse of its consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and a violation of Council resolution 1996/31, which clearly stipulates that NGOs having consultative status with the Economic and Social Council must not engage in "unsubstantiated or politically motivated acts against Member States of the United Nations". III. The Economic and Social Council should respect the decision of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations suspending for three years the consultative status of TRP with the Council Approximately 500 foreign NGOs, most of them from developed countries, are operating in Viet Nam, where they are enjoying the support and assistance of the Vietnamese Government and local NGOs in implementing their projects in different economic, development, social and humanitarian fields. Nearly 400 of them have established their representative offices in the country. The good-willed and cooperative policy and attitude of the Vietnamese Government towards foreign NGOs cannot be questioned. Since TRP accredited Kok Ksor and MFI to attend United Nations meetings and conferences under its protection, Viet Nam, in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation, had refrained at the last three consecutive sessions of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations from asking for punitive action and had agreed to give TRP the opportunity to understand the matter by asking it through the Committee to submit special reports to explain and cease its wrongful acts. Trying at the first stage to defend even FULRO by denying its terrorist nature, then, later on, when realizing that FULRO was indefensible, attempting to deny Kok Ksor and MFI's affiliation with FULRO, TRP's reports had always been considered unsatisfactory by the Committee. More seriously, while the question was still under consideration by the Committee, TRP continued granting accreditation to Kok Ksor and MFI. This only demonstrates that the TRP's abuse and violations are deliberate and that TRP itself nurtures a dark political scheme against Viet Nam. Viet Nam was left with no option other than requesting for suspension of TRP's consultative status with the Economic and Social Council for three years. At the request of Viet Nam, the Committee, at its meeting on 21 May 2004, voted to adopt a decision to that effect. This decision is to be endorsed by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session in July 2004. In the legitimate security, sovereignty and territorial integrity interest of Viet Nam, a Member State of the United Nations, in the interest of the United Nations itself and of those of its members suffering from outside interference in their internal affairs, and to defend the prestige of the Economic and Social Council as a main body of the United Nations tasked with assisting Member States in economic and social development, as well as the prestige of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, Viet Nam urges the members of the Economic and Social Council to respect and endorse the above decision of the Committee. Any attempt to block the Council's endorsement of that decision is unjust and illegitimate. It should be stressed, furthermore, that Viet Nam is not the only country victimized by TRP's dark schemes and that this is not the first time TRP's abuse of its consultative status with the Economic and Social Council by way of supporting terrorist and separatist activities has been questioned by Member States, and this is not the first time its wrongful acts became the subject of scrutiny by the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations and by the Economic and Social Council. Its claim of being a "Gandhian non-violent organization" which "does not condone violence from any quarter, whether governmental or non-governmental" is but a farce! New York, 29 June 2004 