%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|WOMEN|EDUCATION|CULTURE|HUMAN RIGHTS|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|HEALTH SERVICES|HEALTH-CARE DELIVERY|ELECTION OF OFFICERS|

Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Third session New York, 10-21 May 2004 Draft report Rapporteur: Willie Littlechild Chapter I Matters calling for action by the Economic and Social Council or brought to its attention A. Draft decisions recommended by the Forum for adoption by the Economic and Social Council 1. The Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues recommends to the Economic and Social Council the adoption of the following draft decisions: [To be completed] B. Matters brought to the attention of the Council 2. The Forum has identified the proposals, objectives, recommendations and areas of possible future action set out below and, through the Council, recommends that States, United Nations system and intergovernmental organizations, indigenous peoples, the private sector and non-governmental organizations assist in their realization. 3. It is the understanding of the Secretariat that the proposals, objectives, recommendations and areas of possible future action to be carried out by the United Nations as set out below will be implemented to the extent that resources from the regular budget and extrabudgetary resources are available. Chapter II Introduction 1. The Forum held its first session at United Nations Headquarters from 13 to 24 May 2002 and submitted its report to the Council. 2. The Forum held its second session at United Nations Headquarters from 12 to 23 May 2003. 3. By its decision 2003/304, the Council decided that the third session of the Forum would be held at United Nations Headquarters from 10 to 21 May 2004. Chapter III Theme of the session: "Indigenous women" 1. The Forum considered item 3 of its agenda in the form of a high-level panel at its 2nd to _____ meetings, on 10, 11 and 21 May 2004. 2. At its 2nd meeting, on 10 May, the Chairman of the Forum acted as Moderator, and presentations were made by Njuma Ekundanayo, Vice-Chairperson of the Forum; Kyung-wha Kang, Chairperson of the Commission on the Status of Women; Stella Tamang, Chairperson of the International Indigenous Women's Caucus; and Fanny Pocaterra, on behalf of Noeli Pocaterra, Second Vice-President of the National Assembly of Venezuela. 3. At the same meeting, the Forum engaged in an interactive dialogue, and interventions were made by the following members of the Forum: Qin Xiaomei, Mililani Trask and Fortunato Turpo Choquehuanca. 4. At the same meeting, statements were made by the observers for the following countries and organizations: International Indigenous Women's Caucus; United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF); Australia; Caucus de Mujeres Indígenas de America Latina y el Caribe; International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Canada and Africa Region. 5. At its 3rd meeting, on 13 May, the Forum continued its discussion on the item and statements were made by the observers for the following countries and organizations: Pacific Caucus, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Chile, Mexico, Native Women's Association of Canada/Assembly of First Nations, Denmark, Enlace Continental de Mujeres Indígenas. 6. At the same meeting, statements were made by the following members of the Forum: Otila Lux de Coti, Njuma Ekundanayo, Marcos Matias Alonso, Antonio Jacanamijoy, Parshuram Tamang, Ida Nicolaisen. 7. At its 4th meeting, on 11 May, the Forum concluded its discussion on the item and statements were heard from the following observers: Indonesia, Bangladesh Indigenous People's Forum, Asian Indigenous Women Network, International Indigenous Women's Caucus, Tetuwan Oyate, Maasai Women for Education and Economic Development, Indigenous Peoples of Africa Coordinating Committee, Confederación de Comunidades Campesinas y Nativas de Perú, Association of Indigenous Village Leaders in Suriname, Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation, Comunidad de Estudiantes de las Primeras Naciones de America, Asian Indigenous and Tribal People Network, Zeliangrong Women's Union, Mejlis of Crimean Tatar People, IPPAC/Tamaynut, Anywaa Survival Organization, International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs, Defensoria de la Mujer Indígena de Guatemala, Sherpa Association of Nepal, Defensoria de los Pueblos Indígenas del Ecuador en America, Peace Campaign Group, Clan Star, the Institute for Indigenous People, Samson Cree Nation, International Organization of Indigenous Resource Development. 8. At the same meeting, representatives of the Inter-Agency Support Group and the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations also made statements. Action taken by the Forum 9. At its ____ meetings, on 21 May, the Forum adopted its draft recommendations on item 3 (E/C.19/2004/L.3) (see chap. I, sect. B) and took note of the Chairperson's summary of the discussions of the high-level panel on the item (E/C.19/2004/L.2). Chapter IV Mandated areas 1. The Forum considered item 4 of its agenda at its 3rd to 14th, and ____ meetings, from 11 to 19 and on 21 May 2004. A. Education 2. At its 3rd meeting, on 11 May, the Forum considered sub-item 4 (f) and presentations were made by the following panellists: Qin Xiaomei, member of the Forum; Tove Skutnabb-Kangas, Department of Languages and Culture, University of Roskilde, Denmark; Abo Akademi, Department of Education, Vasa, Finland; Linda King, Section for Education for Peace and Human Rights, UNESCO. The Chairperson also made a statement on the sub-item. 3. Statements were made by the following observers: UNICEF; First Nations North and South; Erica-Irene Daes, Special Rapporteur of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. 4. At its 4th meeting, on 11 May, statements on the item were made by the following observers: Indigenous Women's Caucus, Ecuador, Pacific Caucus. 5. At its 5th meeting, on 12 May, the Forum concluded its discussion of the item and heard statements by the following observers: United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), Canada, New Zealand, Consejo Nacional de Mujeres Indígenas del Ecuador, Mexico, Integrante de la Coordinadora Nacional de Mujeres Indígenas de Mexico, Chile, Boarding School Healing Project, Venezuela, Caribbean Antilles Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Guatemala, Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation, African Indigenous Women Organization, Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepard, Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs, Awaete Kaiwa Guarani Nhandeva, Mejlis of Crimean Tatar People, Saami Council, Inuit Circumpolar Conference, International Youth Caucus, Kamakakuokalani Center for Hawaiian Studies, Ogiek Rural Integral Projects/Ogiek People's Development Program, Land is Life, Consultoria de los Pueblos Indígenas en el Norte de Mexico, Enlace Continental de Mujeres Indígenas, IPPAC/Tamaynut, Mbororo Social Cultural and Development Association, Nacionalidad Zapara del Ecuador, Haudenosaunee Six Nations and Consejo Indio de Sud America, Aymara Artist Organization, Asociación Indígena Salvadoreña. 6. At the same meeting, the following members of the Forum made statements: Willie Littlechild, Marcos Matias Alonso, Fortunato Turpo Choquehuanca, Ida Nicolaisen. B. Culture 7. At its 6th meeting, on 12 May, the Forum considered sub-item 4 (e) and statements were made by the following observers: UNDP, World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), UN-HABITAT, Finland, American Indian Law Association/Seventh Generation Fund, Mexico, Montagnard Foundation, Flying Eagle Women, International Indigenous Women's Caucus, Conseil des Innus du Nitassinan, Caribbean Antilles Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation, African Indigenous Women Organization, Te Runanga o NGAI TAHU/Treaty Tribes Coalition, RAPA-NUI Parliament, International Youth Caucus, Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism and Na Koa Ikaika o Ka Lahui Hawaii/Asian Indigenous Village Leaders in Suriname/International Indian Treaty Council/Indigenous Youth Caucus/Rapa Nui Parliament/The Traditional Circle of Indian Elders and Youth/Call of the Earth/Concerned Women for Peace for Sudan/African Indigenous Women's Organization/Indigenous Information Network/Kamakakuokalani Center for Hawaiian Studies, Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander Research Action, Hawaii Caucus, Saami Council and Inuit Circumpolar Conference, Pacific Concerns Resource Center/Bangsa Adat Alifuru, Dewan Adat Papua/'llio `ulaokalani Coalition/Prince Kujio Hawaiian Civic Club/The Koani Foundation/Rapa Nui Parliament/Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu/Te Rapunga o Poutama/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission/National Association for Community Legal Centres/National Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation/Presentation Association/World Council of Churches/Bureau of Consultation for West Papua Indigenous Community Development. 8. At the same meeting, the Chairperson made a statement and the following members of the Forum also made statements: Otila Lux de Coti, Willie Littlechild, Mililani Trask, Wayne Lord. 9. At its 7th meeting, on 13 May, the Forum continued its discussion of the item and heard statements by the following observers: Pacific Caucus, Guatemala, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission, Viet Nam, Division for the Advancement of Women of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, Servicios en Comunicación Intercultural, FAO, Conclave de America Latina, Defensoria de los Pueblos Indígenas del Ecuador en America, Taymaynut/IPACC, Bangladesh Indigenous Peoples Forum, Tebtebba Foundation, World Hmong Peoples' Congress, Asociacion de Cabildos Indígenas del Norte del Cauca, Asian Indigenous Caucus, Conclave de Pueblos Indigenas de Brasil. 10. The following members of the Forum made statements: Njuma Ekundanayo, Marcos Matias Alonso, Ayitegan Kouevi, Parshuram Tamang, Ida Nicolaisen. 11. At its 8th meeting, on 13 May, the Forum concluded its discussion of the item and heard statements by the following observers: La Red Xicana Indígena/International Network of Indigenous Women, Norway, Enlace Continental de Mujeres de Sudamerica, Muscogee (Creek) Nation, First Nation North and South, Armenian Sisters, Consejo Indio de Sudamérica, Gambella Development Agency, Consejo Nacional de le Culture Nahuatl de Mexico. C. Human rights 12. At its 8th meeting, on 13 May, the Forum considered sub-item 4 (d) and heard statements by the following observers: Indonesia, Indigenous Peoples of Africa Coordination Committee, Habitat Pro Association, National Aboriginal Women Association, Femmes autocthones du Québec, Caribbean Antilles Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Conive-Red de Mujeres Indigenas Wayuu de Venezuela/Segunda Vice-Presidenta de la República Bolivariana Venezuela, World Hmong Peoples Congress, Unissons-nous pour la promotion des Batwa, Bangsa Adat Alifuru/'llio `ulaokalani Coalition/Prince Kujio Hawaiian Civic Club/The Koani Foundation/ Rapa Nui Parliament/Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu/Te Rapunga o Poutama/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission/National Association for Community Legal Centres/National Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation/Presentation Association/World Council of Churches/Bureau of Consultation for West Papua Indigenous Community Development, Te Runanga o NGAI TAHU/Treaty Tribes Coalition, Peace Campaign Group, Consejo de Pueblos Nahuas del Alto Balsas Guerrero, Feminist Alliance for International Action, and Bawm Literatura Forum. 13. At the same meeting, the following members of the Forum made statements: Ayitegan Kouevi, Willie Littlechild. 14. At its 9th meeting, on 14 May, an interactive dialogue was conducted between the panellists Yakin Erturk, Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women and Erica-Irene Daes, Special Rapporteur of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, and the following members of the Forum: Ayitegan Kouevi, Fortunato Turpo Choquehuanca, Willie Littlechild, Mililani Trask, Marcos Matias Alonso, Otila Lux de Coti. 15. At the same meeting, the Forum heard statements by the following observers: Canada, Pacific Concerns Resource Center, Montagnard Foundation Inc., American Indian Law Alliance, Finland, International Labour Organization (ILO), Bangsa Adat Alifuru, Democratic Republic of the Congo, African Indigenous Women Organization, Conclave de los Pueblos Indígenas de America del Sud, New Zealand, Asamblea Nacional Indígena Plural por la Autonomía, Internacional Native Tradicional Interchange, Conclave de Pueblos Indigenas de Brasil, Grand Council of the Cree, Native Women's Association of Canada, Asian Indigenous Caucus. 16. At its 10th meeting, on 14 May, another presentation was made by the following panellist: Marisela Padron, Director, Latin American and Caribbean Division, United Nations Population Fund. 17. At the same meeting, the Forum heard statements by the following observers: CONAIE-ECUARUNARI, Bangladesh Indigenous Peoples Forum, International Indigenous Women Caucus, International Treaty Council, Brazil, Bangladesh Indigenous Peoples Forum/Parbatya Chattagram Jana Samhati/Jumma Peoples' Network/Trinamul/Taungya and Bawm Literature Forum, Norway, Saami Council and Inuit Circumpolar Conference, Colombia/Nukak Maku, Na Koa Ikaika o Ka Lahui Hawaii/Ka Lahui Hawaii/Ilio ulaokalani Coalition/Kamakakuokalani Center for Hawaiian Studies, Consultoria de los Pueblos Indígenas en el Norte de Mexico, Organizacion Regional de las Mujeres Indígenas/Confederación Nacional de Comunidades Campesinas y Nativas del Perú/Asociación de Mujeres Aymaras/Asociacion de Mujeres Quechua Ayllu del Perú, Centre d'accompagnement des autochtones pygmees et minoritaires vulnerables, Indigenous World Association, Congress of Aboriginal Peoples, Rapanui Parliament, Asian Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Network, Organizacion Nacional Indigena de Colombia, Mbororo Social Cultural and Development Association, Foundation for Indigenous Americans of Anasasi Heritage, Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander Research Action, Community Action and Research for Development, Sami Parliamentary Council, Indigenous Parliament of the Americas, Partnership for Indigenous Peoples Environment, Clan Star, Movimiento Indígena del Perú, and the Association of Nepalese Indigenous Journalists. 18. At the same meeting, the following members of the Forum also made statements: Zinaida Strogalschikova, Ida Nicolaisen. 19. At its 11th meeting, on 17 May, the Chairperson made a statement. Presentations were also made by the following panellists: Rodolfo Stavenhagen, Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people; Miguel Alfonso Martinez, Chairperson/Rapporteur, Working Group on Indigenous Populations. 20. At the same meeting, the Forum concluded its discussion of the item and heard statements by the following observers: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Innu Council of Nitassinan, Caucus de los Pueblos Indigenas de la Amazonia Ecuatoriana, Chile, International Indigenous Youth Caucus, Guatemala, United States of America, Indigenous Caucus on the World Bank and other Multilateral Development Banks, Mexico, Russian Federation, Delegación de los Pueblos Indígenas de Bolivia, Working Group on Armed Conflict Indigenous Caucus, North American Indigenous Caucus, Sherpa Association of Nepal. 21. At the same meeting, the following members of the Forum made statements: Parshuram Tamang, Antonio Jacanamijoy, Ayitegan Kouevi, Otila Lux de Coti, Ida Nicolaisen, Marcos Matias Alonso, Mililani Trask, Wayne Lord, Fortunato Turpo Choquehuanca, Yuji Iwasawa. D. Economic and social development 22. At the 12th meeting, on 18 May, the Forum considered sub-item 4 (a) and heard statements by the following observers: United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), Denmark/Greenland Home Rule Government, Pacific Concerns Resource Center/Bangsa Adat Alifuru/Dewan Adat Papua/Na Koa Ikaika o Ka Lahui Hawaii/Rapa Nui Parliament/Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu/Ngati Tuwharetoa/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission/Foundation for Association of Community Legal Centres/National Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation/World Council of Churches, Te Runanga o NGAI TAHU, Canada, Caribbean Antilles Indigenous Peoples Caucus, UNDP, New Zealand, Asian Indigenous Caucus, Department of Public Information of the United Nations Secretariat, Mexico, Bangladesh Indigenous Peoples' Forum/Parbatya Chattagram Jana Samhati Samiti/Jumma Peoples' Network/Trinamul/Taungya/Bawm Literatura Forum, ILO, Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), World Bank, Innu Council of Nitassinan, Indigenous Youth, Saami Council/Inuit Circumpolar Conference, Maasai Women Development Organization/Manyoito Pastoralist Integrated Development Organization, IPACC/Taymaynut, Enlace Continental de Mujeres Indígenas, Conclave Indígena de los Pueblos Indígenas de América, Transnational Radical Party, Indigenous Connectivity Survey, Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation, RAIPON, Italy, Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People/Ogoni Volunteer Indigenous Humanitarian Organization, Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs, African Indigenous Women Organization, Foundation for Aboriginal And Islander Research Action. 23. At the same meeting, statements were made by the following members of the Forum: Antonio Jacanamijoy, Fortunato Turpo Choquehuanca, Willie Littlechild. E. Environment 24. At the 13th meeting, on 18 May, the Forum considered sub-item 4 (b) and heard statements by the following observers: UNEP, Myanmar, Association of Iroquois/Allied Indians, Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, International Indian Treaty Council/Consejo Indio de Sud América/United Confederation of Taino People/Consejo General de Tainos Borincanos, Division of Sustainable Development of DESA, Caribbean Antilles Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Guatemala, Secretariat of the United Nations Forum on Forests, Union of British Colombia Indian Chiefs/Indigenous Network on Economies and Trade, Asia Caucus, Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander Research Action, Bangladesh Indigenous Peoples' Forum/Parbatya Chattagram Jana Samhati Samiti/Jumma Peoples' Network/Trinamul/Taungya/Bawm Literatura Forum, International Indigenous Women Caucus/Indigenous Women's Biodiversity Network, Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People/Ogoni Volunteer Indigenous Humanitarian Organization, Land is Life/Nacionalidad Zapara del Ecuador y ONHAE, Saami Council/Inuit Circumpolar Conference, Consejo de Todas las Tierras/Associación Gremial de Pequenios Artesanos Mapuche/Tebtebba Foundation, Conclave de Pueblos Indigenas de Brasil, Enlace Continental de Mujeres Indígenas, Indian Confederation of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples North-East Zone/Bodo Land Territorial Council, Caucus Regional de America Latina, Haudenosaunne Ska-Roh-Reh/International Native Tradition Interchange, Centre d'accompagnement des autochtones pygmées et minoritaires vulnerables/Action d'appui pour la Protection des minoritaires d'Afrique centrale/Programme d'intégration et de developpment des peuples pygmées au KIVU/Union pour l'emancipation de la femme autochtonne/Action chretienne pour la promotion des défavorisées, Indigenous Youth Caucus, UNDP, Pacific Concerns Resource Center/Bangsa Adat Alifuru/Dewan Adat Papua/Na Koa Ikaika o Ka Lahui Hawaii/Rapa Nui Parliament/Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu/Ngati Tuwharetoa/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission/Foundation for Association of Community Legal Centres/National Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation/World Council of Churches, Ka Lahui Hawaii/Iloulaokalani Coalition/Prince Kehui Hawaiian Civic Club/Kamakakuokalani Center for Hawaii Studies/Waikiki Hawaiian Civic Club, South Asia Indigenous Women Forum, Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation, First Nations North and South. 25. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the following member of the Forum: Parshuram Tamang. F. Health 26. At the 14th meeting, on 19 May, the Forum began its consideration of sub-item 4 (c). Presentations were made by the following panellists: Mililani Trask, Vice-Chairperson of the Forum, Siri Damman, University of Oslo, Norway. 27. At the same meeting, statements were made by the following observers: Pan American Health Organization (Regional Office of WHO), Association of Iroquois/Allied Indians, Canada, Caribbean Antilles Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Mexico, African Indigenous Women Organization/African Indigenous Peoples Caucus on Health, Nepal, Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation, Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Guatemala, WHO, Foundation for Aboriginal And Islander Research Action/National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organization/World Council of Churches, Concern Women Action for Peace/Maasai Women Development Organization/Indigenous Information Network, Enlace Continental de Mujeres Indígenas, Association Tunfa/TARA, Conclave Indígena de los Pueblos Indígenas de América, Conclave de Pueblos Indigenas de Brasil, Jay College of Criminal Justice/Proyecto de la Memoria Histórica, Dirección Nacional de Salud de los Pueblos Indígenas/CONAIE/ECUARUNARI/CONMIE/FENOCIN, Association of Shor Peoples/RAIPON, Centre d'accompagnement des autochtones pygmées et minoritaires vulnerables/Action d'appui pour la protection des minoritaires d'Afrique centrale/Programme d'intégration et de développment des peuples pygmées au KIVU/Union pour l'émancipation de la femme autochtonne/Action chrétienne pour la promotion des défavorisées, Tebtebba Foundation/Asia Indigenous Women Network/Cordillera People's Alliance, Pacific Concerns Resource Center/Bangsa Adat Alifuru/Dewan Adat Papua/Na Koa Ikaika o Ka Lahui Hawaii/Rapa Nui Parliament/Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu/Ngati Tuwharetoa/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission/Foundation for Association of Community Legal Centres/National Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation/World Council of Churches, Asian Indigenous Peoples Caucus, Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs/Indigenous Network on Economies and Trade, Consejo Regional Indigena del Guaviare Cgrigua II, Internacional Native Traditional Interchange, Red de Mujeres Indigenas Wayuu, Foundation for Indigenous Americans of Anasasi Heritage, Rapa-Nui Parliament. 28. The following members of the Forum made statements: Ayitegan Kouevi, Otila Lux de Coti, Wilton Littlechild, Ida Nicolaisen. 29. At its ____ meeting, on 21 May, the Forum, in adopting the draft recommendations submitted under agenda item 4 (a) to (f), identified a number of proposals, objectives, recommendations and areas of possible future action, and, through the Economic and Social Council, requested States, the United Nations system and intergovernmental organizations, indigenous peoples, the private sector and NGOs to assist in their implementation (see chap. I.B). Chapter VI Future work of the Forum Chapter VII Provisional agenda for the fourth session of the Forum Chapter VIII Adoption of the report of the Forum on its third session 1. At the _____ meeting, on 21 May, the Rapporteur introduced the draft report of the Forum on its third session (E/C.19/2003/L.__). 2. At the same meeting, the Forum adopted its report on its third session. Chapter IX Organization of the session A. Opening and duration of the session 1. The Forum held its third session at United Nations Headquarters from 10 to 21 May 2004. It held 18 formal meetings (1st to 18th) and a number of informal meetings. 2. At the 1st meeting, on 10 May, the session was opened by the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. During the inauguration ceremony, the floor was given to the Tadodaho Chief and Elder. 3. At the same meeting, a statement was made by Ole Henrik Magga, Chairperson of the Forum. 4. Also at the same meeting, the Secretary-General made a statement. 5. At the same meeting, the President of the Economic and Social Council made a statement, and representatives of the indigenous women delivered a special message. 6. Also at the same meeting, the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs made a statement. 7. At the same meeting, the observer for the Russian Federation made a statement. B. Attendance 8. Members of the Forum and representatives of Governments, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental organizations, as well as of non-governmental organizations and indigenous organizations, attended the session. The list of participants is contained in annex I. C. Election of officers 9. At its 1st meeting, on 10 May, the Forum elected the following members of the Bureau by acclamation: Chairperson Ole Henrik Magga Vice-Chairpersons Njuma Ekundanayo Antonio Jacanamijoy Parshuram Tamang Mililani Trask Rapporteur Wilton Littlechild D. Agenda 10. At its 1st meeting, on 10 May, the Forum adopted the provisional agenda contained in document E/C.19/2004/1, which read: 1. Election of officers. 2. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work. 3. Substantive theme: "Indigenous women". 4. Mandated areas: (a) Economic and social development; (b) Environment; (c) Health; (d) Human rights; (e) Culture; (f) Education. 5. Future work of the Forum. 6. Provisional agenda for the fourth session of the Forum. 7. Adoption of the report of the Forum on its third session. E. Documentation 11. The list of documents before the Forum at its third session is contained in annex II. 