%%%CONSULTATIVE STATUS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations Regular session 2005 5-18 January 2005 Quadrennial reports 2000-2003 submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page International Council on Social Welfare International Federation of Hard of Hearing People International HIV/AIDS Alliance International Lactation Consultant Association International Presentation Association Sisters of the Presentation International Rural Housing Association Lebanese Welfare Association for the Handicapped (General consultative status granted in 1972) The International Council on Social Welfare (ICSW) is a global non-governmental network, which serves as an umbrella organization for 82 local, national and international organizations striving to promote social welfare and social development and working towards the reduction of poverty and deprivation in the world. Most of the organizations that ICSW represents are the peak national umbrella bodies for non-governmental organizations working at the forefront in social welfare or social development. Other ICSW members are issue-based organizations, mostly in the global South, working directly with communities experiencing poverty or other forms of severe hardship. These two groups of members are organized in 10 regions throughout the world. Several major international non-governmental organizations with their own global programmes and networks are also our members. ICSW operates as a global and regional forum for the exchange of information and ideas on social welfare and social development. We are also increasingly active and prominent in policy development and public advocacy, with policy makers and administrators at both the regional and global levels. During the period 2000-2003, ICSW prioritized a number of United Nations lead processes. United Nations meetings and international conferences After serving as a lead non-governmental organization in relation to the World Summit for Social Development, ICSW made a considerable contribution to its five-year review by the General Assembly in June 2000. Through the review process, ICSW helped to maintain the profile of important commitments made at the Summit, and the Copenhagen Declaration remained a principal focus for implementation. In order to further engage in constructive dialogue with intergovernmental representatives to promote equitable and pro-poor policies, ICSW organizes a delegation of global advocates, particularly from developing country civil society organizations, to attend annual sessions of the Commission for Social Development. Given the potential impact of building political will for social reform at both the national and global levels, represented within the Commission, ICSW hosts an annual global civil society forum prior to its opening, at which the Division for Social Policy and Development of the United Nations Secretariat provides an introduction to the programme of the Commission. National delegates and leading civil society advocates elaborate on the themes of the Commission and brief a wide pool of civil society organizations. In 2001, ICSW took a prominent role in the Commission in preparation for the high-level meeting on financing for development. ICSW sought to influence the views of national Governments and the United Nations system to ensure that issues that ICSW had identified through its many regional and subregional meetings during the Copenhagen project were included in the documents and debates being discussed in the two forums. ICSW was represented at the NGO hearing hosted by the coordinating secretariat of the high-level meeting and produced a paper on taxation reform and its benefits for mobilizing domestic financial resources for development, as well as a proposal for an anti-poverty pact. ICSW also co-hosted a global civil society forum that served as a briefing on the preparatory committee for the high-level meeting, and the thirty-ninth session of the Commission, and hosted three civil society lunchtime panels. In 2002, ICSW's annual civil society forum served as a briefing on the fortieth session of the Commission, on the theme "Integration of social and economic policy", a theme that ICSW has consistently addressed over the past few years in many of our policy documents. The forum also considered follow-up to the Summit; the report of the Secretary-General on integration of social and economic policy; the preparatory committee for the Second World Assembly on Ageing; the report of the third mandate of the Special Rapporteur on disability; and preparation for the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family. In March 2002, an ICSW delegation attended the International Conference Financing For Development in Monterey, Mexico, where our former President made statements on debt cancellation and the shortcomings of the heavily indebted poor countries initiative that were included in one of the multi-stakeholder round-table summaries which became part of the official Conference documentation. In 2003, the ICSW forum considered the theme for the Commission's forty-first session, "National and international cooperation for social development". ICSW also co-hosted a briefing at lunchtime on the opening day of the Commission, related to two major events on ageing. There have since been several regional meetings on follow-up to the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing. In 2003, an ICSW delegate attended the forty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women, along with several ICSW partners, to create a more collective presence and forge new connections with women's rights activists from around the world to take these issues up in our regional and global advocacy campaigns. Other activities in support of the Council and the United Nations In continuing to promote national implementation of globally agreed social development policies and the realization of international commitments to crucial human development goals, we have found that implementation requires more widespread action. Importantly, this includes enhanced cooperation among civil society organizations within regions. Thus, ICSW initiated a three-year regional cooperation project in 2001, with the support of the United Kingdom Department for International Development, the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and later the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Finland. The project specifically focuses on creating, enhancing or invigorating the interface between civil society and regional intergovernmental groupings. We have continued to publish material on the themes of the World Summit for Social Development through a quarterly journal, Social Development Review, as well as on the Social Development Website, and our monthly newsletter Global Cooperation regularly features news on United Nations processes. We have also published a number of documents focused on United Nations processes. ICSW considers its consultative status with the Council to be a central organizing principle of its work. We hope to continue our contribution to the realization of crucial human development goals for the benefit of the millions of people who have been the focus of the numerous commitments made in global public policy deliberations within the United Nations. 2. International Federation of Hard of Hearing People (Special consultative status granted in 1996) The International Federation of Hard of Hearing People is an NGO that functions purely on a voluntary basis: the organization has no paid staff. In the period under review, there were changes on the board of the organization, resulting in adjustments that caused some difficulties. Nevertheless, IFHOH continued to work on behalf of hard-of-hearing people, with special emphasis on developing countries. There have been no changes to the structure and aims of the organization. IFHOH was involved in convening a meeting with WHO on a hearing awareness training programme for developing countries, held in Geneva on 17 and 18 February. IFHOH contributed to the drafting of WHO guidelines for hearing aids and services for developing countries. The guidelines set out minimum requirements and recommendations for affordable, appropriate, acceptable and available hearing aids and services. IFHOH convened an international conference on a hearing awareness training programme for developing countries in Ljubljana on 6 September, at which a WHO representative presented a lecture on guidelines for hearing aids and services for developing countries, and a consultant presented a paper on the development of primary ear and hearing care training resources for developing countries. An IFHOH representative participated at a WHO workshop held in Geneva on the provision of hearing aids and services for developing countries, presenting a paper on the role of NGOs in possible models for the provision of hearing aids and services for developing countries. 3. International HIV/AIDS Alliance (Special consultative status granted in 2000) The International HIV/AIDS Alliance is an international non-governmental organization that helps communities in developing countries to reduce the spread of HIV and to mitigate the impact of AIDS. Its purpose is to improve the coverage of effective community-focused HIV/AIDS programmes; to strengthen the leadership and capacity of civil society to respond to HIV/AIDS; and to improve the institutional, organizational and policy environment for community HIV/AIDS responses. Organizational changes 2000-2003 Owing to rapid changes in the AIDS epidemic and the international AIDS funding and programming environment, the Alliance has been growing quickly since 2001, considerably increasing the number of its programmes, partner NGOs, the people it reaches through its support to local communities, and the number of donors and supporters contributing to its work. To meet the new challenges and following a strategic review/development of a new strategic framework, a number of organizational changes were made, including the creation of teams for technical support, policy, communications, monitoring, evaluation and operations research, and partnerships, and the expansion of the Finance and Administration Department. A review of the strategic plan 2001-2006 in mid-2003 reaffirmed the Alliance's commitment to concentrate on community responses to HIV/AIDS, and its organizational development process. Given external challenges and changes, notably the launch of the presidential initiative for AIDS relief in the United States and the Global Fund on AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, it was agreed that the plan should be updated in 2004, for a period beginning in 2005. As a result, the Alliance adopted a revised version of its goals and outcomes and strives to ensure that all its programmes directly contribute to these. Additional country offices were established in the Caribbean, China, Madagascar and Mozambique, which will be developed into affiliated organizations in the medium term. Results and impact Since its creation, the Alliance has provided technical support to thousands of community groups in over 40 countries. During the reporting period, it reached over three million people with services. In January 2000, there were 12 ongoing programmes in Bangladesh, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Ecuador, India, Mexico, Morocco, the Philippines, Senegal, Sri Lanka and Zambia. In December 2003, there were 19 ongoing programmes in Bangladesh, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, the Caribbean, China, Ecuador, India, Madagascar, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, the Philippines, Senegal, Thailand, the Ukraine and Zambia. Amount and sources of funding The development of the Alliance's income has doubled, from $10,273 in 2000 to $20,318 in 2003. Activities carried out in the reporting period The Alliance has regularly participated in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies, major conferences and other United Nations meetings. Alliance implementing partners also maintain a close collaboration with United Nations bodies, including funding and operational relationships with UNICEF, UNAIDS, UNFPA and others. As a UNAIDS collaborative centre, the Alliance regularly sends observers to UNAIDS Programme Coordinating Board meetings. It was also involved in the NGO consultation on the Global Strategy for HIV/AIDS. The participation of the Alliance in United Nations-related meetings is summarized below. National AIDS Control Organization of India and United Nations theme group partners: HIV/AIDS strategic planning retreat, Bangalore; Thirteenth International AIDS Conference, Durban, South Africa. Special session of the General Assembly on AIDS, including presentations, advocacy, support to partner delegations, participation in preparatory process; significant input into the International Partnership against AIDS in Africa; presentation of work on community mobilization to the Francophone Forum on HIV/AIDS by the Alliance's partner organization in Morocco (Association marocaine de solidarité et de développement) and participation in two working groups on cultural approaches to AIDS and an analysis of vulnerability; the Khmer HIV/AIDS NGO Alliance (Cambodian partner) was a member of the United Nations country team to facilitate United Nations agencies' review of their responses to HIV and to develop a strategic plan for the next five years; the National AIDS Foundation (Mongolian partner) acted as the chair of the sub-working group on the upcoming UNFPA country programme formulation. Special Session of the General Assembly on children, Fourteenth International AIDS Conference, Barcelona; World Summit on Social Development, Johannesburg; South African participation in a UNAIDS five-year evaluation stakeholder workshop, including interventions with working groups and the evaluation team on civil society involvement in UNAIDS and hosting a UNAIDS consultation meeting. Ongoing contribution to the Global Fund and the World Bank, globally and regionally; co-sponsored work with WHO to reinvigorate attention to focused prevention; meeting on strategic approaches to targeted HIV prevention, cosponsored by WHO, UNAIDS and the International HIV/AIDS Alliance in October; collaboration with WHO, the International Treatment Access Coalition and others on community preparedness for/involvement in treatment access and voluntary counselling and testing; provision of valuable input into UNAIDS strategic development by working with other NGO Programme Coordinating Board delegates in drafting the recommendations on the future directions of UNAIDS for the Board's approval; participation in the interim steering committee of the ITAC and the WHO Global working groups on counselling and testing on HIV and tuberculosis. Conclusion The Alliance shares the UNAIDS goal of halting and beginning to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS. It concurs with the UNAIDS mission to lead, strengthen and support an expanded response aimed at preventing the transmission of HIV, providing care and support, reducing the vulnerability of individuals and communities to HIV/AIDS and alleviating the impact of the epidemic. In order to do so, it successfully works in partnership with local, national and international organizations, and aims to focus national and international attention to supporting communities in their fight against AIDS. 4. International Lactation Consultant Association The International Lactation Consultant Association (ILCA) is an NGO with consultative status to several United Nations bodies and other NGOs. Over the past few years, the number of ILCA representatives to these bodies and their scope of work have expanded. The ILCA mission is to advance the profession of lactation consulting worldwide through leadership, advocacy, professional development and research. Its vision is a worldwide network of lactation professionals. ILCA fully supports the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant resolutions of the World Health Assembly. ILCA is in official relationship with UNICEF, the World Health Organization and CODEX Alimentarius. United Nations meetings and conferences Through its representatives to UNICEF, ILCA has been an active member of the Child's Rights and Health Caucuses, the Nutrition Working Group and the NGO Committee Working Group on HIV/AIDS. In Geneva, at the eighty-eighth ILO Conference, ILCA actively advocated for the maintenance of paid nursing breaks and extended mandatory maternity leave as promoted in the Maternity Protection Convention 2000. Since that time, ILCA has continued to promote the Convention with the dissemination of a maternity protection kit. Through our representatives, ILCA continues to work with the WHO technical officer assigned to infant feeding. ILCA participated in two of the WHO regional consultations that worked on the content of the Global Strategy for Infant and Young Child Feeding. ILCA now promotes the Strategy to its members, encouraging global implementation. Through its representatives, ILCA participated in the special session of the General Assembly on children and meetings of the Commission on the Status of Women, offering side events when maternal-infant health and welfare were on the agenda. ILCA has a clinical expert list available to Governments and United Nations bodies to provide lactation expertise in natural disasters and other crises that affect infant food security. To promote optimal maternal and infant health, ILCA cooperates with other NGOs, including the United States Breastfeeding Committee; the Coalition to Improve Maternity Services; the World Alliance for Breastfeeding Action; the United States Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations; and Healthy Mothers, Healthy Babies. ILCA seeks to expand its activities even further as it finds qualified representatives. The demand for its expertise is growing with the realization that ILCA represents a profession with specific expertise in breastfeeding and lactation in both normal and challenging situations. ILCA welcomes and anticipates a continuing, fruitful collaboration with United Nations bodies concerned with infant and maternal health. 5. International Presentation Association Sisters of the Presentation Introduction With main offices in New York and Brisbane, Australia, International Presentation Association Sisters of the Presentation (IPA) is an organization of 2,600 members living and working in 27 countries. Our mission statement is: "Flowing from our identity as Presentation women we channel our resources so that we can speak and act in partnership with others for global justice". Meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies With the NGO Committee on Social Development and its Subcommittee on the Eradication of Poverty, we prepared papers each year, as well as a research booklet, entitled "Best practices in poverty eradication case studies from the field", and cosponsored NGO forums in preparation for the substantive sessions of the Council. For the high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions following the International Conference on Financing for Development, we participated in all the NGO hearings and meetings and prepared statements. In 2002, in cooperation with the Permanent Missions of Grenada and Poland to the United Nations, we sponsored an event on the theme "Ethical dimensions of financing for development". With the Non-Governmental Organizations Section, Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, we submitted a project from Zambia on HIV/AIDS and received an honourable mention in the NGO/civil society forum report. In addition: (a) On the NGO Social Development Committee, our main representative served as Secretary from 2000 to 2004. Position papers were written, co-sponsored and published on the various themes for the Commission for Social Development, we organized a civil society consultation and NGO daily briefings, and made an oral statement during the 2003 session of the Commission. With the Subcommittee on the eradication of poverty, in addition to the study mentioned above we sponsored a side event on the theme "Girls and the eradication of poverty"; (b) With the UNICEF Working Group on the Girl Child, we provided materials on HIV/AIDS, girls and education, girls and human rights; (c) With the NGO Committee on the Status of Women, we participated in all meetings of the Council's subsidiary bodies preparing for major themes, wrote statements and organized a side event in 2003 on the theme "Healing the wounds of violence"; (d) As a member of the NGO Committee on the United Nations International Decade of Indigenous Peoples, we worked on a study on capacity-building, sponsored side events and contributed to the work of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, with briefings, side events, a formal reception and a welcome picnic for the participants. Cooperation with United Nations bodies or specialized agencies :: With the Financing for Development Secretariat, we have worked since 2000 on the preparatory process for Monterrey, writing papers and participating in meetings, including high-level meetings of the Council. :: We have participated in every annual DPI/NGO conference, and many weekly briefings year-round. We have a networker, a newsletter, Connections, and a web site (www.ipa.ozehosting.com) through which information is shared with our membership. :: With UNDP, we have participated in the leadership series and other briefings. Conference and Commission participation We participated in the following meetings/processes: :: Preparatory process for the International Conference on Financing for Development :: Special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS :: Preparatory process for the special session of the General Assembly on children :: Preparatory process and the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance :: International Conference on Financing for Development :: Second World Assembly on Ageing :: Preparatory meeting for the World Summit on Sustainable Development :: World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa :: Special session of the General Assembly on children :: Annual DPI/NGO Conference :: High-level dialogue on financing for development During 2001-2003, we have had representation at meetings of the following bodies/processes: :: DPI annual conferences :: Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues :: Commission on Social Development :: Commission on Human Rights :: Commission on the Status of Women :: Commission on Sustainable Development :: Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 6. International Rural Housing Association (Special consultative status granted in 1972) The International Rural Housing Association is a non-profit, non-governmental organization in the field of rural housing, environmental sanitation and integrated rural development. The area of action of IRHA is international; regional rural housing associations have been created on all five continents, and in many countries national rural housing associations have been created as well. The sources of funding are membership fees and donations. During the period under review, the International Rural Housing Association has transmitted technical information concerning rural housing and environmental sanitation by disseminating bulletins, pamphlets and documentation pertinent to the subjects considered by the United Nations. :: The International Rural Housing Association established a close relationship with the Interamerican Network of Health in Housing Centre. The Network works in collaboration with WHO and PAHO. The goal of this approach was to coordinate plans for action together in the field of health in housing in the Latin America and Caribbean region. :: IRHA organized meetings with the Government of Venezuela to attain an agreement to promote the investigation and development of rural dwellings, according to the various bio- climatic and geographical regions. :: IRHA signed an agreement with the Ministry of Health and Social Development and the Monagas regional government for investigation and capacitation of low-income rural communities in Monagas state; Venezuela. :: IRHA facilitated the preparation of the first draft of a policy on indigenous housing in Monagas state. :: IRHA continued a dialogue with the Government of Venezuela to prepare an agreement on rural housing. :: Through community participation, an agreement was reached on the design of houses for indigenous ownership. Several courses and workshops were convened to empower and enhance the livelihood of the rural and indigenous community. :: A project on the theme "International registration of experience about habitat and rural housing" was begun. This project aims to advise rural communities and public and private organizations, concerning the latest technological advances and programmes in the area of habitat and rural housing. :: IRHA held meetings with the Government to obtain national data about habitat and rural housing. :: IRHA coordinated the activities of the agreement signed with the Government and the Monagas regional government. Important changes were made concerning organization, participation and community development in the indigenous community of San José de Buja. :: Visits were made to remote indigenous communities, many of them bordering Colombia, Brazil and Guyana, in preparation for follow-up visits by national and international organizations. :: IRHA held a meeting with PAHO to explore the possibility of installation of a housing health centre in the Autonomous Service of Rural Housing. To promote this idea, a workshop was convened in Maracay, Venezuela, on the theme "The importance of rural housing for health and social development". 7. Lebanese Welfare Association for the Handicapped The Lebanese Welfare Association for the Handicapped is a non-governmental non-profit, non-political organization. Its mission is to improve the quality of life for people with special needs and enhance their dignity, independence and productivity. Its objectives are to provide full rehabilitation services to the physically disabled, including primary medical care, physical and psychosocial rehabilitation and vocational and physical education; provide social assistance to the disabled in need; promote and support the rights of the disabled; and become the most reliable rehabilitation foundation in the region. LWAH has been a member of CONGO since 2000, and officially represents Lebanese NGOs on the Regional Consultative Board of ESCWA. LWAH is a member of Rehabilitation International; the Arab Board of Childhood and Development; the National Commission for the Disabled; the national working team for a United Nations comprehensive and integral international convention on the protection and promotion of the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities; the Handi-Sports Lebanese Federation; the Lebanese "Childhood High Council"; the Lebanese NGO Forum; the National Mine Risk Education Steering Committee; and the National Mine Victims Assistance Steering Committee. LWAH has project partnerships and collaborative relationships with UNICEF, WHO, ESCWA, UNESCO, YMCA, KERPAPE -- France, the World Rehabilitation Fund, Norwegian People's Aid, the American Lebanese Association, the American Task Force for Lebanon, Entente Sportive Handi-Paris, the Japan International Cooperation Agency, Saint Joseph University -- Beirut, Balamand University -- Beirut, and Kuwait Society for the Handicapped -- MAKATON Center. Financial resources As a non-profit organization, LWAH resources are limited to the following: yearly membership fees; activities revenue; donations and contributions; special contracts with the Ministry of Social Affairs, Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of Education and the National Army of Lebanon; and projects shared with many humanitarian and international organizations. Participation of LWAH in United Nations meetings and activities At the local level: participated in a meeting on consolidation of cooperation between ESCWA and civil society organizations held in Beirut, in April 2001; implemented a mine action programme in collaboration with the UNICEF country office (2001 to present); implemented a vaccination campaign in the region of Bekaa, in collaboration with the UNICEF country office, April 2002; implemented an awareness and screening campaign for breast cancer in south Lebanon, in collaboration with the WHO country office, June 2002-July 2003; attended the fourth session of the Social Development Committee of ESCWA, held in Beirut in July 2002; hosted and co-organized two training courses on the rehabilitation of landmine injuries in collaboration with the UNICEF country office, held in south Lebanon in December 2002; attended a joint UNICEF/WHO workshop on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, held in Beirut in January 2003; participated in a workshop on the role of civil society in implementing the Convention on the Rights of the Child, organized by the UNICEF country office in Beirut in March 2003; attended the twenty-second session of ESCWA in Beirut in April 2003; hosted and co-organized the celebration of the World Health Day in collaboration with the WHO country office in south Lebanon in April 2003; participated in regional Arab conference on development standards and the rights of people with disabilities, organized by ESCWA in Beirut in May 2003; participated in World Anti-Smoking Day 2003, organized by the WHO country office in Beirut in May 2003; attended a workshop on the status of children in Lebanon, organized by the UNICEF country office in Beirut in June 2003; participated in the first meeting of the Regional Consultative Board of ESCWA in Beirut in December 2003; hosted and coorganized a training course on the alleviation of psychological disorders among children through animated activities and play, in collaboration with the UNICEF country office, held in south Lebanon in December 2003; hosted and co-organized a training course on the impact of war on child psychology, in collaboration with the UNICEF country office, held in south Lebanon in December 2003. At the international level: participated in the twenty-first General Assembly of CONGO, held in Vienna in November 2000; participated in a UNESCO expert meeting on information and communication technology for people with disabilities, held in Paris in May 2003; participated in the second session of the Ad Hoc Committee for the elaboration of a United Nations convention on the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities, held in New York in June 2003; participated in the twenty-second General Assembly of CONGO held in Geneva in December 2003. 