%%%SLAVERY|TRUST FUNDS|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|PROJECT FINANCE|TRAVEL COSTS|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|FUND-RAISING|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Fifty-ninth session Item 14 (d) of the provisional agenda SPECIFIC GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS OTHER VULNERABLE GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Report of the Secretary-General Addendum GE.04-11524 (E) 120304 The present addendum contains the recommendations adopted by the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery at its ninth session, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 January 2004, which were approved by the United Nations Acting High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General on 23 February 2004 concerning: the financial status of the Fund; the review by the Board of the reports by beneficiaries on previous grants paid from 1999 to 2003; new travel and project grants for 2004; and the Board's needs assessment for 2005. It updates the reports of the Secretary-General to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixtieth session (E/CN.4/2004/78) and to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session (A/58/306). Paragraphs Page I. FINANCIAL STATUS OF THE FUND 1 4 II. NINTH SESSION OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 2 - 31 4 III. NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR THE TENTH SESSION 32 8 IV. HOW TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE FUND 33 - 35 8 V. RECOMMENDATIONS 36 9 Annexes I. Contributions available at the ninth session of the Board of Trustees 10 II. Travel grants 11 III. Project grants 13 1. According to information received from the Administration of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Programme Planning and Budget Section of the United Nations Office at Geneva, at the beginning of the ninth session, US$ 294,457 were available from new contributions paid since the eighth session of the Board of Trustees (see annex I) as well as from previous unspent balance. II. NINTH SESSION OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 2. The ninth session of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery was held in Geneva from 26 to 30 January 2004. The meeting was opened by the Acting High Commissioner for Human Rights, Bertrand Ramcharan. In his opening statement, he highlighted that contemporary forms of slavery are among the foremost issues of conscience and demand the attention of the international community. In his opening statement, the Chairman of the Board thanked the Acting High Commissioner especially for his suggestions. He requested the Board to observe a minute of silence in memory of the late High Commissioner for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello. 3. The five Board members attended the session. During the 10 meetings, they examined information prepared by its secretariat concerning the implementation of recommendations adopted at its eighth session, the financial situation of the Fund, applications for new travel and project grants, as well as the implementation of the recommendations approved from 1999 to 2003. The Board noted with satisfaction that the Fund had sufficient funds available to cover the approved cost plan for 2004. 4. The Board also met with Dzidek Kedzia, Chief of the Research and Right to Development Branch, and Richard Adiyia, from OHCHR Administration, to discuss the developments in the United Nations system concerning trust funds within the context of the Secretary-General's report "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change" (A/57/387 and Corr.1). In this respect, the Board was called to contribute to the discussions on the future of the funds. 5. The Board was also briefed by the Resource Mobilization Unit on the OHCHR fundraising policy. On the last day of the session, the Board of Trustees held its annual meeting with representatives of donor Governments and other interested Governments. 6. Under the agenda item devoted to the developments in the United Nations system concerning relevant mandates, the Board heard presentations concerning the OHCHR trafficking project and the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. The representative of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) provided information on the activities concerning the International Year to Commemorate the Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition and expressed his organization's interest in a future collaboration with the Board and the Fund.7. On 30 January, the Chairperson of the Board attended a press conference at the United Nations Office in Geneva to brief the media on the activities of the Fund and on the situation of contemporary forms of slavery in the world. The Board welcomed the interest expressed by the media on the Fund. Review of travel grants approved in 2003 8. The Board reviewed the participation of the beneficiaries of travel grants who attended the twenty-eighth session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery in 2003 and noted with satisfaction their active role in the Working Group's deliberations. 9. The Board was briefed on the discussions held at the Working Group. The Board expressed appreciation for the support shown by the Working Group to their activities and the fact that the agenda item on the Fund would from now on be discussed at the beginning of the session of the Working Group. 10. The Board recommended that the travel grants for the two beneficiaries from Benin and China who could not attend the twenty-eighth session of the Working Group be kept pending for their participation at the twenty-ninth session. Consideration of new applications for travel grants to participate in the twentyninth session of the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery 11. The Board examined 31 applications for travel grants amounting to approximately US$ 90,000 from representatives of NGOs, including victims of contemporary forms of slavery in 12 countries. 12. The Board noted that the main theme approved by the Working Group for its twentyninth session is "Forced labour, in particular in light of the ILO Programme of Action". In this context, the Board recommended that the secretariat of the Working Group continue to inform the Board at its annual session about priority areas that the Working Group would identify, so that the Board can take them into consideration in its selection of applications for travel grants. 13. The Board emphasized that it always takes into consideration a gender dimension as well as geographical distribution when considering applications and when revising the application forms and guidelines of the Board and Fund. 14. In the light of the selection criteria, the Board recommended nine travel grants for an estimated amount of approximately US$ 30,000 (see annex II). Provided that all conditions attached to the grant have been met, all travel grants should be paid before the twentyninth session of the Working Group, which is scheduled to take place from 28 June to 2 July 2004. The beneficiaries will present the situation of contemporary forms of slavery in seven different countries; two of the beneficiaries will bring their first-hand testimony as former victims of slavery.15. The Board recommended that travel costs be authorized to enable the Chairperson or another member of the Board to participate in the twenty-ninth session of the Working Group. The Board member will introduce the report on the Fund under the relevant agenda item, as well as meet and introduce to the Working Group the beneficiaries of travel grants attending the session. The Board suggested that, if possible, there should be a rotation of the members of the Board that attend the Working Group. Review of project grants approved in 1999-2003 16. The Board reviewed the narrative and financial reports on the use of project grants paid from 1999 to 2003 and adopted relevant recommendations. Within this context, the Board recommended to close the file for 15 projects as organizations had provided satisfactory narrative and financial reports on the use of grants, and to keep 32 project files open to request additional information from the organizations. In some cases, the Board recommended that the secretariat request OHCHR field presences or the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to assist in the follow-up and in evaluating the projects. 17. The Board noted with satisfaction that during the year, Tatiana Matveeva and Cheikh Saad-Bouh Kamara had carried out project evaluation missions to Nice, France, and Dakar, respectively, to visit projects that were subsidized by the Fund in 2003. Similarly, the secretariat visited two other projects, in Santiago de Chile, and in Turin, Italy, at no cost to the Fund. Recommendations for new project grants in 2004 18. The Board examined 49 applications for project grants amounting to approximately US$ 637,000. Applications were received from the following continents and countries: 14 from Africa: 1 Burkina Faso, 2 Burundi, 1 Cameroon, 1 Ghana, 4 Nigeria, 1 Togo, 4 Uganda; 7 from the Americas: 1 Argentina, 2 Brazil, 2 Colombia, 1 Guatemala, 1 Honduras; 23 from Asia: 2 Bangladesh, 3 Cambodia, 15 India, 1 Nepal, 2 Pakistan; 5 from Europe: 2 Italy, 1 Spain, 1 Tajikistan, 1 Ukraine. 19. In the light of the selection criteria, the Board of Trustees recommended 20 project grants for a total amount of US$ 150,700 which will assist NGOs in 15 countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia and Europe (see annex III). 20. In accordance with United Nations rules and regulations governing general trust funds for humanitarian assistance, 13 per cent of the estimated annual expenditures in 2004 had to be set aside for programme support costs related to the servicing of the Fund and 15 per cent of estimated annual expenditures also had to be set aside as a reserve for 2005, in case no new contributions would be received. 21. The Board recommended that within proper limits, provisions should continue to be made in the cost plan for 2004 in order to enable members of the Board or the secretariat to visit and evaluate projects subsidized by the Fund within their geographical region for a better evaluation of the work carried out and planned. A report of these visits should be prepared by the Board or secretariat member and made available to the Board at its next session. Awareness-raising 22. Throughout the session, the members of the Board emphasized the need to find ways and means to raise greater awareness within the international community on contemporary forms of slavery and slavery-like practices. Within this context, the Board met with the head of communications at OHCHR. During the discussions, several proposals were made for disseminating information on contemporary forms of slavery, including the activities of the Fund and the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery. The Board recommended that the secretariat follow up in consultation with the Board members. 23. The Board strongly recommended that an OHCHR fact sheet on the activities of the Fund be prepared in close consultation with the Board, for information and fund-raising purposes, in a sufficient number of copies and languages for wide dissemination to NGOs and donors. Taking into account that 2004 is the International Year to Commemorate the Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition, the Board would appreciate this document being published in the course of this year. 24. The Board strongly supported the suggestion put forward by the Acting High Commissioner about a global report on contemporary forms of slavery, which may be initiated this year to mark the International Year by creating awareness worldwide. 25. The Board also recommended that OHCHR revise Fact Sheet No. 14, on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, in order to include a reference to the activities of the Fund and Board. 26. The Board recommended that a statement be issued on the occasion of United Nations International Day for the Abolition of Slavery (2 December), if possible together with other relevant United Nations organs. The Board also encouraged NGOs, individuals and schools to organize parallel activities during the International Year and on the Day. The Board emphasized the importance of the media in disseminating the statement. The future direction of the Fund 27. The members of the Board also discussed the future direction of the Fund in the light of the information provided by the secretariat. The members took note of the management changes, the establishment of a task force on United Nations trust funds as a follow-up to the Secretary-General's reform agenda, and the increasing focus on the evaluation of results. The members underlined the fundamental importance of the Fund and its Board as an independent United Nations body that provides direct assistance to the victims of contemporary forms of slavery and grass-roots NGOs fighting to combat these practices. They expressed their commitment to the Fund and requested that any changes that are proposed be discussed fully with them. 28. In the context of these discussions, the Board members emphasized the need to take a victimoriented approach by always prioritizing their interests.29. In the framework of the tenth anniversary of the Fund, the Board would favour an evaluation of the activities of the Fund, to be carried out by the secretariat in consultation with the Board. The objective of the exercise would be to reflect the value and impact of the Fund over the years. Fund raising 30. The Board held its annual meeting with regular and new donor Governments and other interested Governments on 30 January. A frank and useful exchange of views took place at that meeting. The Board encouraged greater participation of representatives in future meetings. 31. The Board noted with satisfaction that a number of Governments are annually contributing to the Fund and also new donors, such as Botswana, Mauritius and the Sudan. The Board also expressed appreciation for the fact that more students, NGOs and other private entities and individuals are becoming regular donors to the Fund. III. Needs assessment for the TENTH session 32. In the Board's view, in order to be able to satisfy the new applications envisaged for 2005 and fulfil its mandate satisfactorily, and taking also into consideration that the Board recommended for expenditure almost all money available at its ninth session, the Fund would need new contributions amounting to at least US$ 325,000 before the tenth session of the Board, scheduled to be held from 24 to 28 January 2005. IV. How to contribute to the Fund 33. Voluntary contributions to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery may be made: (a) By bank transfer to the "United Nations Geneva General Fund": In United States dollars: c/o UBS AG, P.O. Box 2770, CH-1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland Account number: 240-C0590160.1, Swift address: UBSWCHZH12A In other currencies: Account number: 240-C0590160.0, Swift address: UBSWCHZH12A. (b) By cheque, to the order of the "United Nations": to be addressed to The Treasurer, United Nations, United Nations Office at Geneva, Palais des Nations, CH1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland.34. Donors should indicate "For the Slavery Fund, account SH" on any payment order. 35. To enable the secretariat to follow up and inform the Board of Trustees, the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the Working Group, donors wishing to make a voluntary contribution to the Fund are invited to inform its secretariat of their payment at: Secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, United Nations, CH1211 Geneva 10 Switzerland, Telephone: + (41) (22) 917 91 64, + (41) (22) 917 91 45, Facsimile: + (41) (22) 917 90 17. V. Recommendations 36. All the above reflects the recommendations adopted by the Board of Trustees at its ninth session and approved by the Acting High Commissioner on behalf of the Secretary-General on 23 February 2004. Contributions available at the ninth session of the Board of Trusteesa State/NGO, other private or public entities, individuals For the year Amount in US$ Local currency Paid on Contribution No. Botswana France Holy See Israel Japan Mauritius Netherlands Euro45 000 South Africa Sw F 8 010 Sudan United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Pound10 000 Mr. Yorio Shiokawa Sw F 200 Sw F 128 Japanese Workers Committee Sw F 300 Students and teachers at Instituto Tecnico Commerciale Oscar Romero, Albino, Italy Euro1 262.10 Euro1 162.90 Total = US$ 147 194 a Based on information available at OHCHR/GE as at 15 January 2004. travel grants A. Travel grants recommended at the ninth sessiona Organization, country Name of applicantb b (f) means a female and (m) a male applicant. Theme to be discussed at the Working Group AFRICA Groupe de Recherche-Action pour un Développement Endogène de la Femme Rurale du Burkina (GRADE-FRB), Burkina Faso Bernadette Tipoko Ouedraogo (f) Theme: The situation of domestic child workers and trafficking in children in Burkina Faso. The Drammeh Institute, United States of Americac c Although the organization is based in the United States of America, the beneficiary is from Mauritania and will discuss forced labour among women in Mauritania. Habsa Sileymane (f) Theme: Forced labour among women in Mauritania and in particular the psychosocial effects of slavery on child development in Mauritania. THE AMERICAS Asociación para la divulgación, promoción y defensa de los derechos humanos e indígenas de los territorios y asentamientos Wayuu de la Guajira (Association for the dissemination, promotion and defense of the human rights and indigenous rights of the Wayuu territories and settlements of the Guajira), Colombia Zulima Esther Fonseca Perez (f) Nellys Amparo Monsalve Mercado (f) Theme: Situation of child labourers in the salt industry in Guajira. Theme: The applicant will relate her experience as a victim of contemporary forms of slavery in Colombia. ASIA Arya Samaj For Bonded and Child Labour Front, India Vithal Rao Arya (m) Theme: Forced and bonded labour system in Andhra Pradesh. International Council of Aryan Youth, India Jagvir Singh (m) Theme: Forced and bonded labour. Conditions: The grant should be kept pending receipt of more information on the activities of the organization. Swabi Women Welfare Society, Pakistan Sher Zaman (m) Theme: Commodification of women, involuntary servitude, forced marriage, "honour killings" and customs of Pakistani women. d Tomorrow Children NGO, Benin Micheline Aklo (f) Theme: The applicant will relate her experience as a trafficked girl from Benin to Gabon where she worked as a domestic labourer for 8 years. The Committee of Propaganda and Education on the Convention on the Rights of the Child and PCAN Shaanxi Translators Association of CAT, China Fuyong Jiao (m) Theme: Presentation of a clinical study of 86 sexually abused children in China. Annex III Project grants recommended at the ninth session Title of project or aspect covered Grant recommended in US$ Groupe de recherche-action pour un développement endogène de la femme rurale du Burkina (GRADE-FRB), Burkina Faso Project of assistance to children victims of sexual exploitation and prostitution (Wend Zoodo) (10 000 and 5 000) United Women Orphanage Development Association (UWODA), Uganda Fight slavery and abuse of human rights (5 000 and 2 700) Development Organisation and Empowerment of Rural Poor (DOERP), Uganda Protection of victims of slavery support project (5 000 and 3 000) Neema Pancrasio (NEEMAPA), Uganda Integrated women development (3 000 and 2 500) Eradicación del Trabajo Infantil para la Reinserción Escolar (ETIPRE), Argentina Eradication of child labour and their reintegration into school (ETIPRE) AKUAIPA WAIMAKAT- Asociación para la Divulgación, Promoción y Defense de los Derechos Humanos e Indígenas de los Territorios y Asentamientos Wayuu de la Guajira, Colombia Plan of action orientated at improving the situation of 600 children working as miners in the marine salt quarry in the Department of La Guajira, Colombia Terre des Hommes, Colombia-Italy Prevention of contemporary forms of slavery of children in Usme, Bogotá, Colombia Les Trois Quarts du Monde (TQM), Guatemala/France Support for two shelter homes, training and reintegration of girls in the streets of Guatemala Centro de estudios de la mujer Honduras Domestic child labour Project Pabartya Bouddha Mission, Bangladesh Rescue and rehabilitation of sexually exploited and trafficked indigenous girls (5 000 and 2 000) Hope Association for Development, Cambodia Relief to child labour through awareness working Arya Samaj for Bonded Labour - Child Labour Front, India Release, rehabilitation of bonded and domestic child labourers and awareness campaign (5 000 and 10 000) Vivek Sadhna Mandir (Temple of Wisdom), India To mobilize the Kol stone miners against forced labour and help them assert their right. (7 000 and 5 000) Agrarian Assistance Association, India Campaign to free bonded child labourers (7 000 and 8 000) Agro Forestry Basic Health and Cooperatives Nepal (ABC), Nepal Rehabilitation programme for victims of trafficking and sexual assault (6 000 and 3 000) Association of network for community empowerment, ANCE, Pakistan Education and health programme for children working in brick kilns EUROPE Fondazione Auxilium, Italy Shelter assistance to women victims of sexual exploitation and forced prostitution Adoratrices-Proyecto ESPERANZA, Spain Project for the rehabilitation of women victims of trafficking "Modar", Tajikistan Trafficking of people - the new phenomenon in Tajikistan (preparation of a book and a seminar) West Ukrainian Center "Women's Perspectives", Ukraine Individual support and assistance to victims of trafficking Total = 20 projects US$ 150 700 