%%%CONSTITUTIONS|TAX SYSTEMS|HUMAN RIGHTS|JUDICIAL SYSTEM|INTERNAL SECURITY|GUATEMALA|TREATIES|

98-32496 (E) 281098 301098 United Nations A/53/541 General Assembly Distr.: General 27 October 1998 English Original: French Fifty third session Agenda item 44 The situation in Central America: procedures for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace and progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development Letter dated 22 October 1998 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Austria to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to bring to your attention the statement issued on 22 October 1998 by the President of the European Union concerning Guatemala (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 44. (Signed) Hans Peter Manz Chargé d’affaires a.i. Deputy Permanent Representative of Austria to the United Nations A/53/541 Annex [Original: English and French] Statement issued on 22 October 1998 by the Presidency of the European Union concerning Guatemala On the occasion of the second meeting of the Consultative Group for Guatemala, in Brussels, the European Union congratulates the people of Guatemala, its constitutional and political representatives and all sectors of civil society on their efforts to implement the Peace Accords. The European Union especially welcomes the recent approval in Congress of constitutional reforms. The European Union hopes that they will be endorsed by popular vote and encourages the State and society of Guatemala to continue the process towards the full implementation of the Peace Accords. The European Union believes that the Peace Accords binds all Guatemalans and strongly encourages all sectors to contribute to the achievement of their targets, in particular in the socio-economic fields. The attainment of the major fiscal goals and progress towards the establishment of a more equitable tax system will be considered as important indicators for Guatemala’s commitment to the peace process. Concerned about unresolved cases of violent crimes, in particular the still unresolved murder of Bishop Gerardi, and human rights violations, the European Union calls upon the competent authorities of Guatemala to renew efforts to ensure a full investigation and bring those responsible to justice. The European Union believes that strengthening the judicial power will be essential to end impunity. Trusting in the will and ability of the people of Guatemala to meet the historic challenge, the European Union reaffirms its active support for the peace process and its solidarity with all Guatemalans committed to it. The Central and Eastern European countries associated with the European Union, the associated country Cyprus and Iceland and Liechtenstein, and the European Free Trade Association countries members of the European Economic Area align themselves with this statement. 