%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|TRUST FUNDS|INDIGENOUS ORGANIZATIONS|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|FUND-RAISING|TRAVEL COSTS|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights Working Group on Indigenous Populations Twenty-second session 19-23 July 2004 Item 6 (d) of the provisional agenda other matters state of the voluntary funds Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations* Note by the Secretariat The present note contains the recommendations adopted by the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations at its seventeenth session, held in Geneva from 11 to 19 March 2004, which were approved by the Acting United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General on 22 April 2004. * Annexes III-VI are circulated in the language of submission only. GE.04-14214 (E) 020504 Summary The seventeenth session of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations was held in Geneva from 11 to 19 March 2004. At the session the five Board members examined a total of 547 admissible applications, in the light of the criteria for the selection of beneficiaries adopted by the General Assembly, and approved a total of 106 grants, in a total amount of some US$ 460,000, to representatives of indigenous communities to attend the third session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (New York, 10-21 May 2004), the twenty-second session of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations (Geneva, 19-23 July 2004) or the tenth session of the working group on the draft United Nations declaration of the rights of indigenous peoples (Geneva, 13-24 September 2004). The annexes contain lists of the beneficiaries and the indigenous groups they represent, and a table showing the contributions and pledges made to the Voluntary Fund. 1. The General Assembly, convinced that the establishment of a voluntary trust fund would constitute a significant development for the future promotion and protection of the human rights of indigenous populations, established the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations by resolution 40/131 of 13 December 1985. The purpose of the Fund is to assist representatives of indigenous communities and organizations to participate in the deliberations of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights by providing them with financial assistance, funded by means of voluntary contributions from Governments, non-governmental organizations and other private or public entities. 2. On 21 December 1995, the General Assembly expanded the mandate of the Fund by resolution 50/156, deciding that the Fund should also be used to assist representatives of indigenous communities and organizations to participate in the deliberations of the openended intersessional working group of the Commission on Human Rights established by the Commission in its resolution 1995/32, as endorsed by the Economic and Social Council on 25 July 1995. 3. The General Assembly further expanded the mandate of the Fund in its resolution 56/140 of 19 December 2001 by deciding that the Fund should also be used to assist representatives of indigenous communities and organizations in attending, as observers, the sessions of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. In accordance with Council resolution 2000/22, which established the Permanent Forum as a subsidiary organ of the Council, its mandate is to discuss indigenous issues within the mandate of the Council relating to economic and social development, culture, the environment, education, health and human rights. Mandate of the Board of Trustees 4. The mandate of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, as established by the General Assembly, is to advise the Secretary-General on the administration of the Fund, through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). The Board is composed of five persons with relevant experience on issues affecting indigenous populations, who serve in their personal capacity as United Nations experts. The Board members are appointed by the Secretary-General for a three-year renewable term, in consultation with the current Chairman of the SubCommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. At least one member shall be a representative of a widely recognized organization of indigenous populations. 5. The five members who have been appointed by the Secretary-General for a three-year renewable term, which ends on 31 December 2005, are themselves indigenous experts: Mr. Lars Anders Baer (Saami), Mr. Nadir Bekirov (Crimean Tatar), Mr. Ahmed Mahiou (Amazigh), Mr. José Carlos Morales Morales (Brunca) and Ms. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz (Igorot). Beneficiaries The criteria for the selection of beneficiaries have been established by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights, as well as by the Secretary-General upon recommendations of the Board of Trustees (see annex I). Seventeenth session of the Board of Trustees 7. The seventeenth session of the Board of Trustees was held at the Palais Wilson in Geneva from 11 to 19 March 2004. The meeting was opened by the Acting High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Bertrand Ramcharan. In his opening remarks he thanked the Board members for their dedication and commitment to indigenous issues. 8. The Board held 14 private meetings. It examined information prepared by its secretariat concerning the implementation of recommendations adopted at its sixteenth session and the financial situation of the Fund, including new contributions paid and the list of donors. The pledges made and the contributions paid in time for the seventeenth session of the Board are listed in annex II. The Board considered a total of 547 admissible applications for travel grants from representatives of indigenous organizations and communities to attend the 2004 sessions of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, the Working Group on Indigenous Populations and the working group on the draft United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 9. On the first day of the session, the Board met with the Chief of the Research and Right to Development Branch and OHCHR Administration to discuss the developments in the United Nations system concerning trust funds within the context of the Secretary-General's report "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change" (A/57/387 and Corr.1). In this respect, the Board was called upon to contribute to the discussions on the future of the funds. 10. The Board was also briefed by the Resource Mobilization Unit on the OHCHR fundraising policy as well as by the Chief of the Executive Branch, Mr. E. Schwartz, on the OHCHR policy regarding the Annual Appeal. The Board highly appreciated the exchange of information and recommended that this practice be continued at its next session. Implementation of recommendations adopted at the sixteenth session in 2003 11. The Board noted with satisfaction that all the recommendations adopted at its sixteenth session had been satisfactorily implemented. Consideration of new applications for grants 12. In accordance with resolution 2003/29 of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and the Protection of Human Rights, the Secretary of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations informed the Board of Trustees of the latest developments concerning the Working Group, including the main theme to be discussed in 2004: "Conflict resolution of indigenous issues". The Secretary of the working group on the draft United Nations Declaration also briefed the Board on the developments concerning that working group. Both presentations were highly appreciated by the members of the Board, who took the issues presented into consideration when selecting beneficiaries. 13. The Board of Trustees reviewed the financial situation of the Fund and the list of contributions paid since the sixteenth session by regular and new donors, as well as the balance that remained in the Fund. After deducting mandatory provisions for programme support costs (13 per cent) and the operating cash reserve (15 per cent), in accordance with the relevant United Nations financial rules, an amount of US$ 533,852 was available for expenditure. 14. The Board considered: (a) A total of 266 admissible applications for travel grants (to cover travel costs and a daily stipend) for representatives of indigenous organizations to attend the twenty-second session of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, to be held in Geneva from 19 to 23 July 2004; (b) A total of 246 admissible applications for travel grants (to cover travel costs and a daily stipend) for representatives of indigenous organizations to attend the third session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, to be held in New York from 10 to 21 May 2004; (c) A total of 35 admissible applications for travel grants (to cover travel costs and a daily stipend) for representatives of indigenous organizations to attend the tenth session of the working group on the draft United Nations Declaration, to be held in Geneva from 13 to 24 September 2004. Recommendations for grants 15. Having examined the applications in light of the selection criteria established by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights, as well as by the Secretary-General upon recommendations of the Board of Trustees, the Board recommended for approval by the Secretary-General: (a) A total of 47 grants for representatives of indigenous communities and organizations to attend the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, for a total amount of about US$ 154,212 (see annex III); (b) A total of 46 grants for representatives of indigenous communities and organizations to attend the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, for a total amount of about US$ 249,700 (see annex IV); (c) A total of 13 grants for representatives of indigenous communities and organizations to attend the working group on the draft United Nations declaration, for a total amount of about US$ 56,316 (see annex V). 16. As several Governments had announced pledges to the Fund to be paid in the coming weeks, the Board decided to establish a contingency list of four additional possible beneficiaries to attend the working group on the draft declaration, for a total amount of about US$ 15,128. The beneficiaries will be informed as soon as the new contributions are paid (see annex VI). 17. When making recommendations, the Board took into consideration the official travel estimates provided by the OHCHR Administration-Travel Unit. 18. The Board ensured geographical, gender and inter-generational balance as much as possible in the selection process. 19. The selection of beneficiaries was based on the admissible applications received. The Board expressed concern that only a few applications were received from certain regions, whereas from other countries and communities a large number of applications had been submitted. Recommendations concerning the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 20. The Board recommended that the stipend given to beneficiaries of travel grants to attend the Permanent Forum in New York be adjusted to US$ 200 per day. 21. The Board appreciated for the statement made by the Chairperson at the second session of the Forum, thanks to which a number of participants expressed interest in the activities of the Fund, including donors. 22. The Board very much appreciated the report by the secretariat on the assistance provided to the beneficiaries of travel grants to attend the second session of the Permanent Forum, and recommended that a similar report be prepared for the third session. This effort in promoting the activities of the Fund enhanced the status of the Fund at United Nations Headquarters. 23. The Board recommended that the Bureau of the Permanent Forum at its third session in 2004 invite the Chairperson, or any other member of the Board or the secretariat of the Board and Fund, to deliver a statement introducing the note by the secretariat on the implementation of the mandate given to the Fund by General Assembly resolution 56/140 of December 2001. The Board recommended that sufficient financial resources for this purpose be allocated in accordance with its approved cost plan for 2004. 24. The Board recommended that the Chairperson and other members of the Board in New York meet with the members of the Permanent Forum at its third session to exchange information. 25. The Board recommended that a meeting be held between the Board members and donors during the third session of the Permanent Forum. Other recommendations 26. The Board recommended that the secretariat continue to organize information meetings on the Fund for indigenous representatives during the sessions of the working groups and the Permanent Forum. 27. The Board recommended that the members of the Board attending the forthcoming session of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations and the secretariat meet with members of various regional indigenous groups, including the African group, to discuss ways and means of disseminating information on the Fund to communities and countries that have not yet applied to the Fund and that do not have access to information on the working groups or the Permanent Forum. 28. The Board recommended that the Bureau of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations at its session in 2004 should continue to invite the Chairperson or any other member of the Board who could be in Geneva during the session, or of the secretariat of the Board and Fund, to deliver a statement introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund. The Board recommended that the working group on the United Nations draft declaration follow the same practice. 29. The Board members have agreed to actively distribute the Fund's application forms as widely as possible, in particular in regions which have been underrepresented. 30. The Board encouraged the participation of indigenous cross-border organizations as well as partnerships among indigenous communities, including those from different regions. New guidelines 31. The Board emphasized that the beneficiaries of travel grants when accepting the conditions attached to the grant commit themselves to participate fully in the session of the working group or Permanent Forum. Failure to do so would have a negative impact on future recommendations for grants. 32. The Board emphasized that beneficiaries of travel grants should report back to their communities to ensure that the community also benefits from the participation of its representative. In this respect, the Board adopted a new guideline by which each beneficiary, as part of his/her reporting obligation to the Fund, will be requested to report on the follow-up activities organized upon his/her return as well as on his/her participation in the working group or Permanent Forum. A framework for reporting was drawn up and will be distributed among beneficiaries. Cost plan for 2005 33. The Board revised and approved the cost plan of the Fund for 2005 with envisaged expenditure amounting to US$ 777,000. 34. The Board expressed its concern about the fact that there was a discrepancy between its approved cost plan and the figures that appeared in the OHCHR Annual Appeal for 2004. The Board hopes that its cost plan for 2005 will be reflected correctly in the next Annual Appeal. Fund-raising 35. The Board held its annual meeting with donors, including Algeria, Bolivia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Norway, the Netherlands, Turkey and the African Union. The Board expressed appreciation for the donors' contributions and pledges to the Fund. In this respect, the representative from Algeria reported that his Government would contribute US$ 5,000 to the Fund for 2004. 36. The Board recommended that the Bureau of the Commission on Human Rights, at its next session in 2005, should continue to invite the Chairperson, or any other member of the Board who could be in Geneva during the session of the Commission, to deliver a statement introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the eighteenth session of the Board and on the activities and needs of the Fund, and to appeal for new contributions. The future direction of the Fund 37. The members of the Board also discussed the future direction of the Fund in light of the information provided by the secretariat. The members took note of the management changes, the establishment of the Task Force on United Nations Trust Funds as a follow-up to the SecretaryGeneral's reform agenda, and the increasing focus on the evaluation of results. The Board also noted the review of the United Nations mechanisms relating to indigenous issues as well as the end of the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People. 38. The members underlined the fundamental importance of the Fund and of the Board as an independent United Nations body that provides direct assistance to indigenous peoples and allows them to participate in the United Nations process. They underlined the fact that at present all the Board members were themselves indigenous representatives. 39. The members of the Board discussed the possibility of working towards the expansion of the mandate of the Fund to include both travel and project grants for indigenous peoples. 40. The Board members expressed their commitment to the Fund and requested that any proposed changes be fully discussed with them. In the context of these discussions, the Board members emphasized the need always to prioritize the interests of indigenous peoples. Dates and agenda of the eighteenth session 41. The Board of Trustees considered and approved their provisional agenda for the eighteenth session. Taking into consideration that the secretariat should be able to analyse applications for the fourth session of the Permanent Forum received before the deadline of 1 October 2004, the Board considered that the annual session of five days should be scheduled from 21 to 25 February 2005 in order to be able to examine all admissible applications in time. In that context, the Board urges donors to contribute before that date. Criteria for the Selection of Beneficiaries 1. According to General Assembly resolution 40/131, the only beneficiaries of assistance from the Fund shall be representatives of indigenous populations' organizations and communities: (a) Who are so considered by the Board of Trustees; (b) Who would not, in the opinion of the Board, be able to attend the sessions of the working groups or the Permanent Forum without the assistance provided by the Fund; (c) Who would be able to contribute to a deeper knowledge on the part of the working groups or the Permanent Forum of the problems affecting indigenous populations and who would provide a broad geographical representation. 2. In addition, the Secretary-General approved the following criteria upon recommendation by the Board: (a) A travel grant approved by the secretariat is given on an individual basis. An organization or beneficiary cannot request that a beneficiary be replaced by another, except under exceptional circumstances, time permitting and upon approval by the secretariat; (b) The representatives and the organizations applying for a grant should be indigenous; (c) The Board does not consider requests from applicants which do not provide a letter of recommendation signed by an executive of their indigenous organization. The Board will not examine a letter signed by the applicant herself/himself; (d) The Board only considers a maximum of two applicants per organization; (e) Applicants are requested to submit application forms and recommendation letters in one of the working languages of the Board's secretariat (English, French or Spanish); applications in other languages will not be considered by the Board of Trustees; (f) The Board selects both representatives who have never participated in a session of a Working Group or the Permanent Forum and representatives who have already participated and could develop specialized capacity and strengthen the core group of participants in a working group or the Permanent Forum; (g) The Board encourages indigenous organizations and communities to consider gender balance and, if possible, propose one woman and one man; (h) The Board encourages indigenous organizations and communities to consider nominating young persons; (i) The Board encourages the former beneficiaries of the OHCHR Indigenous Fellowship Programme to apply for grants to represent their indigenous organization or community at sessions of the working groups or Permanent Forum by sending duly completed application forms and meeting all the criteria for selection; (j) Applicants are requested to indicate their responsibility in their organization or community; (k) Applicants to attend the session of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations are requested to refer in their statements to the specific theme for the session; (l) The Board's recommendation in favour of an applicant to attend a session of the Permanent Forum does not exclude another recommendation to attend the Working Groups and vice versa; (m) The Board confirmed its practice according to which it will give priority to applicants living in their own community and country over applicants living abroad. 3. For the working group on the draft United Nations declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples only: According to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/32, in order to be able to attend the working groups of the Commission on Human Rights organizations must be in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council or be authorized by the Council Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations. 4. For the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues only: In accordance with Council resolution 2000/22, "... non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Council may participate as observers; organizations of indigenous people may equally participate as observers in accordance with the procedures which have been applied in the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protections of Human Rights". According to the same resolution, the Permanent Forum has a mandate to discuss indigenous issues within the mandate of the Council relating to economic and social development, culture, the environment, education, health and human rights. Applicants must therefore refer in their statements to these issues. VOLUNTARY FUND FOR INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS A. Contributions available for the seventeenth session of the Board in March/April 2004 Country/NGO/Individual Amount (US$) Paid on New York Geneva Chile 31 July 2003 x Canada 16 March 2004 Denmark 22 April 2003 11 March 2004 Estonia 30 December 2003 Greece 1 August 2003 Guatemala 14 July 2003 Holy See 4 December 2003 Israel 23 October 2003 Norway 2 May 2003 Mr. Yorio Shiokawa 27 March 2003 Mr. Sachiko Hotta Members of the Aichi International Connecting Conference for Human Rights, Japan Total B. Pledges made Country Pledged in NY/GE Local currency Pledged on Bolivia NY 2-3 November 1999 Pledge made at the 1999 United Nations Pledging Conference on Development Activities in New York. 7-8 November 2001 Pledge made at the 2001 United Nations Pledging Conference on Development Activities in New York. Venezuela 7 November 2001 5 November 2002 Pledge made at the 2002 United Nations Pledging Conference on Development Activities in New York. Annex III BENEFICIARIES TO ATTEND THE twenty-second SESSION OF THE WORKING GROUP ON INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS (Geneva, 19-23 July 2004) A. List of beneficiaries Name of representative Organization Indigenous population represented City/State Hassen Marmouri (m) Association Taralift Touareg Djanet, Algeria Emmanuel Nengo (m) Unissons-nous pour la Promotion des Batwa (UNIPROBA) Batwa Bujumbura, Burundi Honoré Nzol Bissack (m) Organisation d'Appui aux Initiatives de Développement et Environment (OAPIDE) Pygmy, Baka Abong-Mbang, Cameroon Rahamatu Mallam Sali (f) Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association of Cameroon Mbororo Bamenda, Cameroon Amadou Souaibou (m) Federation Nationale des Eleveurs Mbororo de Centre Afrique Bangui, Central African Republic Pacifique Mukumba Isumbisho (m) Centre d'accompagnement des Autochtones Pygmées et Minoritaires Vulnerables (CAMV) Pygmy Sud Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo Julie Nsolo Djelo (f) Centre de Formation de Watshi, femmes rurales et développement Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo Mwendelapinzi Mazambi (f) Action chrétienne pour la promotion des défavorisés (ACPROD) Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo Kirwa Cherviyot (m) Cherangany Indigenous Minority Group Cherangany Ravine, Kenya Beatrice Jemaiyo (f) Nandi Women for Peace and Development Nandi Eldoret, Kenya Mariétou Diallo (f) Tin Hinan-Mali Bamako, Mali Khadija Boujid (f) Association TAWESSNA pour la culture et le sport Amazigh Adadir, Morocco Victoria Geingos (f) Working Group of Indigenous Minorities in South Africa (WIMSA) Maillom Windhoek, Namibia Hannatou Waiza Soumaila (f) Rayouwan-Mata Sonrai Tchirozérine, Niger Mariama Garba (f) ONG Aghirin'man Arlit, Niger Christopher Siara Laisser (m) Olaji Lo Larusa Larusa Arusha, Tanzania Kossi Peter (m) Association de Lutte pour la Santé et le Développement (ALSD) Affoya Fon-Mahi/ Mahinou Lomé, Togo Darlington Lorika (m) Action for Development of Local Communities (ADOL) Northern Ugandan indigenous peoples Kampala, Uganda Doreen Spence (f) Canadian Indigenous Women's Resource Institute Canadian indigenous peoples Calgary, Canada Malcolm Benally (m) Forest Lake Chapter Community Navajo Pinon, United States of America Abelino César Palacios (m) Comunidad indígena del pueblo Kolla de Tinkunaku Kolla Buenos Aires, Argentina Esau Saúl Carayury Parangava (m) Capitanía Guaraní Zona Cruz Guaraní Santa Cruz, Bolivia José Blas Nain Perez (m) Aukiñ Wallmapu Ngulam - Consejo de Todas Las Tierras Mapuche Mapuche Temuco, Chile Luzmila Amaya Curvelo (f) Akuaipa Waimakat Wayuu La Guajira, Colombia Manuel Bosco Antonish Wampash (m) Asociación de Centros Shuar de Limón Shuar Morona Santiago, Ecuador Yolanda Teran (f) Consejo Nacional de Mujeres Indígenas del Ecuador Kichwa Quito, Ecuador Dominga Vino Gomez (f) Asociación de Agro-ecoturismo Indígena AGROETOURS Grupo Maya Kaqchikel Chimaltenango, Guatemala Graciela Granuell Wood (f) Asociación Lakiatara Miskitu Tegucigalpa, Honduras Marcelino Díaz de Jesús (m) Consejo de Pueblos Nahuas del Alto Balsas (CPNAB) Nahuas Guerrero, Mexico Isaías Chapay Miguel (m) Federación de Comunidades Nativas Campa Ashaninka (FECONACA) Ashaninka Satipo, Peru Jimai Montiel Calles (m) Fundación Intercultural Alitasia. Comunidad Alitasia. Guajira Venezolana Maracaibo, Venezuela Paddy Neowarra (m) Ngarinyin Aboriginal Corporation Ngarinyin Derby, Australia Udvasan Chakma (m) Chittagong Hill Tracts Hill Students' Council (PCP) Jumma Dhaka, Bangladesh Virginius Xaxa (m) Society for Education, Training and Development Oraon, Munda and Kharia New Delhi, India Pancha Narzary (f) St. John's Mission, Bijni Bodo Bijni, Assam, India Tamara Tahalele (f) Murkele Organisation Alifuru Jakarta, Indonesia Johnny Kiev Dullah (m) Sarawak Community Cooperation Institute Dayak people (Ibans) Sarawak, Malaysia Shankar Limbu (m) Lawyer's Association for Human Rights of Nepalese Indigenous People (LAHURNIP) Limbo Kathmandu, Nepal Bala Chandra Rai (f) Kirant Chamling Rai Language and Culture Development Central Committee Kirat Chamling Hmejezié Thihmana (m) Conseil national pour les droits du peuple autochtone (CNDPA) Kanak We Lifou, New Caledonia Winstone Te Hati Pakaroa Ponika (m) Tuhoe Tuawhenua Land Trust Tuhoe Nation (Maori) Rotorua, New Zealand Nelofer Rafiq (f) Indigenous People Survival Program (IPSP) Kalash Community of Birir, Bombourait and Ramboor Peshawar, Pakistan Windel Bolinget (m) Cordillera Peoples Alliance Igorot Baquio City, Philippines Kamila Shermatova (f) Istok Kumandin Biysk, Russian Federation Lev Nerbyshev (m) Association of the Khakas Tribes Khakas Abakan, Russian Irina Shafrannik (f) Kolta Kup Selkup Tomsk, Russian Arsen Ashikov (m) Foundation for Research and Support of Indigenous Peoples of Crimea Crimean Tatars Simferopol, Ukraine B. Geographical and gender distribution of the beneficiaries Female Male Africa America Asia-Pacific Europe-Arctic Grand total C. Distribution of beneficiaries by age group BENEFICIARIES TO ATTEND THE THIRD SESSION OF THE PERMANENT FORUM ON INDIGENOUS ISSUES (New York, 10-21 May 2004) Mohammed Beddiaf (m) Association Socioculturelle `Tagazt Djanet Mohamed Si Belkacem (m) Association Culturelle ILES UMAZIGH Tizi Ouzou, Algeria Ai Shatu Ali (f) Mbororo Social Cultural and Development Association Mbororo pastorialists Bamenda, Cameroon Micheline Mbathas (f) Amicale pour la Promotion Communautaire (APC) Pygmies Bangui, Central African Republic Timani Musanga (f) Action Chrétienne pour la Promotion des Défavorisées (ACPROD) Pygmies Bambuti, Batwa Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo Daniel Mpoiko Kobei (m) Ogiek Peoples Development Program (OPDP) Ogiek Nairobi, Kenya Mary Nasieku (f) Ogiek Rural Integral Projects (ORIP) Narok, Kenya Fatima Mourd (f) Association Tamaynut Rabat, Morocco Sada Albachir (f) Association TUNFA Agadez, Niger Moussa Idiwane (m) Toufat Niamey, Niger Tsaro Carter Biragbara (m) Ogoni Volunteer Indigenous humanitarian Organisation (OVIHO) Ogoni Khana Local Government, Nigeria Juvénal Sebishwi (m) Communauté des Autochtones Rwandais (CAURWA) Kigali, Rwanda Thembile Smuts (m) Saartjie Baartman Indigenous Medicine Chainouqua Cape Town, South Africa Susan Joseph Oduho (f) Concern Women Action for Peace - Sudan Lotuho Ikotos, Sudan Sossa Laurent Akouete (m) Association pour la promotion des groupements agricoles (APGA) Kpélé Govié Christina Commonda (f) Wampum International Algonquin Nation Quebec, Canada Luukia Archer (f) Na Koa Ikaika o Ka Lahui Hawaii Indigenous people in Hawaii Hawaii, Natalia Silvina Sarapura (f) Consejo de organizaciones aborígenes de Jujuy "COAJ" Kolla, Atacama, Quchua, Ocloya, Guarani and Omacuaca. Provincia de Jujuy, Argentina Flora Uscamayta Alaña (f) Organización de la Nación Aymara -ONA - sección Bolivia Aymara La Paz, Bolivia Teodora de Souza (f) Indigenous Movement Educational Organization (Awaete Kaiwa Guarani Ipo) Guarani Kaiwa Mato Grosso, Brazil Erity Teave Hey (f) 107 Parlamento Rapa Nui (Marae Ote Unahi Renga) Rapa Nui Rapa Nui, Chile Miguel Antonio Valbuena Guariyu (m) Asociación para la divulgación, promoción y defensa de los derechos humanos e indígenas de los territorios y asentamientos Wayuu de la Guajira. Monica Patricia Chuji Gualinga (f) Comunidad Sarayacu Community Sarayacu Raul Clemente Ilaquiche Licta (m) Confederación de pueblos de la nacionalidad Kichwa del Ecuador (ECUARUNARI) Indigenous peoples in the Andean part of Ecuador Rubén Ortiz (m) Programa de desarrollo economico y social de la mujer "Kichin Konojel" Kaqchikel Evenecer Valeska Calderón Withol (f) Asociación Lakiatara/Buamna Mismitos, Tawahkas, Pech, Garifunas, Mestizos. La Moskitia, Honduras Josefino Martinez Hernandez (m) Comité de solidariedad trique en el área metropolitana A.C. Indigenous peoples of various communities Oaxaca, Mexico Nelson De Leon Kantule (m) Asociación Napguana Kuna Ciudad de Panama, Panama Tarcila Rivera Zea (f) CHIRAPAQ Centro de culturas indígenas del Perú Quechua Lima, Peru Jayariyu Farias Montiel (f) Fundación Wayumaiki-Pueblo Wayuu Les Malezer (m) Foundation for Aboriginal and Islander Research Action (FAIRA) Gubbi Gubbi Queensland, Australia ÿrinal Kanti (m) Parbatya Chattagram Jana Samhati Samiti (PCJSS) Chittagong Hill Tracts, Bangladesh Liton Bom (m) Chin Human Rights Organization Chin Bandarban, Bangladesh Atina Gangmei (f) Zeliangrong Women's Union (ZWU) Rongmei Nagaland, India Ramdayal Munda (m) Indian Confederation of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (ICITP) 500 indigenous and tribal communities spread over the 7 tribal zones of the country Caroline Wahlang (f) Meghalaya Peoples Human Rights Council (MPHRC) Khasi Meghalaya, India Bahaludin (m) Institution for Development of Rural People (IDRAP) Kulisusu People Kendari, Indonesia Evilita Lusiana Jantewo (f) Yayasan Konsultasi Pndidikan Masyarakat Papua West Papua Indigenous Papua, Indonesia Bujang Bolhi (m) Panggau (Borneo Indigenous and Peasant Movement Malaysia) Kayak Bidayuh Chandra Singh Rai (m) Association of Nepalese Indigenous/Nationalities Journalists (ANIJ) Kirat Kulung Anthony Sinclair (m) Te Kawau Maro Maori Auckland, Joan Carling (f) Baguio City, Philippines Jannie Lasimbang (f) Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact (AIPP) Asia Indigenous Peoples Chiang Mai, Thailand Nadejda Petchenina (f) Regional Public Organization - Association of the Shor People Shor Kemerovo, Russian Federation Yegor Bekrenev (m) Association of the Shor People Myski town, Russian Federation Remzi Il'yasov (m) Mejlis Crimean Tatar People Crimean Tatar BENEFICIARIES TO ATTEND THE TENTH SESSION OF THE WORKING GROUP ON THE DRAFT UNITED NATIONS DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES (Geneva, 13-24 September 2004) Saoudata Aboubacrine (f) Tamaynut - ANCAP - Tin Hinan Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso Vital Bambanze (m) Unissons-nous pour la promotion des Batwa (UNIPROBA)/ANCAP Abdallah Hitous (m) Tamaynut ANCAP Brooklin Rivera (m) Indian Law Resource Center/ YATAMA Miskita Managua, Nicaragua Sebastiao Manchineri (m) Coordinator de las organizaciones indígenas de la cuenca amazonica (COICA) 400 indigenous peoples (in 9 countries of the Amazons) Tomas Alarcón (m) Comisión Jurídica para el Autodesarrollo de los pueblos originarios Andinos (CAPAJ) Tacna, Peru Aboriginal Woolloongabba, Australia Bineet Mundu (m) Tebtebba Foundation - Indigenous peoples sharing, study and action - Indigenous peoples global research and education network. Adivasi Tracey Whare (f) International Indian Treaty Council/Aotearoa Indigenous Rights Trust (AIR Trust) Masterton, Rhoda Rivera (f) Luingam Luithui (m) Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact (AIPP)/Nepal Federation of Nationalities Asian indigenous peoples Michael Todishev (m) Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North (RAIPON) Indigenous peoples of the North, Siberia and Far East Moscow, Mejlis of Crimean Tatar people Crimea, Ukraine CONTINGENCY LIST OF BENEFICIARIES TO ATTEND THE TENTH SESSION OF THE WORKING GROUP ON THE DRAFT UNITED NATIONS DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES Mohamed Ikarbane (m) Tamaynut/ANCAP Estebancio Castro Diaz (m) Indian Treaty Council and Kuna Movement San Francisco, United States of America Kripa Ram Rai/Kirati (m) Nepal Indigenous Peoples Development and Information Service Centre (NIPDISC) Tradionaly Kirati Peoples Alliance Kirati Kemerovo, Russian Federation 