%%%FAMILY|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|

Commission for Social Development Forty-third session 9-18 February 2005 * E/CN.5/2005/1. Item 3 (b) (iv) of the provisional agenda* Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly: review of relevant United Nations plans and programmes of action pertaining to the situation of social groups: tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family and beyond Statement submitted by Associated Country Women of the World, European Union of Women, Foundation for the Rights of the Family, International Confederation of Christian Family Movements, International Kolping Society, Service and Research Foundation of Asia on Family and Culture, and SOS Kinderdorf International, non-governmental organizations in special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996. We the undersigned international non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council, Recall that: The World Summit for Social Development was held in Copenhagen in March 1995 under three core themes: poverty, employment and social integration. Family issues were addressed by the Summit and are incorporated in the Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of Action; the words family or families are repeated no less than thirty-seven times. The Programme of Action particularly says that "the family is the basic unit of society and as such should be strengthened. It is entitled to receive comprehensive protection and support. In different cultural, political and social systems, various forms of the family exist. Marriages must be entered into with the free consent of the intending spouses, and husband and wife should be equal partners". (Programme of Action, chapter 4, Social Integration - G. Social integration and family responsibilities, paragraph 80). The twenty-fourth Special Session of the General Assembly states: "There has been continued recognition that the family is the basic unit of society and that it plays a key role in social development and is a strong force of social cohesion and integration". (Twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, resolution S-24/2. Further initiatives for social development, Social integration, paragraph 25). Recognize that: In operative paragraph 1. of the draft resolution recommended by the Economic and Social Council for adoption by the General Assembly, entitled "Celebration of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family and beyond", the Council notes "that the follow-up to the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family is an integral part of the agenda and the multi-year programme of work of the Commission for Social Development until 2006" (Report of the forty-second session of the Commission for Social Development 4-13 February 2004, Economic and Social Council, official records 2004, supplement nº 6 - E/2004/26 E/CN.5/2004/8). In Copenhagen the World Summit for Social Development formulated policies and measures to alleviate poverty, to expand productive employment and to enhance social integration. Based on ten solemn commitments, the Declaration states that the goals and objectives of social development require continuous efforts to reduce and eliminate major sources of social distress and instability for the family and for society. The Programme of Action calls for fostering policies that address various aspects of family life, such as enabling people to combine their remunerated work with their family responsibilities; recognizes the central role of the family in social integration and calls for equal partnership between men and women in the family, community life and society. Underscore that: Peace, economy, the environment, social justice and democracy are viewed as integral parts of development; at their centre is "the person", and around the person is the family. When various families interact, society is born. So we have: the person - the family - society. The strength of society lies essentially on the vitality and resilience of the family. Families, historically, perform a fundamental role in the process of socialization and education and, because of their primacy, have a significant long-term influence on a child's personality and future life. Home is the primary place where family members receive emotional care, experience intimacy, understanding and support in a world that is often unpredictable, hurtful and insensitive. It is a place where people return to regularly for nurturing, comfort and the reduction of tension. People with special needs, especially the disabled, bring an added enriched dimension to human experience; but not seldom, because of their special needs, also add extra burdens on families. Families offer a comprehensive and, at the same time, synthesized approach to social issues and problems, since the family represents the fullest reflection, at the grass-root levels, of the strengths and weaknesses of the social environment. There should, therefore, be an integrated approach to social development through the family. We, hence, suggest that: Flexible working hours be afforded as a way to foster the sharing of parental and domestic responsibilities by women and men alike. Employers should be encouraged to facilitate employees to be able to lead a more responsible family life, which also can be a key trigger for the well-being of the families concerned and the companies involved. Particular attention and support should be given to families providing health care to the very old or sick members, as well as to families eroded by the ravaging effects that armed conflicts, natural disasters and infectious diseases such as the HIV/AIDS pandemic, have on family life and stability. There should be, on the part of Governments and within the United Nations system, an approach to identifying current and future policy-oriented research on the family, as well as networks for exchange of information on such research. Family issues, within the agenda and the multi-year programme of work of the Commission for Social Development, should be considered as components of an integrated approach to development. The Family Programme, within the Division for Social Policy and Development, should continue to extend full support to actions and events organized by Governments and Civil Society Organizations, beyond the year 2004, as a dynamic follow-up to the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family. 