%%%DRUG TRAFFIC|ILLICIT TRAFFIC|DRUG CONTROL|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|DRUG POLICY|CAPACITY BUILDING|LAW ENFORCEMENT|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

Commission on Narcotic Drugs Forty-seventh session Vienna, 15-22 March 2004 Item 6 of the provisional agenda E/CN.7/2004/1. Illicit drug traffic and supply International assistance to the States affected by the transit of illicit drugs Report of the Executive Director Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Africa Asia and the Pacific Central and Eastern Europe Central Asia Latin America and the Caribbean The present report has been prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/34 of 22 July 2003, entitled "International assistance to the States affected by the transit of illicit drugs". The aim of the strategy of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is to assist transit States in the upgrading of legislation and judicial procedures; the strengthening of the technical skills of law enforcement agencies; the improving of data collection by national agencies to support informed responses to combat illicit drug trafficking and the problems associated with it; the provision of equipment to front-line operations; and the strengthening of cross-border and regional cooperation and assistance to develop self-sustaining training in the best operating practices for government law enforcement services. II. Africa In Africa, several new initiatives have been launched by African Governments and regional organizations with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other partners. The initiatives are aimed at strengthening national and regional law enforcement capacities. The inaugural session of the African Union, held in Durban, South Africa, from 8 to 10 July 2002, adopted the Declaration and Plan of Action on Drug Abuse Control and Illicit Drug Trafficking in Africa, which was later renamed the Plan of Action on Drug Control in Africa, 2002-2006. The Declaration benefited from earlier support and technical guidance from the Office on Drugs and Crime and the revised Plan of Action reflects emerging drug trends on the continent and focuses on key drug control areas, including (a) information, research and networking; (b) legal systems and implementation of the law; (c) national and regional law enforcement and control measures; and (d) international cooperation. It also introduced two new dimensions to drug control in Africa: (a) the mainstreaming of drug control in political agenda in Africa and (b) the introduction of monitoring and review mechanisms in the implementation of the Plan of Action. In 2003, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime launched an Africa-wide project to support the Plan of Action. A new liaison office established by the Office in Addis Ababa in August 2003 will work to maintain close cooperation between the Office and the Unit for Drug Control and Crime Prevention of the African Union. It will offer expertise, advisory services and financial support for the implementation of the Plan of Action. The project is to strengthen the commitment and capacity of Governments of African countries, other African partners, regional organizations and United Nations entities to address the drug problems of the continent. A regional law enforcement adviser was recruited in late 2002 as part of a continent-wide project to offer Governments of African countries advisory services and assistance in developing capacities in drug law enforcement and countering organized crime. In partnership with the Government of Nigeria, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has launched a project to support the creation of a regional law enforcement training academy in West Africa. The Government of Nigeria has offered to establish the training academy within the existing premises of the Training Academy of the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency of Nigeria. Significant government resources have already been invested in the renovation and upgrading of the Academy. The project will offer support to the subregion in the areas of training in drug law enforcement, the investigation of money-laundering, drug demand reduction, the establishment of networks and the facilitation of exchanges of strategic information among law enforcement agencies in the subregion. In August 2002, the Southern African Development Community and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime held a regional conference on the Strategic Programme Framework on Crime and Drugs for Southern Africa to identify programme needs and resources. The conclusions of the conference contributed to the formulation of the Office's 2003 strategic programme framework on crime and drugs for Southern Africa. In collaboration with the Customs Co-operation Council (also called the World Customs Organization), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has launched a regional seaport project, which has led to the creation of specialized, joint port control teams in several ports of East and Southern Africa, including at Djibouti, Dar es Salaam, Mombassa, Durban, Cape Town, Port Elisabeth, Johannesburg dry port and Port Louis. In some cases, the creation of the joint teams marked breakthroughs in national law enforcement agency cooperation and also paved the way for concluding similar inter-agency agreements at other border posts. The project of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on Countermeasures against Illicit Drug Trafficking and Cross-Border Crime along Southern and East African Land Borders, which commenced in 2002, continued to be implemented as planned. The project provides expert advisory services, training and logistical support to six border posts in Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In East Africa, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is engaged in a regional project addressing the control of licit drugs and precursors. In 2003, the project continued to assist Governments of counties in the region in developing, training and equipping national drug regulatory authorities, thereby enhancing supervision and control of the licit supply and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Needs assessments were carried out in Burundi, Eritrea, Madagascar and the United Republic of Tanzania. Guidelines for estimating licit drug requirements are being finalized. In 2003, the United Republic of Tanzania revised its licit drug legislation and Madagascar enacted relevant provisions for the control of precursors and adopted a national drug control master plan. The training of judges, magistrates, prosecutors and investigators from 19 countries in East and Southern Africa continued under a regional legal assistance project launched by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to improve the handling of drug-related cases. The project provides training and the transfer of knowledge related to national drug control legislation and the legal and procedural prerequisites for more effective international cooperation. It aims at improving cross-border casework cooperation and performance; enhancing more effective and frequent cooperation in matters of international requests for mutual legal assistance; improving national trial and conviction rates for serious drug offences; enhancing current court systems and capacities through a legal training programme; and establishing a sustainable training capacity in the subregions through the use of training facilities. A regional drug demand reduction project launched by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, aimed at enhancing the capacity of Governments and non-governmental organizations in East Africa, continued to provide training on drug demand reduction to police, prison and probation staff in East Africa and to promote collaboration between the criminal justice system and the health and social services in dealing with drug abusers. In North Africa, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime launched a project on strengthening the national and legal institutional capacities of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya through multisectoral drug control assistance. The project aims to increase the drug control planning and policy formulation capacity in that country. Similar policy development support projects were developed for Algeria and the Sudan. The project of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on the development of an action programme against illicit drugs and organized crime in Morocco commenced delivery in 2003. The project will assist the Moroccan authorities in designing drug control policies with a view to addressing the problem of illicit cultivation of cannabis in northern Morocco. III. Asia and the Pacific The Office has addressed assistance to transit States in Asia and the Pacific by developing drug control agreements and a framework of subregional activities. There has been a high level of demand from Member States for technical assistance. Within the framework of the subregional action plan agreed upon in the 1993 memorandum of understanding on drug control between the countries in the Mekong area (Cambodia, China, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office has continued to play a coordinating role in the field of drug control. That has included providing technical assistance in the formulation and implementation of subregional and national drug control projects, in close collaboration with other United Nations agencies, national and international institutions and non-governmental organizations. A ministerial meeting on drug control and cooperation was held in Hanoi in September 2003 to strengthen the cooperation and coordination between the six States that have signed the memorandum of understanding and to build upon recent achievements. Since 1999, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has had an ongoing programme to develop and strengthen cross-border cooperation between the six signatory States of the 1993 memorandum of understanding. To date, 24 border liaison offices have been established and basic equipment for communication and transportation provided. A large number of border liaison officers have been trained through the Office's computer-based training programme. Agreement has been reached between the participating countries to develop an action plan and procedures for operational law enforcement cooperation to be followed in border areas. A second phase of the project has been approved and funding has been pledged for two more years. In the second phase, the focus will be on strengthening the drug control capacity along the Mekong, which is a major drug and precursor trafficking route. Activities will include the establishment of new border liaison offices and additional training. Within the objectives of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and China Cooperative Operations in Response to Dangerous Drugs (ACCORD) Plan of Action, the computer-based training programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime was expanded in the second phase to include Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. Implementation has commenced. Furthermore, an existing project on precursor control, which commenced in 2001 and assists the six States that had signed the memorandum of understanding, has been extended to involve Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. A memorandum of understanding was signed in July 2002 between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, acting through its Department for International Development, to designate the Regional Centre for East Asia and the Pacific of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Bangkok as the implementing agency for the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Anti-Money-Laundering Initiative. The project, which covers 10 Asian countries, is aimed at developing sustainable institutional capacity in Asia to address money-laundering concerns at the national, regional and international levels. A comprehensive needs analysis has been carried out in China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. The project will focus on law enforcement training in the field of money-laundering. The topics of amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS) from Myanmar and the smuggling of the ATS precursors ephedrine and pseudoephedrine from China and India into Myanmar were discussed at a regional meeting attended by representatives from China, India and Myanmar and organized jointly by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation. Views and information were exchanged and representatives of the three countries agreed to work in closer cooperation and organize a joint training programme for law enforcement officers of India and Myanmar. IV. Central and Eastern Europe The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has continued its close cooperation and coordination role with the drug control agencies throughout Central and Eastern Europe. The Office is working closely to strengthen cooperation with the Community Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilisation (CARDS) programme of the European Union operating in the western Balkans. The Paris Pact arising from the International Conference on Drug Routes from Central Asia to Europe, held in Paris on 21 and 22 May 2003, under which ministers from 55 States affected by the traffic in opium and heroin produced in Afghanistan and originating in Central and South-West Asia agreed to combine their States' efforts to step up national capabilities and develop regional partnerships to tackle all the aspects of the problem, has focused regional and donor attention on the current manifestations of the threat and the countermeasures required. A region-specific Paris Pact round-table meeting on the Balkan route was held in Brussels in September 2003; another round-table meeting was held in October 2003 on the effects of the Afghanistan opium economy on the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Paris Pact process in 2003 culminated in a senior policy-level consultative group meeting, which was held in Rome on 21 November 2003. Further meetings are planned for 2004. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime completed a school-based prevention project in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The prevention materials used were designed to address the shortage of information tools in the Baltic States, where drug-related problems among youth have rapidly become a matter of serious concern. Country teams have developed materials for use by both students and teachers that have been positively received in classrooms. The project has been externally evaluated and found to be an exemplary model activity. A project on strengthening law enforcement capacities in Central Europe was concluded in August 2003 with a policy-level meeting hosted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna. The five countries addressed by the project (the Czech Republic, Hungary, the Slovak Republic, Poland and Slovenia) concluded that it had been fully and successfully implemented. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has continued its support to drug law enforcement agencies of the Balkan States through its project on strengthening the capacities of south-eastern European States in the collection and analysis of criminal intelligence related to drug trafficking and organized crime. Criminal intelligence units have been established in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovenia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and criminal intelligence analysts have been trained. Technical equipment and software have been supplied to facilitate the work of the units and the project will now focus on establishing national-level training capacities for front-line officers, analysts and senior managers. The participating countries have already expressed their satisfaction with the progress that has been made and the launch of a second phase will be considered in the coming months. In Albania, the project on improvement of control measures and enhanced cooperation among drug-related institutions in Albania has focused on strengthening the drug interdiction and seizure capacities of the law enforcement agencies of Albania. As a result, an anti-drug unit has been established and its staff trained, the technical capacities of the police and customs have been further developed and closer and more effective cooperation among law enforcement agencies has been established. This work has facilitated the undertaking of a number of joint investigations and the sharing of intelligence. In terms of other initiatives launched by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office is currently working with the authorities of the Russian Federation on integrating their epidemiological surveillance within the framework of the Global Assessment Programme on Drug Abuse and on extending the surveillance parameters to include linkages with the criminal justice system. A regional project designed to diversify HIV-prevention and drug treatment services for drug users in Belarus, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation and Ukraine aims to minimize the adverse health and social consequences of drug injecting, including prevention of the transmission of HIV and other blood-borne infections among injecting drug users. The training capacity of the federal training centre in the Russian Federation was further increased through the provision of computer-based learning equipment for staff training and the production of a training manual. Furthermore, advanced training for regional drug control units has also been agreed and two seminars have been held, covering topics on the handling of special operations, including intelligence analysis and risk assessment. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has been actively promoting computer-based law enforcement training to the newly established State Drug Control Committee and other law enforcement agencies and facilitating cooperation between the Turkish International Academy against Drugs and Organized Crime (TADOC) and the Russian Advanced Training Institute of the Ministry of the Interior at Domodedovo (located near Moscow). The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime provided training on pre-trial investigation and adjudication of drug-related cases for judges in Armenia and Georgia and, together with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in Azerbaijan. Legal assistance provided under the Southern Caucasus Anti-Drug programme of the European Union has resulted in the adoption of new laws in Armenia and Georgia. The European Union has requested expert assistance from the Office in implementing the legal component of the European Union Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova Anti-Drug Programme. At the annual summit of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), held in Yalta, Ukraine, in September 2003, the strategic platform for stronger cooperation between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and CIS was further developed at the Council of Heads of State and the Council of Foreign Ministers in Yalta. It was recognized that utilizing existing CIS machinery, including the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly and other CIS common legislative bodies, would generate maximum benefit from resources committed by the Office in the future to meet the needs of the COS member States. The Office on Drugs and Crime regional office in Moscow, together with the regional office of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Tashkent, is designing projects that strengthen cooperation among law enforcement agencies of Central Asian States in the areas of controlled delivery enhancing capacity and cross-border cooperation in drug law enforcement. V. Central Asia In 2002 and 2003, Afghanistan once again became the world's largest source of illicit opium. Central Asia is one of the world's key transit routes for opiates, heroin and certain chemical precursors. Rapidly growing illicit drug trafficking and related crime problems, and the resulting wide availability of morphine and heroin have increased drug misuse and accelerated the spread of HIV/AIDS related to injecting drug use in Central Asia. Responding to that threat to human security and stability in the region, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has expanded its Central Asia programme significantly in terms of volume and thematic coverage. In addition to a law enforcement project package worth more than US$ 18 million, which was launched in the first half of 2003, other law enforcement projects for more than $8 million have been prepared for commencement in 2004. A new subprogramme on demand reduction was approved in mid-2003 and implementation will commence in 2004 once funding has been secured. Much of the programme focus in Central Asia continues to be on drug law enforcement, notably (a) the strengthening of national enforcement institutions' capacities, legal frameworks and structures, (b) the creation of adequate border control measures and structures along the most affected borders with, or close to, Afghanistan and (c) the fostering of operational law enforcement cooperation and information exchange at the national level and within the region, as well as with countries affected by the Afghan opium economy. Demand reduction action is aimed at improving the prevention and treatment services throughout the region and the reduction of drug-related HIV/AIDS. In the area of legal development, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime operated within the framework of established cooperation with the Interparliamentary Assembly of CIS. A joint workshop on harmonization of national drug control legislation brought together lawmakers, judicial practitioners and drug control administrators from 11 countries of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in Velikiy Novgorod, Russian Federation. The workshop identified national legislation and practices in need of improvement and harmonization at the regional level and delivered a set of practical recommendations to Governments of CIS member States for their consideration and implementation. The Legal Assistance Programme for Central Asia also conducted work in CIS member States in the Caucasus and Europe. For precursor control, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime reviewed the relevant legislation of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, made recommendations on how to improve chemical control regimes and assisted in the drafting of amended national legislation. Customs and law enforcement personnel and laboratory technicians were trained on different aspects of precursor control, and specialized equipment and information materials for chemical analysis were distributed among agencies and national forensic laboratories. In Afghanistan, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has initiated projects in the priority areas of legal and judicial reform; law enforcement; mainstreaming of the drug control element in development assistance; drug demand reduction; and monitoring and assessment. The projects are being implemented in close cooperation with relevant Afghan counterparts and other stakeholders. Institutional capacity for drug control in Afghanistan is one of the main priorities for tackling the drug problem in the country. Following the creation of the Counter-Narcotics Directorate in October 2002, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, under the capacity-building project, has been providing continuous support to the Directorate to enhance its working capability in the areas of the recruitment of professional staff, the drafting of terms of reference, the training of staff and the provision of office equipment, including vehicles. An effort is also under way to assist the Directorate in establishing satellite offices in key provinces. In the field of drug law enforcement, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has established a good working relationship with the Ministry of the Interior of Afghanistan. However, frequent changes within the Ministry, from the Minister downwards, have slowed progress. On a number of occasions the process of dialogue has had to be restarted. Despite such setbacks, the Office has pushed forward the creation of a Drug Investigation Unit in Kabul, which, together with a replication of investigation and intelligence functions in seven key locations, is the basis of national drug law enforcement. In Kabul, staff members for the unit have been selected and have undergone basic training in drug investigation; they are currently acquiring basic computing and English skills. The first of the provincial units has been formed in Kandahar and is receiving basic training in drug investigation. The Transitional Authority of Afghanistan has also started the recruitment process for drug law enforcement staff in other key provincial locations. A further strengthening of the law enforcement capacity in Afghanistan is planned through the development of more projects. These will be designed and implemented as the absorption capacity of the relevant Afghan counterparts increases. In a new project, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is assisting the Afghan authorities in establishing an interdiction unit, which is to be an operational arm in support of the drug investigation and intelligence units. The Illicit Crop Monitoring Programme in Afghanistan actively sought the participation of the Counter-Narcotics Directorate in conducting the Annual Opium Poppy Survey of 2003. A significant element in the 2003 survey was the fact that all survey activities were conducted jointly with the Directorate. The goal is to build, over a period of 3 to 5 years, the capacity of the Directorate to execute illicit crop monitoring programmes and to enable its professional staff to take a leading responsibility in survey activities. Once again, the annual Afghan opium poppy survey provided accurate estimates of the level of opium poppy cultivation, enabling a calculation of the likely production potential to be made. A "farmer's intention survey" was also carried out by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the major opium-growing provinces of Afghanistan to assess the potential for opium poppy cultivation in the 2003/2004 planting season and to identify the different factors that have influenced the cultivation. In the period 2002-2003, the demand reduction programme in Afghanistan continued to provide considerable resources in terms of advice, drug prevention education and training and community-based drug treatment to a wide range of agencies and organizations, including the Counter-Narcotics Directorate, the Ministry of Public Health, United Nations entities, donor agencies and non-governmental organizations. An outreach referral system and home-based detoxification and treatment services for drug addicts in Kabul have been developed and established, in collaboration with the local mental health hospital and non-governmental organizations. In response to increasing opium poppy cultivation and opium trafficking in the northern provinces of Afghanistan, particularly Badakhshan, with its direct routes into and through Central Asia, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has expanded its projects strengthening border control measures in Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. Since summer 2003, four projects have been delivering modern equipment, training and expert advice on effective border control procedures and practices. They have also been developing forensic and chemical analysis capacities, strengthening the existing units of handlers of drug detector dogs, and improving existing information and analytical capacities in support of law enforcement operations. In Tajikistan, a special focus has been placed on the control checkpoints at Dushanbe, Kulyab and Khodjent airports and at the railway station in Dushanbe. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has continued to build consensus among the potential stakeholders for the establishment of a Central Asian regional intelligence coordination centre to support cross-border and regional drug law enforcement operations. A number of technical meetings were held during 2003, as a result of which a full project document was developed and subsequently circulated for donor comment. The centre will serve as a regional focal point for the exchange of operational information between law enforcement agencies and will assist in facilitating cross-border and regional operations. It will also provide analysis of information and coordinate joint operational activities. The regional intelligence coordination centre initiative is also designed to build upon an ongoing project of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime aimed at establishing systems for national intelligence collection, analysis and exchange. In 2003, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime convened two regional seminars on drug demand reduction at the technical level in Central Asia. The first was a regional expert group meeting on setting up a Central Asian regional drug epidemiology network; it was attended by representatives from all the Central Asian countries and held in Tashkent in March 2003. The second was held in Osh, Kyrgyzstan, on 31 May and 1 June 2003 and attended by national focal points and other key experts from the region, who met for initial deliberations on the way forward in the diversification of HIV prevention and drug treatment services for injecting drug users. With support from the regional office of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, a meeting of the Foreign Anti-Narcotic Community took place in March 2003 in Tashkent. Several sessions of the Mini-Dublin Group were also held in the region. Member States of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) identified the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as the most qualified and impartial implementer of technical assistance programmes related to drug control in the region, a view supported by a number of donor countries that provided funding for the implementation of the Office's technical assistance projects. The second phase of the Office's project to strengthen the Drug Control Coordination Unit at the ECO secretariat (2001-2004), is aimed at enhancing drug control cooperation and coordination among ECO member States by strengthening the technical capabilities of the Drug Control Coordination Unit in providing to national focal points of ECO member States coordination services related to drug control. That project complements work undertaken in the national projects that the Office is currently implementing in ECO member States. In Kazakhstan, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is working with the Government and international donors to strengthen drug control on the Russian-Kazakh border. In close coordination with the State Drug Control Commission, the Office is also developing a project on enhancing control along the southern border of Kazakhstan, which has recently seen heavy trafficking activity and low opiate prices. Future activities of the Office will focus on the strengthening of the operational and interdiction capacities of selected drug control bodies in Kazakhstan. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is implementing a project on the establishment of a drug control agency in Kyrgyzstan. The Kyrgyz agency is modelled on the drug control agency that was successfully established in Tajikistan and that was recommended as a model for all Central Asian countries in an independent evaluation. The Kyrgyz drug control agency will be under the direct authority of the President of Kyrgyzstan and will enjoy a high degree of political support. Since summer 2003, the project has been providing expertise, advisory services, logistical and training support to Kyrgyz officials in the creation of a solid, well-managed and self-sustaining drug control agency. In addition, the Office is currently reviewing a project to establish a system for gathering data and other information, to strengthen border control in drug trafficking "bottlenecks" and to upgrade forensic laboratories and training capacities in the country. In Tajikistan, the two major ongoing projects of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, on strengthening drug interdiction along the border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan and on the development of a specialized drug control agency, are both entering their second phases. In the second phase, specific services are planned to assist the Government of Tajikistan in developing management plans, legal provisions, budget and administrative frameworks and the structures required to maintain the agency from national budget sources. The goal is to develop national provisions and adequately trained staff for the drug control agency to become a self-sustaining agency by the end of the project. The second phase also includes components to develop mechanisms for operational cooperation between Afghan and Tajik law enforcement authorities in joint border areas. Future activities will also assist the Government of Tajikistan in the improvement of forensic laboratory capacities. In Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, new projects focusing on border control were launched. In Turkmenistan, assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is aimed at the strengthening of border control and interdiction capacities in drug trafficking bottlenecks. Specialized equipment, communication facilities and training in modern interdiction techniques are being provided. Special attention is also being given to developing and implementing drug abuse prevention and treatment policies. In addition, funds have been pledged for a project on strengthening control along the Turkmen-Afghan border. The major initiative for Uzbekistan entails improving the sharing and exchange of information between national drug law enforcement bodies (including a project dedicated to developing Intranet facilities for public prosecutors), strengthening law enforcement capacities in dealing with drug trafficking cases and reinforcing interdiction at bottlenecks at the most vulnerable points of the borders of that country with Afghanistan and Tajikistan. A major project has been inaugurated on strengthening controls at the only border checkpoint between Uzbekistan and Afghanistan, situated at the bridge across the Pyanj river at Termez-Hayraton, which includes the provision of video-control, computer, X-ray, search and other equipment. In response to growing drug abuse and HIV/AIDS problems, national assessments of drug abuse patterns and trends for Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, concluded in 2002, were used as a basis to develop plans for national action to address identified problem areas. In the framework of the Global Assessment Programme on Drug Abuse, support is given for the setting up of city-based drug information and monitoring systems and for the creation of a Central Asian regional drug epidemiology network. Existing demand reduction policies and programmes were reviewed at country level. Gaps in terms of policies, human and financial resources and programme implementation were reviewed and priority areas for future action identified. That resulted in a new drug demand reduction subprogramme for Central Asia, approved in the summer of 2003, which is based on two strategic priorities: (a) the provision of policy and legal advice to Governments of countries in the region and (b) the implementation of comprehensive drug demand reduction projects in the areas of capacity-building, institutional development, the promotion of partnership and networking, the transfer of technical expertise and the provision of physical facilities and equipment. The ongoing HIV/AIDS prevention project improved and further developed a range of HIV-prevention and drug-treatment services for injecting drug users in selected sites in five countries. They include outreach and low-threshold services for education on HIV/AIDS prevention, access to condoms and clean injecting equipment, inpatient and outpatient detoxification, counselling, treatment and rehabilitation. The mapping of existing medical and social services for drug abusers, training needs assessments among personnel and detailed action programmes for the diversification of services in each selected target area have all been completed. Subregional and national training workshops were organized in late 2003 and early 2004. The implementation of the joint project of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran on increasing the drug law enforcement capacity of the Iranian police continued in 2003. Project delivery is placing emphasis on regional support and building regional communication through the use of regional expertise to provide assistance in such areas as the training of drug-detecting dogs, expert study tours and "front-line" training of operational officers. In Pakistan, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has initiated a process of promoting drug abuse control at the district level. Under a pilot project, the Office established district drug abuse prevention committees in eight target districts. In addition, the Office continued to provide assistance to drug law enforcement agencies in Pakistan and to promote subregional cooperation in drug law enforcement, notably between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan. As of 2003, the Government of Afghanistan has been included in the meetings of the Intergovernmental Technical Committee, sponsored by the Office, which is a well-established forum for the exchange of drug law enforcement information in the subregion. In Turkey, the second phase of a project to support TADOC focused on the introduction at the Academy and Learning Resource Centres in various cities in Turkey, developed by the Office, and spreading that effective training technique to other countries in the region through the Academy. In addition, national and regional training activities continued at TADOC and included the provision of training for law enforcement officers from Afghanistan. The efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the Near and Middle East continued to focus on the development of subregional and national technical cooperation programmes among groups of countries and territories affected by similar trends in illicit drug trafficking and drug abuse, including Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and the Palestinian autonomous areas. Taking into consideration the positive results and outcomes of the original Subregional Drug Control Cooperation Programme for the Middle East and the strong political commitment of the national counterparts to the programme activities and the framework for delivering the technical assistance, an extension of the Programme has been prepared. Within that framework, the ongoing treatment and rehabilitation activities in Egypt and Jordan have continued to focus on upgrading and strengthening the drug abuse treatment and rehabilitation capacities through specialized training courses and the establishment of an in-service training centre. In addition, the implementation of the activities under the project on drug abuse prevention among street children in Egypt and the subregional project to upgrade licit drug control in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon have been initiated. Based on drug abuse rapid situation assessment studies conducted in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon to determine the drug abuse problems in those countries, a comprehensive subregional project on the prevention of drug abuse and drug-related HIV/AIDS has been prepared. Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinian autonomous areas are to be included in the project, which will contribute to reducing the prevalence of drug addiction and related HIV/AIDS among youth in the participating countries. To complement the Subregional Drug Control Cooperation Programme for the Middle East, national technical cooperation projects have been prepared in Egypt and Lebanon. The project in Lebanon will support the development and implementation of a national action plan on drug demand reduction, while the project in Egypt will focus on demand reduction activities in schools, universities, sports clubs and the national media. A cooperation programme intended to replicate the activities under the Middle East programme in the Persian Gulf area has been prepared for the United Arab Emirates. The project provides for targeted assistance to the drug control authorities in the United Arab Emirates, with the aim of improving their capacity through provision of advisory and coordination services, training and policy development. Drug control assistance to the United Arab Emirates will have a wider impact in the Persian Gulf area, because of the location of the country at main trafficking routes. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime held a regional workshop for Afghanistan, the Gulf States, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan in Islamabad in February 2004 to address issues relating to the exchange of operational information among the law enforcement authorities in the region. The workshop identified the immediate impediments to timely exchange and initiated a process to remove them. VI. Latin America and the Caribbean Six field offices of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime support the delivery of the programmes of the Office in Latin America and the Caribbean. Over the reporting period, through its Caribbean field office, the Office has continued to work closely with and actively support the Caribbean Community heads of government and the Caribbean Task Force on Crime and Security established by them. In 2003, work continued on regional initiatives to strengthen the police, customs and judicial institutions, as well as cross-border cooperation. The Agreement concerning Cooperation in Suppressing Illicit Maritime and Air Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances in the Caribbean Area was opened for signature in April 2003, placing emphasis on improved drug interdiction and mutual cooperation. Caribbean regional efforts to comply with international provisions against money-laundering and the financing of terrorism have improved and all Central American countries are now members of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has assisted Caribbean jurisdictions in their efforts to counter money-laundering through the provision of mentors in Antigua and Barbuda and the Eastern Caribbean. In Central America, together with the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission of the Organization of American States, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to support the Permanent Central American Commission for the Eradication of the Illicit Production, Traffic, Consumption and Use of Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is participating in projects under implementation in countries of the region. Under the subregional forensic laboratory programmes for Mexico and Central America, 200 drug and precursor field test kits were delivered to law enforcement agencies and two training courses were conducted to strengthen national forensic laboratories. Furthermore, the National Database System has been promoted and personnel trained to strengthen precursor and drug control. In Colombia, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime supported law enforcement training for the Colombian police, armed forces, public prosecutors and field and laboratory technicians. Training has included judges and final-year university students. That law enforcement training has been extended to Ecuador and support has been offered for the strengthening of the investigation-prosecution-conviction chain. The Office has also organized a follow-up meeting on environmental impact related to precursor control and the destruction of seized substances. In Colombia, the seizure of precursors (both controlled and non-controlled) has increased dramatically. According to the national police, the recycling of precursor chemicals is becoming common. The above-mentioned meeting sought to provide recommendations to law enforcement entities on alternative and safe means of destroying seized substances. In Ecuador, legal advisory assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime identified the need for a practical and effective case management tool within the prosecution service. Such a management tool was subsequently developed by the regional legal adviser of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for Latin America and the Caribbean. In April 2003, it was presented to the office of the Chief Prosecutor in Quito. The case management tool allows the prosecution and investigation team to plan, execute and evaluate investigations systematically and coherently. It helps in the drafting of indictments, opening and closing arguments, direct and cross-examination and testimony. It also provides a means for quality control and anti-corruption mechanisms. Once it has been formally adopted, a manual will be prepared and practical training workshops undertaken in Quito, Guayaquil and Cuenca. In Bolivia, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is delivering a project on precursor control. A total of 20 training events, including 8 courses on human rights (with the participation of the Office of the Ombudsman), two workshops on procedures on the control of chemical substances and 32 computer training courses have been completed. Special attention was given to the training of all employees from the Vice-ministry for Social Defence, Prevention and Rehabilitation, including anti-narcotics prosecutors. To strengthen project capacity, 25 computers were received from the Narcotics Affairs Section of the Embassy of the United States of America in Bolivia. An international seminar on chemical precursors control was also held, with the cooperation of the Embassy of France, and attended by 60 public servants. In Peru, a mentor provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is advising the Government on organized crime-related issues with a view to strengthening the capacity of investigators, prosecutors and judges to deal more effectively with organized crime, including illicit drug trafficking. Intensive training programmes on the identification of criminal networks and proceeds of organized crime and drug trafficking have been carried out for anti-organized crime intelligence analysts, judges, justice workers and police researchers. Officials were provided with advanced software that facilitates the analysis and identification of organized criminal networks, the persons involved in them, as well as the identification of illicit proceeds. The mentor is also providing advice on extradition requests and requests from other countries concerning evidence-gathering in money-laundering cases. In Brazil, under a National Police Academy programme, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is assisting in the provision of training to modernize and improve classrooms and technical equipment. During 2003, 1,050 new federal police officers received training in the modernized premises, each completing 700 hours of training. A unit for the delivery of the electronic learning (known as elearning) programme developed by the Office was created at the National Police Academy. Work continued on the introduction of a computerized information system for controlling precursor chemicals, to be used by the federal police, and implementation was completed. The system includes all administrative procedures for companies dealing with controlled substances, as well as a complete registration of such companies, and is accessible via the Internet. In addition, a bidding process is under way as part of a joint initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Brazilian Federal Police Department and the Itaipú Binacional electric power company to buy motor boats and intelligence communication equipment to assist the police in patrolling parts of the Paraná river at Itaipú lake, on the border between Brazil and Paraguay, for the purpose of countering illegal immigration, the smuggling of guns and munitions and the trafficking of narcotics and chemical precursors. The Amazon Surveillance System is providing information to Colombia to increase the ability of the law enforcement agencies to identify and combat illegal activities and monitor local air traffic. The information is obtained through the use of a wide range of sensors that gather data on the Amazon region. Legal assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime enabled the Government of Brazil to inaugurate a new Department for Asset Recovery in July 2003. 