%%%POVERTY MITIGATION|REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH|SEXUAL BEHAVIOUR|

Commission on Population and Development Thirty-seventh session 22-26 March 2004 Item 3 of the provisional agenda* Follow-up actions to the recommendations of the International Conference on Population and Development Statement submitted by World Population Foundation, a non-governmental organization in special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council * E/CN.9/2004/1. The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996. Sexual and Reproductive Health: Key to Poverty Reduction Amsterdam Call for Action 225 participants from 4 continents representing 78 organisations met in Amsterdam on 21 November 2003 for the International Conference "Reproductive Health: Key to Poverty Reduction" organised by World Population Foundation (WPF), NCDO (National Committee for International Cooperation and Sustainable Development) and Share-net (Netherlands Network on Sexual and Reproductive Health and AIDS). While reaffirming the Cairo and Beijing commitments and that of their +5 reviews, the conference adopts as follows: Guiding principles Development Acknowledge that sexual and reproductive rights and health are mainstream in development and key to poverty reduction Acknowledge that sexual and reproductive rights and health for all are key to the realisation of all Millennium Development Goals Youth Recognize the rights and needs of young people for sexual and reproductive health education and services Affirm the importance of meaningful and active youth participation in projects, programmes and policies affecting young people's lives at all levels Gender Re-iterate that gender equity is key to overall development and to the realisation of sexual and reproductive rights Recognise the specific needs of men and women and the importance of male responsibility and involvement related to sexual and reproductive health Financing Condemn the shortfall in meeting the agreed global resource target for sexual and reproductive health programmes, including HIV/AIDS Are highly concerned about shortages in reproductive health supplies (particularly condoms) needed to provide protection against unwanted pregnancy, HIV/AIDS and other STDs, and to provide hygienic conditions in giving birth Stakeholders Acknowledge the role of civil society to improve sexual and reproductive rights and health Appreciate the leading role of the Dutch government in supporting sexual and reproductive health, including the participation of young people Acknowledge the crucial role of parliamentarians in promoting sexual and reproductive rights Acknowledge that the state is responsible to create the conditions through legislation and policy for people to enjoy their sexual and reproductive rights Therefore, we the participants of the International Conference "Reproductive Health: Key to Poverty Reduction" (Amsterdam, 21 November 2003) call upon all stakeholders involved to take an active role in the realisation of the ICPD Programme of Action (Cairo 1994). We call for ... Inclusion of sexual and reproductive health goals in all poverty reduction strategies and projects ... Inclusion of sexual and reproductive health goals in the implementation process of the UN Millennium Development Goals ... Action to realise young people's sexual and reproductive rights, including access to information and services and funding ... Promoting active, meaningful and gender balanced youth participation and youth-adult partnership, as well as women's participation at all levels of policy making ... Inclusion of youth delegates in governmental and NGO delegations related to the ICPD +10 process and the Millennium Summit +5 ... Promoting gender equity and empowerment of women, especially through education, and making comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services compatible to the needs of both sexes and readily available to both sexes ... Improving access of women and men to sexual and reproductive health services and promote the responsibility of men, and communication and respect between men and women on sexual and reproductive health issues ... Fulfilment of at least the agreed target of 0.7% of GNP for Official Development Assistance and make every effort to mobilize the agreed estimated financial resources needed for sexual and reproductive health programmes, including HIV/AIDS ... Creating awareness on reproductive health supplies shortages and allocating sufficient financial resources to overcome these shortages ... Improving access to basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric care to reduce maternal morbidity and mortality ... Making sexual and reproductive health services available to people in conflict areas, refugees and displaced persons ... Recommitment to the ICPD programme of action by all stakeholders and call upon the Dutch government to use their influence to this end during the Dutch Presidency of the European Union in 2004 ... Establishment of national all-party parliamentary groups on sexual and reproductive rights and health in general and in the Netherlands specifically for the implementation of these internationally recognised sexual and reproductive rights in international and regional forums ... Respect and fulfilment of sexual and reproductive rights through legislation and policy 