%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS|CAPACITY BUILDING|REPORT PREPARATION|GUIDELINES|EXPERTS|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|CONFERENCES|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2003/19 24 March 2004 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION ON ITS NINETEENTH SESSION, HELD AT MILAN FROM 1 TO 10 DECEMBER 2003 Contents Paragraphs Page OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) The nineteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) was held at the Fiera Milano Congressi, Milan, Italy, from 1 to 10 December 2003. The Chair of the SBI, Ms. Daniela Stoycheva (Bulgaria), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. She welcomed Mr. Fadhel Akbar Lari (Kuwait), Vice-Chair of the SBI, and Ms. Emily Ojoo-Massawa (Kenya), Rapporteur of the SBI. organizational matters (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st and 5th meetings, on 1 and 4 December, respectively, the SBI considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBI/2003/9 and Corr.1). Statements were made by representatives of 17 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 1st meeting, the SBI adopted the agenda with sub-items 3 (d) and 7 (a) held in abeyance. At its 5th meeting, the SBI adopted agenda sub-items 3 (d) and 7 (a) with amended titles. The agenda was finally adopted is as follows: Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of agenda; Organization of the work of the session; Election of officers other than the Chair. National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention: Consideration of the fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications; Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention; Provision of financial and technical support; Submission of second and, where appropriate, third national communications. Financial mechanism of the Convention: Special Climate Change Fund; Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties; Additional guidance to the Global Environment Facility. Capacity-building. Article 6 of the Convention. Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention: Progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7; Matters relating to the least developed countries. Request from a group of countries of Central Asia and the Caucasus, Albania and the Republic of Moldova regarding their status under the Convention. Administrative and financial matters: Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002 - 2003; Programme budget for the biennium 2004 - 2005. Other matters: Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry; Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention; Status report on the review of third national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention; Any other matters. Report on the session. Organization of work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 1 December, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work posted on the UNFCCC web site. At its 6th meeting, on 9 December, the SBI noted the proposal of Saudi Arabia, speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to include in the provisional agenda of the twentieth session of the SBI, and of each SBI session thereafter, an item entitled "Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat". Election of officers other than the Chair (Agenda item 2 (c)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st and 8th meetings, on 1 and 10 December, respectively. At the 1st meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBI is expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. Such an election was last held at the seventeenth session of the SBI and led to the election of the current incumbents. The Chair informed the SBI that consultations were being undertaken and that she would keep delegates informed of any progress made. At the 8th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that an agreement had been reached among the regional groups on the nomination for the post of Vice-Chair of the SBI and announced the nominee. The SBI re-elected Mr. Fadhel Akbar Lari (Kuwait) as Vice-Chair; he will serve for a second term of one year at the twentieth and twenty-first sessions of the SBI. At the same meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that consultations on the nomination for the post of Rapporteur were ongoing and that the SBI will elect its next Rapporteur as a first matter of business at its twentieth session. The Chair thanked the current SBI Bureau for its work. National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 3) Consideration of the fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications (Agenda item 3 (a)) 1. Proceedings The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st, 3rd and 8th meetings, on 1, 2 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2003/13 and FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.14. At the request of some Parties, document FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.14 was not considered. Statements were made by representatives of nine Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States, one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). At the 1st meeting, the representative of AOSIS requested the secretariat to prepare a compilation and synthesis of information contained in all initial national communications from small island developing States, focusing on adaptation and mitigation. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider the sub-item together with sub-items 3 (b) and (c) in a contact group chaired by Mr. Sok Appadu (Mauritius). At its 8th meeting, the SBI received a report on the contact group's consultations. 2. Conclusions At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.23) for adoption by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its ninth session. Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 3 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 1st and 8th meetings, on 1 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.17. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Brian Challenger (Antigua and Barbuda), Chair of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE), to present the results of the CGE meeting which was held in Mexico City on 23 and 24 September 2003. See paragraph 12 above. At the 8th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI of pending nominations for membership of the CGE (see annex II). At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the following conclusions: The SBI took note of the report by the CGE on its first meeting (FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.17) and expressed its gratitude to the Government of Mexico for hosting that meeting. The SBI also took note of the work programme of the CGE for the period 2003 - 2007 including the hands-on training workshops on thematic areas of national communications of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (nonAnnex I Parties). The SBI noted that these workshops aim to provide technical advice to non-Annex I Parties and to assist them in the preparation of their second and, where appropriate, initial and third national communications. To enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the workshops, the SBI requested the CGE and the secretariat, when organizing regional workshops, to seek to invite experts working on the different areas of national communications, taking into account other relevant activities and programmes (such as the national adaptation programmes of action (NAPA) processes). The SBI acknowledged that the financial and technical resources available may not be sufficient for the amount of work that the CGE is mandated to do and that the CGE will need to take into account available resources in implementing its work programme. The SBI therefore invited Annex II Parties to contribute financial resources to support the organization of the workshops to be conducted by the CGE, in accordance with paragraph 6 of decision 3/CP.8. The SBI concluded that closer cooperation with expert groups established under the Convention - the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) and the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) - would be beneficial to the work of the CGE. The SBI encouraged the CGE, in its work on supporting the process of preparation of national communications, to take into account activities of the National Communications Support Programme (NCSP) of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The SBI further concluded that, in the fulfilment of the mandate of the CGE, it will be beneficial for the CGE, in its efforts to facilitate support to non-Annex I Parties to meet their needs and concerns in the process of preparing national communications, to receive regular reports from the NCSP. The SBI emphasized the need for the CGE to prioritize its activities and/or tasks in operationalizing its work programme to support the preparation of national communications from nonAnnex I Parties. Provision of financial and technical support (Agenda item 3 (c)) The SBI considered this sub-item, at its 1st and 8th meetings on 1 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.15 and FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.9. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. The SBI expressed its gratitude to the GEF, as an operating entity of the financial mechanism of the Convention, for information provided on its funding activities and projects in support of initial national communications by non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.15). The SBI welcomed the progress made by non-Annex I Parties in the preparation of their national communications as reflected in the document on the "Status of the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention". The SBI noted with satisfaction that 110 non-Annex I Parties had so far submitted their initial national communications, and encouraged those Parties that have yet to submit their initial national communications to do so as soon as possible. The SBI invited Parties to continue to submit views to the secretariat on their experiences with the GEF and its implementing agencies in relation to the preparation of their national communications, and requested the secretariat to compile this information and make it available to the SBI. Submission of second and, where appropriate, third national communications (Agenda item 3 (d)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 5th and 8th meetings, on 4 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.10 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At its 5th meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this item, together with sub-items 3 (a), (b) and (c), in the contact group chaired by Mr. Sok Appadu (Mauritius). At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI concluded that it had not completed its consideration of issues under agenda sub-item 3 (d), and agreed to continue its consideration of those issues at its twentieth session. (Agenda item 4) Special Climate Change Fund (Agenda item 4 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 8th meetings on 2 and 10 December, respectively. No new documents were prepared for this sub-item. Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States, and one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Rawleston Moore (Barbados) and Mr. Frode Neergaard (Denmark). At the 8th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 8th meeting, the SBI agreed to pass the text of a draft decision proposed by the Chair, contained in document FCCC/SBI/2003/L.31, to the President of the COP at its ninth session for further action. Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties (Agenda item 4 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 8th meetings on 2 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/CP/2003/3. Statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At the 2nd meeting, the Chair invited the representative of the GEF Secretariat to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.27) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Additional guidance to the Global Environment Facility (Agenda item 4 (c)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 8th meetings, on 2 and 10 December, respectively. No new documents were prepared for this sub-item. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBI with the assistance of Ms. Andrea Alban (Colombia). At its 8th meeting, the SBI received a report on these consultations. At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.28) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Capacity-building (Agenda item 5) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 2 and 9 December, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/14. Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this item in a contact group chaired by Ms. Dechen Tsering (Bhutan). At the 6th meeting, Ms. Tsering reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 6th meeting, on 9 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.19) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Article 6 of the Convention (Agenda item 6) It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2003/10, FCCC/SBI/2003/17, FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.16 and FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.11. Statements were made by representatives of nine Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair invited the representative of UNEP to make a statement. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of SBI with the assistance of Mr. Markus Nauser (Switzerland). At its 6th meeting, the SBI received a report on these consultations. At its 6th meeting, on 9 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI adopted the following conclusions: The SBI considered documents FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.11 containing views from Parties on possible ways to improve reporting on Article 6 activities in national communications, and FCCC/SBI/2003/17 containing a synthesis of those views. The SBI also noted the web document FCCC/WEB/2003/2, containing information from the database on key programmes and initiatives reported by Annex I Parties in their third national communications, and document FCCC/SBI/2003/13, the fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications from non-Annex I Parties. The SBI also considered document FCCC/SBI/2003/10 containing the report of the European regional workshop on Article 6 of the Convention, and noted the oral report of the secretariat on this agenda item. The SBI reaffirmed that reporting on activities relating to Article 6 of the Convention should receive particular attention, and: Encouraged Parties to report on the six key areas of Article 6 in their national communications, consolidated and organized to the extent possible consistent with the scope of the New Delhi work programme on Article 6; Noted that additional and/or separate interim reports on the implementation of the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 will remain a voluntary initiative by Parties; Invited Parties to make use of the current guidelines for the preparation of national communications when reporting on Article 6 matters, and to take note of other sources of guidance such as the New Delhi work programme on Article 6. The SBI considered the report by the secretariat on the development of an Article 6 information network clearing house (FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.16) and noted the offer of the UNEP/GRID - Arendal centre to contribute to the development of this clearing house. The SBI concluded that further guidance to the secretariat is necessary for the implementation of the clearing house. In order to achieve this it requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources: To set up an interim informal advisory group of interested Parties as soon as possible. This group will facilitate the prompt start of the preparation phase of the clearing house, based on the secretariat's initial proposal contained in document FCCC/SBI/2003/4; To further explore possible institutions that could house and/or support the clearing house, and report back to the SBI no later than at its twenty-first session; To undertake development work, under the guidance of the interim informal advisory group, that would contribute to a small-scale version of the clearing house by the twentieth session of the SBI; To organize a pre-sessional workshop to receive feedback from interested Parties on the further development of the clearing house, and to provide input to the SBI at its twentieth session for its consideration of future action relating to the clearing house. The SBI invited interested Parties, and those in a position to do so, to provide information, expertise and financial resources to this endeavour. The SBI expressed its appreciation to UNEP and to the Governments of the United States of America and Canada for co-financing the African regional workshop to be hosted by the Gambia from 28 to 30 January 2004, and welcomed the offer of the Government of France to provide interpretation between English and French during the workshop. The SBI also welcomed the fruitful cooperation between the UNFCCC secretariat and UNEP in supporting this workshop, and encouraged the secretariat to explore possible cooperation with UNEP or other United Nations agencies for the financing of regional workshops addressing the needs of Asia, Latin America and the members of the Alliance of Small Island States. The SBI further invited Parties, in a position to do so, to consider funding these remaining workshops. Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention (Agenda item 7) Progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7 (Agenda item 7 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 5th and 8th meetings, on 4 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2003/11, FCCC/SBI/2003/18, FCCC/SB/2003/1 and FCCC/SB/2003/INF.2. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At its 5th meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Al Waleed Hamad Al-Malik (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Robert Mason (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). At the 8th meeting, the co-chairs reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBI invited Parties and relevant international organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 15 May 2004, information on current and/or planned activities including, where appropriate, support programmes, to meet the specific needs and circumstances of developing country Parties arising from the adverse effects of climate change, implemented in support of the various provisions of decision 5/CP.7. The SBI decided to continue its consideration of issues under this agenda sub-item at its twentieth session on the basis of a draft text prepared by the co-chairs of the contact group (see annex I). Matters relating to the least developed countries (Agenda item 7 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 8th meetings, on 2 and 10 December, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/16. Statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the least developed countries and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair invited Mr. La'avasa Malua (Samoa), Chair of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), to report on the outcomes of the LEG's programme of work as it approaches the end of its current mandate. At the same meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBI with the assistance of Mr. Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso) and Mr. José Romero (Switzerland). At the 8th meeting, Mr. Honadia and Mr. Romero reported on these consultations. At its 8th meeting, the SBI agreed to pass the text of the draft conclusions proposed by the Chair, contained in document FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29, to the President of the COP at its ninth session for further action. At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, having considered proposals by the Chair, the SBI recommended two draft decisions (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29/Add.1 and Add.2) and draft COP conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29/Add.3, as amended) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Request from a group of countries of Central Asia and THE Caucasus, Albania and the Republic of Moldova regarding their status under the Convention (Agenda item 8) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd and 8th meetings, on 2 and 10 December, respectively. No new documents were prepared for this item. A statement was made by the representative of one Party speaking on behalf of the Group of Countries of Central Asia and the Caucasus, Albania and the Republic of Moldova. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair announced that she would continue her consultations and report to the SBI on their outcome at the close of the nineteenth session. At the 8th meeting, the Chair informed the SBI that conclusions were not forthcoming. Administrative and financial matters (Agenda item 9) Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002 - 2003 (Agenda item 9 (a)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 6th meetings, on 2 and 9 December, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBI/2003/12, FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.13 and FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.18. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBI agreed that the Chair would prepare, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties, a draft decision for consideration by the COP at its ninth session. At its 6th meeting, on 9 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.16) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Programme budget for the biennium 2004 - 2005 (Agenda item 9 (b)) The SBI considered this sub-item at its 2nd, 4th and 7th meetings, on 2, 3 and 9 December, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/15 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of 10 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and of some acceding States, and one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At its 4th meeting, the SBI agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group chaired by Mr. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda). At the 7th meeting, Mr. Ashe reported on the contact group's consultations. At the 7th meeting, the representative of Argentina requested that his Government's formal reservation on the scale of contributions to be applied for the programme budget for the biennium 2004 - 2005 be recorded in the report of the nineteenth session of the SBI. At the 8th meeting, representatives of two Parties raised the issue of the secretariat's practice not to fund eligible participants from those countries whose contributions were in arrears. The Chair agreed to hold informal consultations and to report back to the SBI before closing the session. At the 8th meeting, on 10 December, the SBI noted the concern of some Parties over the practice of the secretariat with respect to the funding of delegates from Parties whose contributions are outstanding in sessions of the COP and its subsidiary bodies . The SBI requested the secretariat to suspend this practice through COP 10 and to review its financial impacts and the effects on the implementation of paragraph 7 (c) of the Financial Procedures of the Convention regarding the participation of representatives of developing country Parties and of Parties with economies in transition in sessions of the COP and its subsidiary bodies, and to report its findings to the SBI for its consideration at its twentieth session. At its 7th meeting, on 9 December, having considered a proposal by the Chair, the SBI recommended a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.22, as amended) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. (Agenda item 10) Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry (Agenda item 10 (a)) The SBI considered sub-item 10 (a) together with sub-item 10 (b) at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 2 and 9 December, respectively. No new documents were prepared for sub-item 10 (a). For sub-item 10 (b), the SBI had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.12. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed to consider sub-items 10 (a) and 10 (b) together in informal consultations convened by Mr. Jim Penman (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). At the 6th meeting, Mr. Penman reported on these consultations. The SBI took note of the requests by Croatia contained in documents FCCC/CP/2001/MISC.6/Add.2 and FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.6 and recalled its conclusions, at its eighteenth session, on a proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry, contained in document FCCC/SBI/2003/8, paragraph 60 (a). The SBI decided to recommend a draft decision on this subject (FCCC/SBI/2003/L.17/Add.1) for adoption by the COP at its ninth session. Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention (Agenda item 10 (b)) See paragraphs 61 and 62 above. The SBI noted with appreciation the information provided by Croatia (FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.12) in response to the invitation by the SBI, at its eighteenth session, to provide inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of all greenhouse gases not controlled by the Montreal Protocol, by year, including data from 1990 or an earlier year to the latest inventory year available, as well as projections of its greenhouse gas emissions. The SBI decided that this matter merited further consideration at a future session. Status report on the review of third national communications from Parties included (Agenda item 10 (c)) The SBI considered this item at its 3rd meeting, on 2 December. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.19 which the SBI took note of. Any other matters (Agenda item 10 (d)) Under this agenda item the SBI considered, at its 3rd and 6th meetings, on 2 and 9 December, respectively, a request by Belarus relating to its base year and Kyoto Protocol target. It had before it document FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.13. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 3rd meeting, the SBI agreed that the Chair would prepare draft conclusions on this issue, with the assistance of the secretariat and in consultation with interested Parties. The SBI considered a submission of Belarus contained in document FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.13 and took note of the intention of Belarus to use 1990 as its base year under the Convention. The SBI noted with appreciation that Belarus submitted its national greenhouse gas inventory in 2002 and 2003 and submitted its first national communication under the Convention on 29 July 2003. The SBI also noted that an in-depth review of the first national communication of Belarus took place from 17 to 21 November 2003. Having considered document FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.13 and the related statement of the representative of Belarus to the SBI at its nineteenth session, the SBI concluded that the relevant information presented in the first national communication of Belarus should be considered by the Parties in more detail. To facilitate this further consideration, the SBI requested the secretariat to make available the report on the in-depth review of the first national communication of Belarus before the twentieth session of the SBI. (Agenda item 11) At its 8th meeting, on 10 December, the SBI considered the draft report on its nineteenth session. At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBI authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report on the session, under the guidance of the Chair. closure of the session At the 8th meeting, on 10 December, the Chair thanked delegates, the chairs of contact groups and convenors of informal consultations for their contributions. Draft decision for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its twentieth session [Progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7] The Conference of the Parties, Recalling its decision 5/CP.7, [Reaffirming that in order to respond to the challenges faced now and in the future, climate change and its adverse effects should be addressed while meeting the requirements of sustainable development,] [Affirming that responses to climate change should be coordinated with social and economic development in an integrated manner with a view to avoiding adverse impacts on the latter, taking into full account the legitimate priority needs of developing countries for the achievement of sustained economic growth and the eradication of poverty,] Option 1 [Welcoming that significant progress has been made in the implementation of decision 5/CP.7 and noting that work towards the implementation of that decision should continue,] Option 2 [Noting that limited progress has been made and that there are still significant gaps in the implementation of decision 5/CP.7, and that there is a need to further the implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention and decision 5/CP.7, with a view to building on work and activities already undertaken, particularly on the outcomes of the different workshops under decision 5/CP.7,] [Recognizing the specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties referred to in Article 4, paragraph 8, and the specific needs and special situations of the least developed countries referred to in Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Convention,] [Reaffirming that Parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and future generations of humankind, on the basis of equity and in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, and that, accordingly, the developed country Parties should take the lead in combating climate change and its adverse effects,] [Reaffirming that full consideration should be given to the specific needs and special circumstances of developing country Parties, especially those Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, and of those Parties, especially developing country Parties, that would have to bear a disproportionate or abnormal burden under the Convention,] [Acknowledging that the impact of the implementation of response measures will differ significantly from country to country, depending on each country's national circumstances, including the structure of its economy, trade and investment, natural resource endowment, social system, legal regime and population growth rate,] [Acknowledging the efforts already made by Parties to meet the specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries, with regard to adaptation,] [Insisting that action relating to adaptation follow an assessment and evaluation process, based on national communications and/or other relevant information, so as to prevent maladaptation and to ensure that adaptation actions are environmentally sound and will produce real benefits in support of sustainable development,] Having considered the reports on the workshops referred to in paragraphs 32 - 37 of decision 5/CP.7,1 Invites Parties and relevant international organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 15 May 2004, information on current and/or planned activities including, where appropriate, support programmes, to meet the specific needs and circumstances of developing country Parties arising from the adverse effects of climate change [and the adverse effects of the implementation of response measures], implemented in support of the various provisions of decision 5/CP.7; Option 1: Requests the secretariat to prepare a document synthesizing the submissions referred to in paragraph 1 above, as well as related information in national communications and other reports presented to the Conference of the Parties, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its twenty-first session [, with a view to recommending further actions necessary to implement decision 5/CP.7]; [and to report on this synthesis to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its twenty-first session;] Option 2: Requests the secretariat to prepare a document synthesizing the submissions referred to in paragraph 1 above, as well as related information in national communications and other reports presented to the Conference of the Parties; Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementations to consider the document referred to in paragraph 2 above;2 Option 1: Invites Parties and relevant international organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 15 May 2004, views on [possible elements of a work programme on] insurance [and risk assessment] in the context of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its twenty-first sessions [, with a view to recommending a draft decision for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth session]; Option 2: Invites Parties and relevant international organizations to include, in their submissions referred to in paragraph 1 above, further views on insurance and risk assessment in the context of decision 5/CP.7, taking into account the outcomes of the workshops referred to in paragraphs 34 and 35 of that decision; [Decides to explore possible mechanisms or arrangements to provide international support for engaging the private insurance sector in the development of alternative risk transfer mechanisms for vulnerable countries and/or to provide reinsurance for public or national insurance schemes, or national and regional disaster funds;] 4. bis [Decides to further explore, through the holding of an expert round-table discussion on insurance and risk assessment, to which experts in relevant fields could be invited, prior to the tenth session of the Conference of the Parties: Possible collaboration between the climate change community, disaster community, government programmes and private insurance sectors; Private - public partnerships linking insurance mechanisms and risk-reduction mechanisms; Ways to build capacity, at the national level, for risk management, risk financing and risk transfer to better manage the impacts of extreme weather events; Means to engage the private sector in the development of alternative risk transfer mechanisms;] 4. ter [Decides to establish a forum on insurance to address the specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties arising from the impact of the implementation of response measures;] Option 1: [Requests the secretariat to organize three regional workshops before the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties, and] invites Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 15 March 2004, views on possible terms of reference for the regional workshops referred to in paragraph 32 of decision 5/CP.7, further elaborated in paragraph 39 (e) of the report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its seventeenth session;3 [The terms of reference for these regional workshops could include: Modalities for assisting developing country Parties in the implementation of chapters I and III of decision 5/CP.7; Support from the Global Environment Facility and its implementing agencies for existing and planned support programmes including through the Special Climate Change Fund; Sharing of experience by Parties not included in Annex I of the Convention in accessing funding for the Global Environment Facility;] Option 2: Requests the secretariat to organize, before the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties, three regional workshops, as outlined in paragraph 32 of decision 5/CP.7, in order to facilitate information exchange and integrated assessments, including for adaptation, taking into account differences between regions, and to invite relevant international organizations to participate in the workshops; [Requests Parties included in Annex II to the Convention (Annex II Parties) to mobilize technical and financial resources, including through the Special Climate Change Fund, to support, as a high priority, adaptation activities at national and regional levels to address the adverse effects of climate change through, inter alia, a prompt start to country-driven projects under paragraph 8 of decision 5/CP.7;] 6 bis. [Requests entities identified in paragraph 8 of decision 5/CP.7 to continue to consider the provisions contained therein;] [Requests the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice [under its agenda item on XXXX] to consider, at its twentieth and twenty-first sessions, the outcome of the workshop on modelling activities4 and to explore, at its twentieth and twenty-first sessions, what further action is needed in this context, with a view to recommending further action for consideration by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth session, ] [such actions to include: Dissemination of modelling tools and models to Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) and ensuring increased collaboration in modelling activities on an ongoing basis; Development of methodologies to assist developing countries to examine vulnerability to the impact of the implementation of response measures; Examination of mechanisms to be established to develop draft guidance documents on how to undertake socio-economic assessments of response measures which could then be piloted in a few countries with a view to developing more detailed and comprehensive guidance; Development, as a high priority and in collaboration with international organizations, of methodologies to assess the impacts on developing countries of policies already implemented by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) by expanding coverage of current models for evaluating the adverse effects of climate and the impact of the implementation of response measures;] 7 bis. [Requests Parties to consider at the twentieth sessions of the subsidiary bodies whether the outcomes from the report on the workshop on the status of modelling activities should be discussed at future sessions;] [Invites Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 15 March 2004, views on possible actions arising out of the workshop on modelling activities for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its twentieth session;] [Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to develop, under relevant agenda items, guidelines for the preparation of national communications, to address the provisions of decision 5/CP.7, paragraphs 22 - 29, for Annex I Parties and for non-Annex I Parties;] 9 bis. [Requests non-Annex I Parties to provide information, in their national communications and/or other relevant reports, on their specific needs and concerns arising from the impact of the implementation of response measures;] 9 ter [Requests Annex II Parties to provide detailed information, in their national communications and/or any other relevant reports, on their existing and planned support programmes to meet the specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties arising from the impact of the implementation of response measures;] [[Decides to establish an expert group on economic diversification to consider the following elements:] [Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to consider, as appropriate, the following elements, arising from the report of the workshop on economic diversification, and to make recommendations on them to the Conference of the Parties at its tenth session:] The integration of sustainable development with economic diversification; Exchange of experience in economic diversification and lessons learned, with a view to identifying what technical assistance may be needed to develop structural and institutional capacity and/or to establishing a mechanism for facilitating efforts to achieve economic diversification; Coordination by the secretariat with relevant international organizations and the private sector in developed countries on matters relating to economic diversification;] 10 bis [Requests Parties to consider at the twentieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation whether the outcomes from the report on the workshop on economic diversification should be discussed at future sessions;] [Decides to assess, at its tenth session, the status of implementation of [decision 5/CP.7] [Article 4, paragraph 8, of the Convention] and to consider further action thereon.] 11. bis [Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its twenty-first session, to continue to consider progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7.]] Nominations for members of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) pending since the eighteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation Asia Mr. Mahendra Kumar (Fiji) Mr. Vute Wangwacharakul (Thailand) Mr. Subodh Kumar Sharma (India) Mr. Jae-kyu Lim (Republic of Korea) Ms. Tatyana Ososkova (Uzbekistan) Latin America and the Caribbean Ms. Julia Martinez (Mexico) Annex I Parties The sixth member to be nominated from the Annex I Parties is pending further consultations among them. List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its nineteenth session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/SBI/2003/9 and Corr.1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2003/10 Article 6 of the Convention. Report of the European regional workshop on Article 6 of the Convention. Note by the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/11 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Progress on the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 8. Report on the UNFCCC workshops on insurance. Note by the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/12 Administrative and financial matters. Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002 - 2003. Income and budget performance as at 30 June 2003. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2003/13 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Consideration of the fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications. Fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications FCCC/SBI/2003/14 Capacity-building. Analysis of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries FCCC/SBI/2003/15 Administrative and financial matters. Programme budget for the biennium 2004 - 2005. Revised programme budget. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2003/15 Administrative and financial matters. Programme budget for the Add. 1 biennium 2004 - 2005. Revised programme budget. Note by the Executive Secretary. Addendum. Work programme and resource requirements FCCC/SBI/2003/16 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Matters relating to the least developed countries. Progress report of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group FCCC/SBI/2003/17 Article 6 of the Convention. Compilation and synthesis of views from Parties regarding possible ways to improve reporting on Article 6 activities in national communications FCCC/SBI/2003/18 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Progress on the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 8. Report of the workshop on the needs and options of non-Annex I Parties for economic diversification, and on support programmes by Annex II Parties to address these needs FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.13 Administrative and financial matters. Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002 - 2003. Unaudited financial statements for the biennium 2002 - 2003 as at 31 December 2002. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.14 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Consideration of the fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications. An initial assessment of steps taken by non-Annex I Parties to reduce emissions and enhance removals of greenhouse gases FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.15 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Provision of financial and technical support. Information on activities by the Global Environment Facility FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.16 Article 6 of the Convention. Progress report on the development of an Article 6 information network clearing house FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.17 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Report of the first meeting of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.18 Administrative and financial matters. Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002 - 2003. Status of contributions as at 31 October 2003 FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.19 Other matters. Status report on the review of third national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.9 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Provision of financial and technical support. Experiences of Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention with the Global Environment Facility or its implementing agencies in relation to the preparation of national communications. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.10 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the and Add.1 Convention. Frequency of submission of second and, where appropriate, third national communications. Frequency of submission of second and, where appropriate, third national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.11 Article 6 of the Convention. Possible ways to improve reporting on Article 6 activities in national communications. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.12 Other matters. Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention. Submission from a Party FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.13 Other matters. Any other matters. Base year 1990 for the Republic of Belarus and Kyoto Protocol target. Submission from a Party FCCC/SB/2003/INF.2 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Progress on the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 8. Other matters. Any other matters. Report of the workshop on local coping strategies and technologies for adaptation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.15 Report on the session. Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its nineteenth session FCCC/SBI/2003/L.16 Administrative and financial matters. Interim financial performance for the biennium 2002 - 2003. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.17 Other matters. Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.17/Add.1 Other matters. Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.18 Other matters. Special circumstances of Croatia under Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.19 Capacity-building. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.20 Article 6 of the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.21 Other matters. Any other matters. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.22 Administrative and financial matters. Programme budget for the biennium 2004 - 2005. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.23 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Consideration of the fifth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.24 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.25 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Provision of financial and technical support. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.26 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Progress on the implementation of activities under decision 5/CP.7. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.27 Financial mechanism of the Convention. Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.28 Financial mechanism of the Convention. Additional guidance to the Global Environment Facility. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Matters related to the least developed countries. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29/Add.1 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Matters relating to the least developed countries. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29/Add.2 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Matters relating to the least developed countries. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.29/Add.3 Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention. Matters relating to the least developed countries. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum. Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/SBI/2003/L.30 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Submission of second and, where appropriate, third national communications. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2003/L.31 Financial mechanism of the Convention. Special Climate Change Fund. Proposal by the Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation Other documents before the session FCCC/CP/2001/MISC.6/Add.2 Implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action: Adoption of the decisions giving effect to the Bonn Agreements. Draft decisions forwarded for elaboration, completion and adoption. Land use, land-use change and forestry. Views from a Party. Note by the secretariat. Addendum FCCC/SBI/2003/4 Article 6 of the Convention. Proposal for an information network clearing house FCCC/SBI/2003/8 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its eighteenth session, held at Bonn, from 4 to 13 June 2003 FCCC/SBI/2003/MISC.6 Other matters. Proposal by Croatia on land use, land-use change and forestry. Data and information on land use, land-use change and forestry in Croatia. Submission from a Party Documents available on the UNFCCC web site FCCC/WEB/2003/2 Article 6 of the Convention. Programmes and initiatives for the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention reported by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention in their third national communications. Database information FCCC/WEB/2003/4 National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Provision of financial and technical support. Status of the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Note by the secretariat 