%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|GREENHOUSE GASES|EMISSION INVENTORIES|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|LAND USE|FORESTRY|RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBSTA/2004/6 20 September 2004 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twentieth session, held at Bonn from 16 to 25 June 2004 Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes I. Agreement for Expert Review Services 25 II. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 9 27 III. Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its twentieth session 28 Opening of the session (Agenda item 1) The twentieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the Maritim Hotel, Bonn, Germany, from 16 to 25 June 2004. The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Abdullatif S. Benrageb (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Arthur Rolle (Bahamas) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Mr. Ibrahim Al-Ajmi (Oman) as Rapporteur of the SBSTA. The Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC, Ms. Joke Waller-Hunter, welcomed Mr. Benrageb as the new Chair of the SBSTA and assured him of the support of the secretariat. She announced that Turkey had become the 189th Party to the Convention. She informed delegates that the current SBSTA Coordinator, Mr. Dennis Tirpak, would retire after the session and that Mr. Halldor Thorgeisson would be his successor. Ms. Waller-Hunter drew the attention of delegates to the fact that in the years 2006 and 2007 the Commission on Sustainable Development will address the thematic cluster "energy, climate change and industrial development" and that the SBSTA may wish to consider whether it would like to contribute to this process. She also called attention to several issues on the agenda of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), particularly the need to consider arrangements for the intergovernmental process, streamlining the agendas of the subsidiary bodies, and the involvement of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other observers in the UNFCCC process. Organizational matters (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 16 June, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/SBSTA/2004/1). At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted the agenda without amendment: Organizational matters: Organization of the work of the session Methodological issues: Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) activities under the Kyoto Protocol, harvested wood products and other issues relating to LULUCF Small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport Issues relating to greenhouse gas inventories Issues relating to Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol Issues relating to registry systems under Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Kyoto Protocol Development and transfer of technologies "Good practices" in policies and measures among Parties included in Annex I to the Convention Research and systematic observation Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation Cooperation with relevant international organizations Other matters: Issues relating to cleaner or less-greenhouse-gas-emitting energy Issues relating to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol Any other matters Report on the session. (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 16 June, at which the Chair drew attention to the tentative programme of work posted on the UNFCCC web site. The secretariat informed the SBSTA of the status of documentation and of applications for provisional accreditation to the sessions of the subsidiary bodies by 12 NGOs. The SBSTA agreed to admit these organizations, on the basis of the provisions of Article 7, paragraph 6, of the Convention, without prejudice to subsequent action by the Conference of the Parties (COP). During the session, the Chair of the SBSTA convened a meeting with the chairs of the expert groups established under the Convention - the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE), the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT), and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) - as mandated by decision 10/CP.8. The aim of that meeting was to further discuss how to facilitate collaboration among these expert groups in the implementation of their respective programmes of work. Participants identified areas of cooperation among the expert groups that would help them to work more effectively, including improved sharing of information among the groups. (Agenda item 3) (Agenda item 3 (a)) 1. Proceedings The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.1, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.1, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.5, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.8 and Add.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.9 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States,1 one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group chaired by Mr. William Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana) and Mr. Audun Rosland (Norway). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Agyemang-Bonsu reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions2 proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group. 2. Conclusions Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry The SBSTA took note of the information contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.1 on the common reporting format (CRF) and requirements for reporting annual greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory information on LULUCF activities under the Kyoto Protocol. The SBSTA also took note of the methodological guidance for estimation, measurement, monitoring and reporting of LULUCF activities under the Kyoto Protocol included in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (hereinafter referred to as the IPCC good practice guidance for LULUCF). The SBSTA elaborated the tables of a CRF for the reporting of GHG inventories for LULUCF activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol, contained in annex II to draft decision -/CP.10 (Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol).3 The SBSTA did not conclude its consideration of how identification codes in the CRF tables may refer to LULUCF projects under Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol, and did not conclude its consideration of item 3.3.3 in annex I to draft decision -/CP.10 (Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol). The SBSTA will consider these two issues at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA decided to further consider, at its twenty-first session, the draft decision mentioned in paragraphs 13 and 14 above, including a draft decision to be forwarded to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP) at its first session, with a view to recommending it for adoption by the COP at its tenth session. The SBSTA, recalling paragraph 4 of decision 21/CP.7, requested the secretariat to prepare a note including a proposal for technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol of estimates of anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals from LULUCF activities under the Kyoto Protocol. This note should be based on the technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol adopted by draft decision -/CMP.1 (Technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol) attached to decision 20/CP.9, and the experience gained in the application of that guidance in response to the request contained in decision 20/CP.9. The SBSTA agreed to consider the note referred to in paragraph 16 above with a view to recommending, at its twenty-second session, a decision on adjustments for adoption by the COP at its eleventh session to be forwarded for adoption by the COP/MOP at its subsequent session. The SBSTA, recalling paragraph 2 of decision 22/CP.7, decided to discuss, at its twenty-second session, criteria for cases of failure to submit information relating to estimates of GHG emissions by sources and removals by sinks from activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, with a view to recommending a decision on this matter as soon as practicable thereafter, for adoption by the COP/MOP at its subsequent session. In accordance with decision 16/CP.9, the SBSTA noted that there are costs associated with the implementation of these conclusions, and that their implementation is subject to the availability of supplementary funds. Harvested wood products The SBSTA took note of the information contained in documents FCCC/TP/2003/7 and Corr.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.9 and Add.1 on harvested wood products. The SBSTA decided that the objective of the workshop on harvested wood products, to be organized before its twenty-first session, is to increase understanding of issues relating to harvested wood products. The workshop should take into consideration the information contained in the documents referred to in paragraph 20 above as well as the information on harvested wood products contained in the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories4 and the IPCC Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry.5 The workshop should include presentations, group work and plenary discussions. Specific topics to be discussed should include: Definitions and scope of estimation, reporting and accounting of harvested wood products, including system boundaries, changes in carbon stocks and emissions in relation to wood products, and the relationship to waste and energy sectors Approaches for accounting of harvested wood products and implications of different approaches, including socio-economic and environmental implications, impacts on forest carbon stocks and emissions in Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) and Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties), impacts on sustainable forest management and biomass use, impacts on Annex I and non-Annex I Parties, impacts on countries that export and import wood, and impacts on trade Methods for estimation and reporting of wood products, including inventory methods, assumptions, availability of data, classes of wood products, accuracy and uncertainties, feasibility and costs. The SBSTA welcomed the ongoing work of the IPCC relating to the development of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (hereinafter called the 2006 IPCC Guidelines), including a meeting in November 2004 to address harvested wood products, and invited the IPCC to take into account any additional guidance that could be provided by the SBSTA following the workshop referred to in paragraph 21 above. Other LULUCF issues The SBSTA took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.5 on definitions and methodological options relating to degradation of forests and devegetation of other vegetation types. The SBSTA considered the information contained in the report by the IPCC entitled Definitions and Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-Induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types and recognized the importance of this information to the work of the SBSTA, and decided to consider these issues at a future session. The SBSTA took note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.8 and Add.1 and decided to further consider the items referred to in paragraph 24 (h) - (k) of document FCCC/SBSTA/2003/15 at its twenty-first session. Small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism (Agenda item 3 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.3, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.4, FCCC/TP/2004/2, FCCC/WEB/2004/1 and FCCC/WEB/2004/2. Statements were made by representatives of 15 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, one on behalf of AOSIS and one on behalf of the African Group. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in a contact group chaired by Ms. Thelma Krug (Brazil). At the 5th meeting Ms. Krug reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions6 proposed by the Chair of the contact group. The SBSTA welcomed the information provided in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.3 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.4. It took note of documents FCCC/TP/2004/2 (which the secretariat had prepared in response to a request by decision 19/CP.9), FCCC/WEB/2004/1 and FCCC/WEB/2004/2. The SBSTA made progress in its consideration of simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism (CDM) and prepared a draft negotiating text for further consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-first session.7 The SBSTA requested its Chair, with the assistance of the secretariat and on the basis of submissions by Parties contained in documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.3 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.4, and of inputs by Parties during the twentieth session of the SBSTA, to prepare a draft text for a decision on simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM and on measures to facilitate the implementation of these project activities, for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare documentation on any administrative and budgetary implications, in accordance with decision 16/CP.9, resulting from the adoption of a decision on simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM and on measures to facilitate the implementation of these project activities, for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA agreed to continue this work at its twenty-first session, with a view to recommending a decision on simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM and on measures to facilitate the implementation of these project activities, for adoption by the COP at its tenth session. (Agenda item 3 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 17 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.5. Statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States.8 At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Greg Terrill (Australia). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Terrill reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions9 proposed by the Chair. The SBSTA concluded that it had not completed its consideration of issues under this agenda sub-item, and agreed to continue its consideration of these issues at its twenty-first session. (Agenda item 3 (d)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/3, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.2, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.3, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.4, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.6 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.7. Statements were made by representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States.10 At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item and sub-item 3 (e) "Issues relating to Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol" in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Branca Americano (Brazil). At the 5th meeting, Ms. Plume reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions11 proposed by the Chair. The SBSTA welcomed the report by the secretariat on activities relating to the technical review of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/3. The SBSTA noted that these activities, including the meetings of inventory lead reviewers and the training programme for review experts, have contributed to improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency of the review process, the quality of inventories of Annex I Parties, and the reliability of information available to the COP. It requested the secretariat to continue these activities, subject to the availability of resources. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to further improve the annual report to the COP on GHG emissions and trends of Annex I Parties, required by decision 19/CP.8, by providing information on the improvements achieved in preparing and reporting their GHG inventories. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to include data from current year inventories in the report referred to in paragraph 42 above only if those inventories have been received within six weeks of the due date for submission and hence in time to have been subject to the secretariat's quality control procedures. The secretariat may include inventory submissions received at a later date, provided that these submissions have also been subject to those procedures. The SBSTA invited Annex I Parties to use the new CRF software (CRF Reporter) developed by the secretariat to report the inventory submissions due in 2005. The SBSTA also requested those Parties to submit the inventory information of the LULUCF sector for the trial period in 2005 using the provisional electronic spreadsheets developed by the secretariat to report the new LULUCF CRF tables, in accordance with decision 13/CP.9. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources, to integrate the LULUCF CRF tables into the CRF Reporter by August 2005, to enable Annex I Parties to submit inventory information in 2006 using integrated software. The SBSTA endorsed the agreement for expert review services (see annex I), to be used beginning in 2004, and noted that the use of the agreement would further promote the professionalism and objectivity of the technical review of GHG inventories of Annex I Parties. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to include information on experience with implementation of the code of practice for the treatment of confidential inventory information, and on the use of the agreement for expert review services, in its report on the implementation of the guidelines for the technical review of the GHG inventories of Annex I Parties adopted with decision 19/CP.8, for consideration by the SBSTA at its first session in 2006. The SBSTA did not complete its consideration of documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.2, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.3, FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.7, due to a delay in their availability in good time before the twentieth session of the SBSTA. Some Parties expressed the view that these documents contain useful background information for the work of the IPCC on the development of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Other Parties said that they needed more time to consider the documents. The SBSTA agreed to defer action and further consideration of these documents until its twenty-first session. (Agenda item 3 (e)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/5 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.2. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States.12 At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item and sub-item 3 (d) "Issues relating to greenhouse gas inventories" in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Ms. Branca Americano (Brazil). At the 5th meeting, Ms. Americano reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions13 proposed by the Chair. The SBSTA considered ways of providing expert review teams with access to confidential inventory information of Annex I Parties during periods when the team is neither in the country under review nor at the offices of the secretariat. The SBSTA decided to recommend a decision14 on this matter for adoption by the COP at its tenth session, including a draft decision to be forwarded to the COP/MOP at its first session. The SBSTA considered text to incorporate the modalities and procedures for afforestation and reforestation project activities under the CDM agreed in decision 19/CP.9 into the relevant sections of the guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. The SBSTA decided to recommend a decision on this matter15 for adoption by the COP at its tenth session. Issues relating to registry systems under Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 3 (f)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/4. A statement was made by the representative of one Party. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Mr. Murray Ward (New Zealand). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Ward reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions16 proposed by the Chair. The SBSTA took note of the progress report on work relating to registry systems contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/4. The SBSTA welcomed the progress made by the secretariat, in collaboration with technical experts, on the specifications of the technical standards for data exchange between registry systems called for by decision 24/CP.8. It stressed the need to ensure, by its next session, that version 1.0 of these specifications is in accordance with the general design requirements of the data exchange standards recommended by decision 24/CP.8 for adoption by the COP/MOP. The SBSTA reaffirmed the importance of making progress on the development of the independent transaction log (ITL), in accordance with priorities set by the SBSTA at its nineteenth session. It noted that the ITL is currently expected to be established in mid-2005, subject to the timely availability of funding and the extent of modification required to be made to the program code provided as an in-kind contribution to the secretariat. The SBSTA stressed the need to ensure effective, long-term cooperation among administrators of national registries, the CDM registry, the ITL and any supplementary transaction logs established by Parties, for the purpose of facilitating and promoting accuracy, efficiency and transparency in the operation of registry systems. It noted that the cooperation referred to in decision 24/CP.8 may include the elaboration and implementation of procedures in relation to the management of change in the specifications of the data exchange standards, the coordination of reconciliation and testing among registry systems, the resolution of problems, and the suspension of registry services in the event of persistent technical problems. The SBSTA agreed to prepare a draft decision at its twenty-first session, with a view to the COP at its tenth session taking a decision on, inter alia, the structure of cooperation among administrators, the facilitation of such cooperation by the ITL administrator, and the manner of reporting to the appropriate subsidiary body on activities undertaken. The SBSTA requested its Chair, in conducting the intersessional consultations with Parties and experts in accordance with decision 19/CP.7, to consider the following aspects, and report on progress to the SBSTA at its twenty-first session: Ensuring that version 1.0 of the specifications of the data exchange standards is in accordance with the general design requirements of the data exchange standards recommended by decision 24/CP.8 for adoption by the COP/MOP Facilitating dialogue among administrators, and developers of national registries identified by Parties, prior to the tenth session of the COP Preparing proposals, for the consideration of the SBSTA at its twenty-first session, on the structure and procedures for cooperation among administrators in the long term, including in relation to the scope, activities, reporting and funding of such cooperation and the possible role of the cooperation in contributing to the review process under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol Exchanging information and experience relating to the establishment and operation of registry systems. The SBSTA encouraged each Annex I Party with a commitment inscribed in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol to inform the secretariat which organization is designated as its registry administrator to maintain the national registry of that Party, with a view to facilitating early cooperation among administrators. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to report on progress made with the development and establishment of the ITL and make proposals on operational issues, including reporting, guidance and resource implications, for the consideration of the SBSTA at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the pledges made by Annex II Parties for the development of the data exchange standards and the ITL, and the contributions to the UNFCCC Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities made to date. However, the SBSTA noted that considerably more funds need to be received in order to carry out the activities required for the full development and establishment of the ITL, the facilitation of cooperation among administrators of registry systems and other required activities, such as the intersessional consultations. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-first session and in accordance with decision 16/CP.9, documentation on any administrative and budgetary implications which would result from the adoption of a decision in relation to registry systems. The SBSTA noted in particular that no financial provision had been made in the 2004 - 2005 core budget to hold the intersessional consultations mentioned in paragraph 61 above and that those conclusions can only be implemented subject to the availability of supplementary funds. (Agenda item 4) The SBSTA considered this item at its 1st and 2nd meetings, on June 16, and at its 5th meeting, on 25 June. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2004/2 and FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.8 and Add.1 and Corr.1. Statements were made by representatives of nine Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States,17 one on behalf of the African Group, one on behalf of AOSIS and one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Andrej Krancj (Slovenia) and Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Krancj reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions18 proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group. The SBSTA noted the reports prepared by the secretariat on the outcome of the senior-level round-table discussion on enabling environments for technology transfer held at the ninth session of the COP (FCCC/SBSTA/2004/2), and on the results of the survey on the effectiveness of the use of the UNFCCC technology information clearing house (TT:CLEAR) (FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.8 and Add.1). The SBSTA welcomed the report by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT)19 on the outcome of the fifth meeting of the EGTT held on 13 and 14 June 2004 in Bonn, Germany. It further noted the progress on the implementation of the programme of work of the EGTT for 2004, in particular the recommendations of the EGTT on various activities. The SBSTA further noted the report of the EGTT indicating that sector-specific workshops and other activities relevant to enabling environments for the development and transfer of the technologies have yet to be organized by business and industry NGOs, as encouraged by the SBSTA at its eighteenth session. In this regard, the SBSTA reaffirmed its encouragement to business and industry NGOs and relevant international organizations to organize, in consultation with the EGTT and the secretariat, the above-mentioned sector-specific workshops, and to report on progress to the SBSTA at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA noted the results of the TT:CLEAR survey, which provided useful feedback and recommendations for improving the system, including enhancing the use of and access to the system by non-Annex I Parties. The SBSTA encouraged Parties and relevant international and regional organizations to strengthen the role of national climate change focal points, and national and regional information centres, on dissemination of technology information, including on the promotion of the use of TT:CLEAR. It further urged Parties undertaking their technology needs assessments to make the results of their studies available to the secretariat for dissemination via TT:CLEAR. The SBSTA endorsed the recommendation of the EGTT that the workshop on innovative options for financing the development and transfer of technologies should have a practical focus, utilizing to the greatest extent possible actual innovative financing situations and experiences. The workshop should also be built around a series of case studies encompassing the experience of a range of stakeholders and stages of technology and market development, including assessments of the ability of various innovative options for financing arrangements to meet the needs identified during technology needs assessments. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the offer by the Government of Canada to host the abovementioned workshop in September 2004. It also expressed its appreciation to the Climate Technology Initiative (CTI) for its pledge to provide support for the organization of the workshop. It further invited Parties in a position to do so to provide financial support to the secretariat for the organization of the workshop. The SBSTA urged Annex I Parties and relevant organizations in a position to do so to provide technical support to developing country Parties undertaking their technology needs assessments. The SBSTA invited the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), in cooperation with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), other relevant organizations and the CTI in a position to do so, to hold additional regional workshops to assist developing country Parties to finalize their technology needs assessment reports. It further encouraged these organizations to assist, as appropriate, developing country Parties in the development of national/regional databases on technology needs assessment results and to organize these results in a form suitable for posting on international databases such as TT:CLEAR. The SBSTA urged Parties to give consideration to taking a decision at the tenth session of the COP reflecting the progress made and the next steps to further advance the framework for meaningful and effective actions to enhance the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 5, of the Convention, covered under decision 4/CP.7. The SBSTA invited UNDP, in cooperation with UNEP and the Global Environment Facility (GEF): To collect the reports of the technology needs assessments and prepare an analysis of the technology needs identified by developing countries in these reports and of the lessons learned from the process and analysis of the results, and to report its findings to the EGTT at its sixth meeting; To make available to Parties at SBSTA 21 the most recent version of the handbook for conducting technology needs assessments for climate change and, to the extent possible, translate the handbook into other official languages of the United Nations; To analyse options to further provide technical support to Parties working on completing their initial technology needs assessments or on updating their needs assessments. The SBSTA requested the EGTT: To consider, at its sixth meeting, the outcomes of the workshop on innovative options for financing the development and transfer of technologies and the workshop report prepared by the secretariat with possible recommendations to the SBSTA for consideration at its twenty-first session; To explore possible ways to enhance synergy with other global conventions and processes where technology transfer and capacity-building for technology transfer are considered, in particular with the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) on its programme of work and its expert group on technology transfer and technological and scientific cooperation, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), and the Montreal Protocol, and to consider the outcomes of the work of the Joint Liaison Group (JLG), to encourage complementarity and avoid duplication of efforts, and to report on progress to the SBSTA at its twenty-second session; To consider for possible inclusion in its programme of work for 2005: Activities relating to the identification of possible joint research programmes between Annex I Parties and non-Annex I Parties for the development of environmentally sound technologies Ways to enhance access to scholarships and fellowships to non-Annex I Parties to build capacity for the development and transfer of environmentally sound technologies. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources: To organize a special meeting of the EGTT in conjunction with the workshop on innovative options for financing the development and transfer of technologies, referred to in paragraph 74 above; To organize in early 2005 a seminar on the development and transfer of environmentally sound technologies for adaptation to climate change in order to discuss case studies encompassing short-, medium- and long-term examples of their application, taking into consideration the terms of reference to be prepared by the EGTT at its sixth meeting, and to report on the findings of this seminar to the SBSTA at its twenty-second session; To prepare a technical paper on the applications of environmentally sound technologies for adaptation to climate change, based on the outcomes of the above-mentioned seminar and on the terms of reference to be prepared by the EGTT at its seventh meeting. This paper will be made available for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-third session; To continue its work on maintaining and improving TT:CLEAR, taking into account the report on the survey on the effectiveness of the use of the system and the recommendation of the EGTT at its fifth meeting: To more narrowly define what topic areas it can best focus upon; improve userfriendliness of the site; focus on its clearing house role; better define the target audiences and tailor information to meet their needs; focus on data organization and management; and build a simple and effective search engine for users; To enhance outreach efforts to increase the use of the system by users from nonAnnex I Parties, including wider distribution of the stand-alone version of TT:CLEAR on CD-ROM, distribution of information to regional networks and specialized web sites, and distribution of technology news; To enhance networking between national and regional centres working on the dissemination of technology information, and encourage the use of TT:CLEAR; To translate portions of the site into other official languages of the United Nations; To provide information on financial and technical assistance for the development and transfer of technologies. To clearly identify, taking into account the points in paragraph 81 (d) above, budgetary needs for maintaining and further developing TT:CLEAR, and report to the SBSTA at its twentyfirst session. The SBSTA noted that, in accordance with decision 16/CP.9, the Executive Secretary provided Parties with an indication of the administrative and budgetary implications of these conclusions. The SBSTA noted that no financial provision has been made in the 2004 - 2005 core budget to hold the special meeting of the EGTT mentioned in paragraph 81 (a) above or the seminar mentioned in paragraph 81 (b) above, and that the conclusions can only be implemented subject to the availability of supplementary funds. "Good practices" in policies and measures among Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 5) The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. No new documents were prepared for this item. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Anders Turesson (Sweden) and Mr. Tony Surridge (South Africa). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Surridge reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions20 proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group. The SBSTA welcomed the progress made in implementing decision 13/CP.7. The SBSTA agreed on the next steps in implementing decision 13/CP.7 as set out in paragraphs 89 and 90 below, recalling that these steps should: Facilitate (in making preparations during the lead-up to the first session of the COP/MOP, in relation to Article 2, paragraph 1 (b), of the Kyoto Protocol) cooperation among Annex I Parties in order to enhance the individual and combined effectiveness of policies and measures such as those in Article 2, paragraph 1 (a), of the Kyoto Protocol, in particular by sharing experience and exchanging information at a technical level, and taking into account national circumstances; Take place under the guidance of the SBSTA, inter alia, through initiatives involving all Parties and, as appropriate, environmental, business and industry NGOs, and should include the exchange of information on policies and measures undertaken by Annex I Parties in all relevant sectors and on cross-cutting and methodological issues; Contribute to the improvement of transparency, effectiveness and comparability of policies and measures. To that end this should: Enhance transparency in reporting on policies and measures in the national communications of Annex I Parties through, as appropriate, criteria and quantitative parameters, and consider issues of methodology, attribution and national circumstances; Facilitate information sharing on ways Annex I Parties have striven to implement policies and measures in such a way as to minimize adverse effects, including the adverse effects of climate change, effects on international trade, and social, environmental and economic impacts on developing-country Parties, taking into account information relating to these issues provided by non-Annex I Parties; Assist Parties and the COP in identifying further options for cooperation between Annex I Parties and other interested Parties to enhance the individual and combined effectiveness of their policies and measures. The SBSTA noted that these steps would take into account considerations such as environmental effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, social and economic impacts and ancillary benefits. The SBSTA invited Annex I Parties to make available information on their experiences in implementing policies and measures, as outlined in paragraph 87 above, to all Parties at a meeting in the form of a round-table discussion at a technical level, at the twenty-second session of the subsidiary bodies. The SBSTA further invited Parties to exchange views at this meeting. It requested the secretariat to organize this meeting and to provide a report on activities outlined in this paragraph for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-third session. The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to provide information, including an assessment of resource implications, on options for using, inter alia, web-based approaches to sharing experience and exchanging information on "good practices" in policies and measures, as outlined in paragraph 87 above, at a technical level. To that end, the secretariat should consider relevant ongoing activities under other agenda items of the subsidiary bodies, as well as activities of other international and intergovernmental organizations, with a view to reporting to the SBSTA at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA invited interested Annex I Parties to support the activities outlined in paragraphs 89 and 90 above by providing additional resources, if necessary. The SBSTA noted that future work on this agenda item needs to be considered in the light of overall work plans of the subsidiary bodies to the Convention. (Agenda item 6) No new documents were prepared for this item. Statements were made by representatives of six Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, and one on behalf of the African Group. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Stefan Rösner (Germany) and Mr. Soobaraj Nayroo Sok Apadu (Mauritius). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Rösner reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions21 proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group. The SBSTA recognized with appreciation the progress made by the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) secretariat, under the guidance of the GCOS steering committee, in the development of the 5- to 10-year implementation plan for the integrated global observing systems for climate,22 in particular the publication of the draft implementation plan for open review.23 It urged the GCOS secretariat, in finalizing this plan, to clearly identify priorities for actions, taking into account the views expressed by Parties and relevant international programmes and bodies. The SBSTA noted the progress made by the ad hoc Group on Earth Observations (GEO) to develop a 10-year implementation plan for a global Earth observation system of systems (GEOSS). It welcomed the collaboration between GCOS and GEO in developing their respective implementation plans and urged both bodies to integrate them to the extent possible. The SBSTA emphasized the need to treat global climate monitoring as a priority within GEOSS. The SBSTA welcomed the progress made in the regional workshop programme run by the GCOS secretariat. It encouraged Parties to continue to pursue the implementation of elements of the regional action plans developed under this programme. The SBSTA invited the GCOS secretariat to report on progress made in implementing the regional action plans in relation to global observing systems for climate, including support from the financial mechanism of the Convention and other bilateral and multilateral agencies and mechanisms, for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-first session and subsequent sessions as appropriate. The SBSTA noted the ongoing development of the GCOS Cooperation Mechanism to address priority needs for improvements in global observing systems for climate in developing countries, in particular the plans to develop an inventory of donor activities relating to global observing systems for climate. The SBSTA noted the preliminary report on data exchange problems provided by the GCOS secretariat.24 Reinforcing its conclusions at its eighteenth session, the SBSTA invited the GCOS secretariat, in consultation with the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), to provide the full report on this issue for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-second session. The SBSTA particularly encouraged the inclusion of options to remedy existing data exchange problems and advice on problems associated with the accessibility of data by and from global data centres. The SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views among representatives of government research programmes and international programmes and bodies during the event requested by the SBSTA,25 and held at the twentieth session of the SBSTA, on research in response to the recommendations of the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC. The following were noted as requiring further consideration: The need to assess the adequacy of research activities and their international coordination to meet the needs of the Convention The importance of social as well as natural sciences, and the interaction between the two, in responding to the research needs arising from the assessment reports of the IPCC The enhancement of the capacity of developing countries to contribute to and participate in global climate change research efforts, such as those coordinated by the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), the International Geosphere - Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the International Human Dimensions Programme (IHDP) and DIVERSITAS. The SBSTA requested Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 15 September 2004, their views on how to adequately address the main issues arising from the event requested by the SBSTA,26 in particular those mentioned in paragraph 102 above, for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-first session. The SBSTA requested Parties to submit to the secretariat additional views on this subject by 24 January 2005 for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-second session. It requested the secretariat to compile both sets of submissions into miscellaneous documents and to prepare a synthesis of all the views of Parties for consideration by the SBSTA at its twenty-second session. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change (Agenda item 7) (Agenda item 8) The SBSTA considered these items at its 4th and 5th meetings, on 21 and 25 June, respectively, following the in-session workshops on agenda items 7 and 8, which took place on Friday, 18 June, and Saturday, 19 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.6 and Add.1. Statements were made by representatives of 28 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of AOSIS and one on behalf of the African Group. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider these items in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. David Warrilow (United Kingdom) and Mr. Kok Seng Yap (Malaysia). At the 5th meeting, Mr. Warrilow reported on the contact group's consultations on adaptation and Mr. Yap reported on the contact group's consultations on mitigation. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA adopted conclusions on item 727 and on item 828 proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group. Item 7: Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change The SBSTA took note of the submissions from Parties contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.6 and Add.1. The SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views among Parties, experts and representatives of NGOs, businesses, and international and other relevant organizations during the in-session workshop on the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change, in the context of the themes of sustainable development, opportunities and solutions, and vulnerability and risk. It expressed appreciation to the speakers, representing a broad range of expertise, who participated in the workshop. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to post the text of the Chair's oral report from the workshop on the UNFCCC web site.29 The SBSTA agreed to continue focusing its work on exchanging information and sharing experiences and views among Parties on practical opportunities and solutions to facilitate the implementation of the Convention, as mandated by the COP by its decision 10/CP.9. As a next step, the SBSTA agreed that, at its twenty-first session, it will focus on the exchange of information and sharing of experiences, views and lessons learned, taking into account different national circumstances, on the following topics: Application of methods and tools, including regional models, for assessing impacts and vulnerability and adaptation Linkages between adaptation and sustainable development. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to organize a workshop during its twenty-first session allowing for in-depth discussion to exchange information and share experiences and views on the topics referred to in paragraph 110 above. To facilitate the discussion at the workshop, the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a background paper on the application of methods and tools, including regional models, for assessing impacts and vulnerability and developing adaptation responses, inter alia, drawing on the practices of the relevant expert communities, including those responsible for dealing with natural disasters. It also requested the secretariat to make available through the UNFCCC web site published papers relating to the linkages between adaptation and sustainable development. To facilitate the discussion at the workshop, the SBSTA invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 31 August 2004, their views on the topics referred to in paragraph 110 above, and on the workshop referred to in paragraph 111 above, for compilation into a miscellaneous document. The SBSTA requested its Chair to prepare a summary of the workshop referred to in paragraph 111 above, and requested the secretariat to make this summary, and the workshop presentations and abstracts, available on the UNFCCC web site as soon as possible after the workshop. The SBSTA agreed to determine next steps on this agenda item at its twenty-first session. In accordance with decision 16/CP.9, the SBSTA noted that there are costs associated with implementing these conclusions, and that their implementation is subject to the availability of supplementary funds. Item 8: Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation The SBSTA welcomed the exchange of views among Parties, experts and representatives of NGOs, businesses, and international and other relevant organizations during the in-session workshop on scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of climate change mitigation, in the context of the themes of sustainable development, opportunities and solutions, and vulnerability and risk. It expressed appreciation to the speakers, representing a broad range of expertise, who participated in the workshop. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to post the text of the Chair's oral report from the workshop on the UNFCCC web site.30 The SBSTA agreed to continue focusing its work on exchanging information and sharing experiences and views among Parties on practical opportunities and solutions to facilitate the implementation of the COP by its decision 10/CP.9. As a next step, the SBSTA agreed that, at its twenty-first session, it will focus on exchanging information and sharing experiences, views and lessons learned, taking into account different national circumstances, with respect to the following topics: Mitigation technology innovation, deployment and diffusion, including identification and removal of barriers Practical opportunities and solutions for mitigation that contribute to sustainable development. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, to organize a workshop allowing for in-depth discussion during its twenty-first session to exchange information and share experiences and views on the topics referred to in paragraph 120 above. The SBSTA invited Parties to submit to the secretariat, by 31 August 2004, their views on the topics referred to in paragraph 120 above and on the workshop referred to in paragraph 121 above, for compilation into a miscellaneous document to facilitate the discussion at the workshop. The SBSTA requested its Chair to prepare a summary of the workshop referred to in paragraph 121 above, and requested the secretariat to make this summary, and the workshop presentation and abstracts, available on the UNFCCC web site as soon as possible after the workshop. In accordance with decision 16/CP.9, the SBSTA noted that there are costs associated with implementing these conclusions and that their implementation is subject to the availability of supplementary funds. (Agenda item 9) The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 5th meetings, on 16 and 25 June, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.9. Statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States31 and one on behalf of AOSIS. Statements were also made by representatives of the secretariats of the UNCCD and the Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar, Iran, 1971; hereinafter called the Ramsar Convention), the IPCC, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Inter-Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR). A written statement by the secretariat of the CBD was made available to Parties. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA with the assistance of Ms. Outi Berghäll (Finland) and Ms. Marcela Main (Chile). At the 5th meeting, Ms. Berghäll reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions32 proposed by the Chair. Cooperation with other Conventions The SBSTA noted with appreciation statements made by representatives of the secretariats of the UNCCD and the Ramsar Convention. The SBSTA also took note of a written statement from the secretariat of the CBD. It noted the report prepared by the UNCCD secretariat on the "Workshop on forests and forest ecosystems: Promoting synergy in the implementation of the three Rio Conventions"33 which was organized by the secretariats of the UNCCD and the CBD, in cooperation with the UNFCCC secretariat, and held in Viterbo, Italy, from 5 to 7 April 2004. The SBSTA, recalling its conclusion at its sixteenth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6, para. 50 (e)), noted the important contribution that the Ramsar Convention secretariat can make to the work of the JLG and encouraged its continued involvement. The SBSTA also noted the report of the fifth meeting of the JLG (FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.9), including its plan to prepare a paper on options for enhanced cooperation among the three Rio Conventions, and requested the secretariat to present this paper, as soon as it is available, for consideration by the SBSTA. The SBSTA invited the secretariat to continue to exchange information with the secretariats of the CBD and the UNCCD, via the JLG, and to improve inter-accessibility of available data, including through improving web-based access, within existing resources. In response to the specific invitation to the COP of the UNFCCC from the COP of the CBD at its seventh session contained in decision VII/15 on biodiversity and climate change,34 the SBSTA decided to recommend a draft conclusion35 on this matter for adoption by the COP at its tenth session. Cooperation with scientific organizations and United Nations bodies The SBSTA noted with appreciation statements made on behalf of the FAO and the ISDR on their activities relating to climate change and the relevance of the work of these organizations to the UNFCCC. It also took note of the oral report of the IPCC on its activities and urged the secretariat and the IPCC to cooperate fully to ensure that Parties are kept well informed. Other matters (Agenda item 10) (Agenda item 10 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 17 and 25 June, respectively. No new documents were prepared for this sub-item.36 Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States.37 At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this sub-item in informal consultations convened by the Chair of the SBSTA. At the 5th meeting, the Chair reported on these consultations. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions38 proposed by the Chair. (Agenda item 10 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 17 and 25 June, respectively. No new documents were prepared for this item.39 Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States40 and one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At its 5th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions41 proposed by the Chair. (Agenda item 10 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd meeting, on 17 June. This item was closed as no issue was raised thereunder. Report on the session (Agenda item 11) At its 5th meeting, on 25 June, the SBSTA considered the draft report on its twentieth session (FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.1). At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report on the session, under the guidance of the Chair. Closure of the session At the 5th meeting, on 25 June, the Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC referred to decision 16/CP.9 and provided the SBSTA with an indication of administrative and budgetary implications of decisions and conclusions approved at the twentieth session which cannot be met from existing resources within the core budget. About USD 500,000 in additional supplementary funds, over and above those listed in the above-mentioned decision, will be needed to respond to the requests of the SBSTA and the SBI. She also stressed that the decisions and conclusions of the SBSTA at this session contain requests for the secretariat to organize seven42 additional workshops and meetings. Before closing the session, the Chair of the SBSTA expressed appreciation to Mr. Dennis Tirpak, SBSTA Coordinator, for his many contributions to the work of the SBSTA. Several Parties also expressed their appreciation. Following this, the Chair encouraged Parties to reflect on the issues which did not move forward at this session and to come to SBSTA 21 prepared with new ideas. At the same meeting, the Chair thanked delegates, the chairs of contact groups and convenors of informal consultations for their contributions. Annex I Agreement for Expert Review Services1 The secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) has invited you to participate as an expert in the technical review of the greenhouse gas inventories of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) (the "review"). Your service as an expert reviewer is requested on the basis of your expertise in greenhouse gas inventories, and will help to ensure that the Conference of the Parties (COP) has accurate and reliable information on greenhouse gas emissions. Reviews are conducted under the authority of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the auspices of the UNFCCC, as set out in decision 2/CP.1, and in accordance with the guidelines for review of greenhouse gas inventories adopted by decision 19/CP.8 (FCCC/CP/2002/8). The COP, by its decision 12/CP.9, decided that, beginning in 2004, all members of expert review teams participating in the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories from Annex I Parties shall be required to sign this agreement for expert review services, prepared based on the elements included in annex III to that decision (FCCC/CP/2003/6/Add.1). Your participation in the review is subject to the terms and conditions set forth below. Conduct in the review The expert shall use the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories, adopted by decision 18/CP.8, and the Revised 1996 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines and IPCC good practice guidance as the bases for the technical review of inventories, following the procedures and deadlines for each stage as set out in the inventory review guidelines, under the direction of the Convention secretariat. In conducting review activities, the expert shall perform duties in an objective, neutral and professional manner and serve in the best interest of the Convention. The expert shall notify the secretariat of any known potential conflict of interest relating to a specific review activity in which the expert has been invited to participate. The expert shall work cooperatively with other review team members, in particular lead reviewers and other experts working in the same subsector, with a view to achieving consensus in decision-making within the expert review team. If, under exceptional circumstances, consensus cannot be reached within an expert review team, lead reviewers from other expert review teams may be asked to work cooperatively with a team to assist it in achieving consensus. The expert will be advised of the time requirements and deadlines for the review process, and will do everything in his or her power to meet these deadlines. If, due to unforeseen circumstances, the expert is not able to perform his or her review duties in the time allotted for them, he or she shall notify the secretariat, lead reviewers of the team and other members of the team as soon as possible. Information provided during the review 5. Information provided by Parties under review and by the secretariat is provided for the sole purpose of the inventory review and shall not be used by expert review team members for purposes other than the inventory review. In this regard, the expert shall not disclose any information acquired during the review before finalization and publication of the inventory review report; and shall not disclose any non-published information acquired during the review without the express agreement of the Party concerned and the secretariat. Further, the expert shall not disclose information about the review, including any findings, or the status of internal procedures, to anyone except the Party concerned, the secretariat, members of the review team and, as necessary, other lead reviewers, while the review is being conducted. 6. The expert has an obligation to protect any confidential information provided in the course of the review both during and after the term of service. If the expert is specifically authorized to handle confidential inventory information, he or she shall adhere to established UNFCCC procedures for treatment of this information, as instructed by the secretariat. In this case, the expert shall be informed by the secretariat that he or she may be personally liable and shall be informed by the secretariat of the potential consequences, including legal consequences, that may arise from disclosure of the confidential information by the expert. The expert shall notify the secretariat of any known potential conflict of interest relating to specific confidential information submitted by the Annex I Party being reviewed before the information is viewed. Consequences 7. Failure to comply with the conditions of this agreement may result in the expert's removal from the review. Recognition 8. Upon request, the secretariat will provide a letter of recognition for services to experts who have participated in a review in accordance with the terms and conditions of this agreement, with a copy to the national focal point. Acknowledgement Please acknowledge your agreement with the terms and conditions for your participation in the review process by signing, dating and returning to the UNFCCC secretariat a copy of this agreement. For the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Printed name: _ Signature: _ Date: _ Acknowledged and agreed: Annex II Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 91 Recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA), at its twentieth session, decided to recommend the following draft conclusion for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth session. Conclusion on the invitation by the Conference of the Parties of the Convention on Biological Diversity (decision VII/15) The Conference of the Parties (COP), recalling that the role of the Joint Liaison Group (JLG) is to enhance coordination among the three Rio Conventions through the exchange of relevant information and the exploration of options for further cooperation, requested the secretariat, within existing resources, to provide information to the JLG on relevant activities that are mutually supportive of the objectives of the three Conventions, based on existing information publicly available and already provided by Parties under the UNFCCC. The COP also encouraged Parties to enhance coordination under the three Rio Conventions at the national level by facilitating the involvement of national experts, and by the sharing of relevant information at local and national levels, where possible and as appropriate. Annex III Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its twentieth session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/SBSTA/2003/15 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its nineteenth session, held at Milan from 1 to 9 December 2003 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBSTA/2004/2 Summary of the senior-level round-table discussion on enabling environments for technology transfer, held at the ninth session of the Conference of the Parties. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/3 Annual report of technical review activities of greenhouse gas inventories from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/4 Progress report on work relating to registry systems. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/5 Additions to the guidelines for the preparation of the information required under Article 7, and the guidelines for the review of information under Article 8, of the Kyoto Protocol relating to the modalities and procedures for afforestation and reforestation as specified in the annex to decision 19/CP.9. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.1 Draft tables of the common reporting format for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.2 Estimation of fugitive emissions from fuels. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.3 Estimation of emissions from road transport. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.4 Estimation of emissions from agriculture. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.5 Methodological issues relating to emissions from international aviation and maritime transport. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.6 Agreement for expert review services. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.7 Estimation of emissions and removals in land-use change and forestry and issues relating to projections. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.8 Results of the survey on the effectiveness of the use of the UNFCCC Add.1 and Corr.1 technology information clearing house (TT:CLEAR). Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.9 Report of the fifth meeting of the Joint Liaison Group FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.1 Common reporting format and requirements for reporting annual greenhouse gas inventory information on land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the Kyoto Protocol. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.2 Possible ways to ensure access to confidential information by review experts in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of decision 21/CP.9 relating to the implementation of Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.3 Measures to facilitate the implementation of small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.4 Simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.5 Definitions and methodological options relating to degradation of forests and devegetation of other vegetation types. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.6 Sustainable development, opportunities and solutions, vulnerability and Add.1 and risk. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.8 Future methodological issues relating to land use, land-use change and Add.1 and forestry. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.9 Issues relating to harvested wood products. Submissions from and Add.1 Parties FCCC/TP/2004/2 Simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism. Technical paper FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.1 Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twentieth session FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.2 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on agenda item 4 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.3 Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 9 and Add.1 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.4 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on agenda item 6 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.5 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on agenda item 5 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.6 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on agenda item 3 (d) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.7 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on and Add.1 - 2 agenda item 3 (e) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.8 Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 3 (f) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.9 Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair of the contact group on agenda item 3 (b) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.10 Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 10 (a) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.11 Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 10 (b) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.12 Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair on agenda item 3 (c) FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.13 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on agenda item 7 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.14 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on agenda item 8 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/L.15 Draft conclusions proposed by the co-chairs of the contact group on and Add.1 agenda item 3 (a) Other documents before the session FCCC/SBSTA/2002/6 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its sixteenth session, held at Bonn, from 5 to 14 June 2002 FCCC/SBSTA/2002/MISC.3 Proposal on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy. and Add.1 - 2 Submissions from Parties FCCC/TP/2003/7 Estimation, reporting and accounting of harvested wood products. and Corr.1 Technical paper FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.7 Issues relating to cleaner or less-greenhouse-gas-emitting energy. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2003/MISC.8 Issues relating to the implementation of Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2004/MISC.101 Views on the workshop on emissions projections from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Submissions from Parties Documents only available on the secretariat web site FCCC/WEB/2004/1 Measures to facilitate the implementation of small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism. Submissions from accredited organizations FCCC/WEB/2004/2 Simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism. Submissions from accredited organizations 