%%%TREATY COMPLIANCE|NORWAY|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|VERIFICATION|

Third session New York, 26 April-7 May 2004 Implementation of article VI of the NPT and paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament Report submitted by Norway This report presents the steps taken by Norway in the implementation of article VI of the NPT and paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 Decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament". The report focuses on the 13 practical steps of the 2000 Final Document, which is the most recent elaboration of the obligations embodied in article VI and the "Principles and Objectives". Step 1 - CTBT Norway signed and ratified the treaty at an early stage. Universal adherence to and early entry into force of the Treaty continues to be a high priority. Norway has worked towards this goal by actively promoting signature and ratification of the CTBT, and by supporting the work of the CTBTO PrepCom in Vienna in implementing the Treaty's verification mechanism. At the 57th UN General Assembly last Fall, Norway's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jan Petersen, signed a Joint Ministerial Statement in support of the CTBT. Norway has expressed the view on several occasions, notably at the two Article XIV-Conferences and at the UN 1st Committee, of the crucial importance that the nuclear powers ratify the Treaty without delay, and that the remaining State parties listed in Annex II to the Treaty, do so as well. In order to accelerate the ratification process Norway has granted financial assistance to selected countries in the list of 44 states, through the Preparatory Commission in Vienna. Step 2 - Test Moratorium Pending the entry into force of the CTBT, it is important that the moratoria on tests remains. Norway advocates the view that such self-imposed moratoria cannot, however, replace the legally binding commitments represented by the signing and ratification of the CTBT. The CTBT establishes a far-reaching global monitoring and verification system, capable of detecting all relevant nuclear explosions. The CTBT's verification system is thus at the core of the Treaty. The full implementation of the International Monitoring System (IMS) as soon as possible, and not awaiting the entry into force of the treaty, would represent a significant confidence and security-building measure. Six monitoring stations comprising altogether 119 field instruments is located on Norwegian territory as part of the IMS. With the ratification of the CTBT in 1999, NORSAR has been established as the Norwegian National Data Center for Treaty verification. Step 3 - FMCT Norway considers it as a top priority for the CD to start negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and effectively verifiable Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT). Such a treaty is the next logical step on the multilateral arms control agenda and essential if we are to advance nuclear non-proliferation. As long as the deadlock in the CD remains, Norway welcomes the ongoing parallel process to identify and assess particular and technical aspects of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty. It is necessary to deal with the entire field of weapons-usable material in a comprehensive manner. All nuclear-weapons states should conclude and implement arrangements to place fissile material that is no longer required for military purposes under the IAEA verification regime. Norway advocates the principle of irreversible disposition in order to ensure that excess stockpiles of fissile material remain outside the military cycle. To that end IAEA monitoring is required. Step 4 - Nuclear disarmament in the CD Norway has expressed concern about the continued deadlock in the CD and supported efforts to agree on a programme of work, including the cross-regional initiative as well as its revised version. This proposal calls for the early commencement of consideration of nuclear disarmament. Step 5 - Irreversibility Norway has repeatedly expressed support for the principle of irreversibility in arms control and nuclear disarmament. Irreversible reductions of existing stockpiles are effective non-proliferation efforts. Step 7 - Strategic arms agreements Norway welcomes the Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty on further reductions in strategic nuclear warheads. Reductions in the numbers of operationally deployed strategic warheads will be an important contribution to the implementation of the decisions of the 2000 NPT Review Conference and to continued strategic stability and enhanced security in the new international context. While welcoming reductions in strategic nuclear warheads, Norway underlines the need for verifiable, transparent and irreversible reductions. Step 8 - Trilateral Initiative between the US, Russia and IAEA Norway holds the view that emphasis should be given to the completion and full implementation of the Trilateral Initiative between the US, Russia and the IAEA. Efforts could be made to expand this arrangement to all nuclear weapon capable states, as an important step in the direction of international control of excessive stocks of fissile material and deeper cuts in nuclear arms. Step 9 - Steps by the nuclear weapon states Norway strongly supports increased transparency with regard to nuclear arsenals. At the NPT Review Conference two years ago we introduced proposals in this respect, together with Belgium, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. We also would like to refer to the working paper tabled by Belgium, the Netherlands and Norway at the Second Meeting of the preparatory Committee to the 2005 review Conference. We also encourage transparency through concluding Additional Safeguards with the IAEA. We urge all those States that have not yet signed or ratified such an Additional Protocol to do so without delay. Norway has welcomed the unilateral declarations by the US and the Russian presidents in 1991-92 which resulted in the elimination of a great number of tactical nuclear weapons. These declarations are in Norway's view still relevant and should be preserved and strengthened. We encourage the adoption of transparency measures such as reporting on the implementation of these two important declarations and reciprocal information exchange by the two countries involved. In this regard we would like to point to the transparency measures that NATO has proposed to Russia. Norway hopes to see an early start of further negotiations on substantial cuts in the arsenals of tactical nuclear weapons. Step 11 - General and complete disarmament Arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation issues remain central elements in Norwegian foreign policy. An Action Plan to combat nuclear terrorism was drawn up by the IAEA and approved by the IAEA General Conference in March 2002. Norway has contributed USD 130 000 to activities under the Action Plan's sub programme K 6 on nuclear and radiation emergencies. Norwegian experts have been made available to the Agency. The Convention on Early Notification of Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency form a good basis for international cooperation. The implementation of these conventions needs, however, to be strengthened and enhanced. As an example of bilateral cooperation programmes, Norway has for more than 10 years had bilateral cooperation with the Russian Federation regarding nuclear safety issues. Under its national Plan of Action Norway has since 1995 allocated USD 130 millions, mainly to Russia. This Plan of Action concentrates on four main areas, nuclear safety, safety of nuclear fuel and radioactive waste, monitoring of radioactive contamination and weapons related environmental problems. The idea behind this assistance has been to facilitate and speed up the ongoing program on dismantling decommissioned nuclear powered submarines with nuclear fuel on board. Step 12 - Reporting Norway believes that national reports by State parties should contain regular, systematic and detailed information to the other State parties with the goal to improve the functioning of NPT's strengthened review process. In submitting its national report, Norway shares the view that reporting should be done by all State parties. It should be obligatory rather than optional. Step 13 - Development of verification Norway supports the further development and strengthening of verification capabilities, which is clearly linked to the issue of compliance. We have taken a number of steps to support verification regimes under various arms control-, disarmament- and non-proliferation agreements, including the above mentioned International Monitoring System for the CTBT. Norway also supports the verification regimes of the IAEA. Our agreement with the IAEA on Comprehensive Safeguards was signed in 1972, while our agreement on the Additional Protocol entered into force in 2000. The IAEA has conducted several inspections under the framework of the additional Protocol. The measures contained in the IAEAs Model Additional Protocol are important for the Agency's efforts to enhance nuclear non-proliferation and as a new verification standard. It strengthens the effectiveness of the comprehensive IAEA safeguards system. Norway has on a number of occasions spoken in favour of making the Additional Protocol mandatory. The IAEA conceptual framework for integrated safeguards represents a more comprehensive, more flexible and efficient system for verification. Norway has qualified for integrated safeguards, and these are being implemented in Norway. 