%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|

Third session New York, 26 April-7 May 2004 Implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Report submitted by the Republic of Kazakhstan 1. Kazakhstan, a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons since 1993, considers that the Treaty remains the key instrument for the prevention of vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the starting point for nuclear disarmament. The decision by the country's leadership to voluntarily renounce nuclear status was a matter of principle, and Kazakhstan continues to adhere strictly to the principles of non-proliferation. All nuclear weapons have been removed from the country's territory, and all work which could potentially have led to military uses of nuclear energy has ceased. With support from a number of foreign countries, a broad programme to convert the former military research infrastructure has been conducted -- this concerns both specialists who were involved in the military programmes of the former Soviet Union, and the infrastructures of testing areas. 2. Kazakhstan attaches great importance to the full implementation of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards and to strengthening the Agency's verification mechanisms. All nuclear activities in Kazakhstan are under IAEA supervision in accordance with a safeguards agreement. The Agency conducts regular inspections at its nuclear sites in order to verify the quantity of nuclear materials officially declared by the country. In connection with the signature on 6 February 2004 of an additional protocol to the safeguards agreement with IAEA, Kazakhstan proposes to implement additional measures to strengthen the regime for the verification of nuclear activities. Currently, 11 programmes are under way in Kazakhstan in the framework of the IAEA technical cooperation programme. The country is also participating in seven IAEA regional projects. Under the technical cooperation programme, IAEA is financing the research in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy being conducted by institutions and organizations in Kazakhstan. In just four years, five IAEA research contracts have been fulfilled, each of them worth about $5,000 per annum. Grants are also provided to enable Kazakh nationals to take part in various educational courses, seminars, conferences and symposiums conducted with IAEA participation, and payments are made for the expert services of specialists involved in various aspects of the Agency's work. The Republic of Kazakhstan has signed the following international agreements: :: The Convention on Nuclear Safety, of June 1994; :: The Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, of 29 September 1997; Preparations are being made to sign the following: :: The Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; :: The Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency; :: The Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident. 3. Comprehensive State control over trade in nuclear materials, equipment, dual-use technologies and arms is an integral part of Kazakhstan's policy in the area of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In March 1993, in connection with the beginning of independent exports of nuclear and dual-use items, the Government of Kazakhstan adopted a decision on the export and import of nuclear materials and dual-use materials and technologies, laying the foundation of the country's export-control system. In 1996, Kazakhstan adopted a law on export controls in relation to arms, materiel and dual-use products, which became the cornerstone of the country's export regulation system. Since November 2000, there has been a national list, renewed periodically, of items subject to export control; this list meets the requirements of international non-proliferation regimes. International experts consider that Kazakhstan's regulatory basis in the area of export controls complies with international standards. Further evidence of this is the fact that in May 2002, Kazakhstan was accepted into the Nuclear Suppliers Group. As early as 2000, pursuing its consistent policy in the area of non-proliferation, Kazakhstan applied to join the Missile Technology Control Regime, providing all the necessary documentation. 