%%%NUCLEAR SAFEGUARDS|ENRICHED URANIUM|PLUTONIUM|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|TRANSPARENCY IN ARMAMENTS|GUIDELINES|

Third session New York, 26 April-7 May 2004 Plutonium management group: activities since the 2000 NPT Review Conference Working paper submitted by Switzerland on behalf of Belgium, China, France, Germany, Japan, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America 1. The Final Document from the 2000 NPT Review Conference contained the following paragraphs relating to the policies adopted by a number of States on the management of plutonium. Article III and preambular paragraphs 4 and 5, especially in their relationship to article IV and preambular paragraphs 6 and 7 39. The Conference welcomes the additional transparency on matters pertaining to the management of plutonium resulting from the establishment, in 1997, of Guidelines for the Management of Plutonium (INFCIRC/549), setting out the policies that several States, including the nuclear-weapon States, have decided to adopt. 55. The Conference encourages all other states that separate, hold, process or use separated plutonium in their civil nuclear activities to adopt policies similar to those which have been adopted by the participants in the Plutonium Management Guidelines (INFCIRC/549). Furthermore, the Conference encourages the States concerned to consider similar policies for the management of highly enriched uranium used for peaceful purposes. This paper sets out details of the activities undertaken by those States participating in the Guidelines since the review conference. Transparency and Management 2. In fulfilment of their commitment to transparency, the States participating in the Guidelines continue to make available details of their national holdings of plutonium in the civil cycle. These details are published annually by the IAEA in the INFCIRC/549 series. 3. In addition to publishing details of their national holdings, all those participating in the Guidelines have published details of their national strategies on plutonium holdings. These national strategies set out how participating States put into practical effect their continued commitment to the safe and responsible management of plutonium entered into through their adherence to the Guidelines. 4. The participating States have continued to meet on annually to discuss the national returns and any other relevant issues. Encouraging further states to adopt similar policies 5. On 14 December 2001, the Chair of the Group wrote to all other 35 states possessing nuclear reactors. The letter drew attention to the Guidelines and made clear the readiness of the participants in the Guidelines to provide any information and advice to any country which held or used plutonium and was considering adhering to the Guidelines. Review of the Guidelines 6. In paragraph 15 of the Guidelines, participating States expressed their willingness to join with other States "in reviewing the Guidelines in the light of experience with their application and changing circumstances at an agreed time not less than five years after the date on which these Guidelines are notified to the DG of the IAEA." The Group discussed the revision of the Guidelines at their meeting in September 2003 and decided that it would continue to keep the guidelines under review. High Enriched Uranium 7. In 200 and 2001, the Group considered the question of how to respond to the issue of developing similar guidelines for the management of High Enriched Uranium. The Group did not reach a consensus on how to take this forward. However, some States have expressed an interest in developing guidelines similar to those set out in INFCIRC/549. 8. Three States participating in the Group publish annual returns of holdings of High Enriched Uranium in the civil cycle on a voluntary basis. These figures appear as an annex to the annual returns published as INFCIRC/549. Conclusion 9. States participating in the Guidelines suggest that the 2005 NPT Review Conference:- welcomes the continued transparency demonstrated by nine states on the management of their civil plutonium takes note that the States participating in the Guidelines have reviewed those Guidelines encourages all other states that separate, hold, process or use separated plutonium in their civil nuclear activities to adopt policies similar to those adopted by the participants in the Guidelines encourages those States that have yet to do so to reply to the Chair's letter of 14 December 2001 welcomes the publication by States of the details of their civil High Enriched Uranium holdings on a voluntary basis as three States have already done. And that the third session of the Preparatory Committee produces recommendations to that effect. 