%%%DISARMAMENT|AGENDA|MEETING RECORDS|LANGUAGE SERVICES|DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR ARMS RACE|NON-NUCLEAR-WEAPON STATES|SECURITY ASSURANCES|WORK ORGANIZATION|MEMBERS|CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|

98-36137 (E) 231198 United Nations A/53/586 General Assembly Distr.: General 18 November 1998 Original: English Fifty-third session Agenda item 73 Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session Report of the First Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Motaz M. Zahran (Egypt) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled: “Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session: “(a) Report of the Disarmament Commission; “(b) Report of the Conference on Disarmament; “(c) Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters; “(d) United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research” was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-third session of the General Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolutions 52/40 A to C of 9 December 1997. 2. At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 15 September 1998, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the First Committee. 3. At its 2nd meeting, on 17 September 1998, the First Committee decided to hold a general debate on all disarmament and international security items allocated to it, namely, items 63 to 79, which was held at the 3rd to 12th meetings, from 12 to 16 and from 19 to 21 October (see A/C.1/53/PV.3–12). Thematic discussions on the items were held, and draft resolutions were introduced and considered, at the 14th to 21st meetings, on 23 and from 27 to 30 October and on 2 November (see A/C.1/53/PV.14–21). Action on all draft resolutions was taken at the 22nd to 31st meetings, from 3 to 6 and on 9, 10, 12 and 13 November (see A/C.1/53/PV.22–31). A/53/586 4. For its consideration of the item, the First Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Conference on Disarmament; Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27). (b) Report of the Disarmament Commission; Ibid., Supplement No. 42 (A/53/42). (c) Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters (A/53/222); (d) Note by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (A/53/187). II. Consideration of proposals A. Draft resolution A/C.1/53/L.1 5. At the 18th meeting, on 29 October, the representative of Belarus, on behalf of Algeria, Belarus, Croatia, Ecuador, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Luxembourg, Peru, South Africa, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic and Uganda, subsequently joined by Fiji, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Report of the Disarmament Commission” (A/C.1/53/L.1). 6. At its 24th meeting, on 5 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/53/L.1 without a vote (see para. 10, draft resolution A). B. Draft resolution A/C.1/53/L.12 and Rev.1 7. At the 20th meeting, on 30 October, the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland introduced a draft resolution entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament” (A/C.1/53/L.12), which read: “The General Assembly, “Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27). “Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community, has the primary role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament, “Considering, in this respect, that the present international climate should give additional impetus to multilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching concrete agreements, “Recognizing that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of urgent and important issues for negotiations, “1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community; “2. Welcomes the determination of the Conference on Disarmament to fulfil that role in the light of the evolving international situation, with a view to making early substantive progress on priority items of its agenda; “3. Also welcomes the decisions of the Conference on Disarmament to establish an Ad Hoc Committee under agenda item 4 entitled ‘Effective International Arrangements to Assure Non-Nuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use of Nuclear Weapons’, to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, which could take the form of an internationally legally binding instrument, as well as an Ad Hoc Committee under item 1 of its agenda entitled ‘Cessation of the Nuclear Arms Race and Nuclear Disarmament’, to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator (CD/1299) and the mandate contained therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; “4. Further welcomes the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to entrust its successive Presidents with the task of pursuing intensive consultations and seeking the views of its members on appropriate methods and approaches for dealing with agenda item 1 entitled ‘Cessation of a nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament’, and encourages the Conference to resume these consultations at the start of its 1999 session; “5. Notes with satisfaction the desire of the Conference on Disarmament to promote substantive progress during its 1999 session, and expresses the hope that appropriate consultations during the inter-sessional period could lead to commencement of early work on other agenda items; “6. Encourages the Conference on Disarmament to intensify its consultations on the review of its membership with a view to reaching an early agreement on its further expansion; “7. Also encourages the Conference on Disarmament to intensify further the ongoing review of its agenda and methods of work; “8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the provision to the Conference on Disarmament of adequate administrative, substantive and conference support services; “9. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session; “10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled ‘Report of the Conference on Disarmament’.” 8. At the 27th meeting, on 10 November, the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland introduced a revised draft resolution entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament” (A/C.1/53/L.12/Rev.1). 9. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted revised draft resolution A/C.1/53/L.12/Rev.1 without a vote (see para. 10, draft resolution B). III. Recommendations of the First Committee 10. The First Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolutions: A Report of the Disarmament Commission The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Disarmament Commission, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/53/42). Recalling its resolutions 47/54 A of 9 December 1992, 47/54 G of 8 April 1993, 48/77 A of 16 December 1993, 49/77 A of 15 December 1994, 50/72 D of 12 December 1995, 51/47 B of 10 December 1996 and 52/40 B of 9 December 1997, Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called upon to play and the contribution that it should make in examining and submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and in the promotion of the implementation of the relevant decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session, 1. Takes note of the report of the Disarmament Commission;4 2. Reaffirms the importance of further enhancing the dialogue and cooperation among the First Committee, the Disarmament Commission and the Conference on Disarmament; 3. Also reaffirms the role of the Disarmament Commission as the specialized, deliberative body within the United Nations multilateral disarmament machinery that allows for in-depth deliberations on specific disarmament issues, leading to the submission of concrete recommendations on those issues; 4. Commends the Disarmament Commission for the successful conclusion of the review of its work in accordance with General Assembly resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997 at the resumed session of the First Committee in June 1998, resulting in the adoption of Assembly decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998; 5. Encourages the Disarmament Commission to continue to make every effort to enhance its working methods so as to enable it to give focused consideration to a limited number of priority issues in the field of disarmament, bearing in mind the decision it has taken to move its agenda towards a two-item phased approach; 6. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, Resolution S-10/2. and with paragraph 3 of Assembly resolution 37/78 H of 9 December 1982, and to that end to make every effort to achieve specific recommendations on the items of its agenda, taking into account the adopted “Ways and means to enhance the functioning of the Disarmament Commission”; A/CN.10/137. 7. Recommends that the Disarmament Commission, at its 1998 organizational session, adopt the following items for consideration at its 1999 substantive session: (a) The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned; (b) Guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament, with particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of General Assembly resolution 51/45 N of 10 December 1996; (c) [To be considered]; 8. Requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for a period not exceeding three weeks during 1999 and to submit a substantive report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session; 9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Disarmament Commission the annual report of the Conference on Disarmament, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27). together with all the official records of the fifty-third session of the General Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that the Commission may require for implementing the present resolution; 10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure full provision to the Disarmament Commission and its subsidiary bodies of interpretation and translation facilities in the official languages and to assign, as a matter of priority, all the necessary resources and services, including verbatim records, to that end; 11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Report of the Disarmament Commission”. B Report of the Conference on Disarmament Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, Ibid. Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community, has the primary role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament, Considering, in this respect, that the present international climate should give additional impetus to multilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching concrete agreements, Recognizing that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of urgent and important issues for negotiations, 1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community; 2. Welcomes the determination of the Conference on Disarmament to fulfil that role in the light of the evolving international situation, with a view to making early substantive progress on priority items of its agenda; 3. Also welcomes the decisions of the Conference on Disarmament to establish an Ad Hoc Committee under item 4 of its agenda entitled “Effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons”, to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, which could take the form of an internationally legally binding instrument, as well as an Ad Hoc Committee under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator CD/1299. and the mandate contained therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and notes the recommendations that they be re-established at the beginning of the 1999 session; 4. Further welcomes the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to entrust its successive Presidents with the task of pursuing intensive consultations and seeking the views of its members on appropriate methods and approaches for dealing with item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of a nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, and notes the recommendation by the last President of the 1998 session that they should resume at the start of the 1999 session; 5. Notes with satisfaction the desire of the Conference on Disarmament to promote substantive progress during its 1999 session, and expresses the hope that appropriate consultations during the inter-sessional period could lead to commencement of early work on various agenda items; 6. Encourages the Conference on Disarmament to continue its consultations on the review of its membership with a view to reaching an early agreement on its further expansion; 7. Also encourages the Conference on Disarmament to intensify further the ongoing review of its agenda and methods of work; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the provision to the Conference on Disarmament of adequate administrative, substantive and conference support services; 9. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session; 10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament”. 