%%%SCHOLARSHIPS|NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE|FUNDS|TRAVEL COSTS|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|

United Nations A/53/604 General Assembly Distr.: General 26 October 1998 English Original: French Fifty-third session Agenda item 90 Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Rapporteur: Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué (Côte d’Ivoire) I. Introduction 1. At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 15 September 1998, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled “Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories” and to allocate it to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee). 2. At its 2nd meeting, on 17 September 1998, the Fourth Committee decided to hold a general debate covering agenda items 18, 87, 88, 89 and 12, and 90. The general debate on the items was held at the 3rd to 6th meetings, on 5, 7, 9, and 12 October (see A/C.4/53/SR.3–6). The Committee took action on item 90 at its 7th meeting, on 13 October (see A/C.4/53/SR.7). 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Secretary-General (A/53/262 and Add.1). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.4/53/L.3 4. At the 7th meeting, on 13 October, the Chairman drew attention to a draft resolution entitled “Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories” (A/C.4/53/L.3), sponsored by Algeria, Argentina, China, Cuba, Egypt, Ghana, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Singapore, Thailand and the United Republic of Tanzania. Subsequently, Jamaica, the Philippines and the Sudan joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 5. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.4/53/L.3 without a vote (see para. 6). III. Recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) 6. The Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 52/74 of 10 December 1997, Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, A/53/262 and Add.1. prepared pursuant to its resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954, Conscious of the importance of promoting the educational advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of offers of scholarships is essential in order to meet the increasing need of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories for educational and training assistance, and considering that students in those Territories should be encouraged to avail themselves of such offers, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1 2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories; 3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, wherever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students; 4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution; 6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution. 