%%%SOVEREIGNTY|INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|INTERNAL SECURITY|IRAQ|ELECTIONS|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|CONSTITUTIONS|REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT|CAPACITY BUILDING|INSTITUTION BUILDING|TERRORISM|CONFERENCES|CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY|NEIGHBOURING STATES|GOOD NEIGHBOURLINESS|

Letter dated 23 July 2004 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit herewith the final statement of the Sixth Conference of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of States Neighbouring Iraq, which was held in Cairo on 21 July 2004 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would arrange for the statement to be distributed as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Amr Aboul Atta Chargé d'affaires a.i. and Deputy Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic and English] Final statement of the Sixth Conference of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of States Neighbouring Iraq Cairo, 21 July 2004 Upon the invitation of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the group of countries neighbouring Iraq, namely the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the State of Kuwait, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the Republic of Turkey and the Republic of Iraq and as well the Arab Republic of Egypt, and with the participation of the representative of the United Nations Secretary-General, held a meeting in Cairo, on the 4th of Gamadi El Akhar 1425, corresponding to 21 July 2004. In accordance with the consultations of the Ministers which recalled the conclusions of their previous meetings and related Security Council resolutions, they agreed to the following: The Ministers: 1. Welcome the transfer of authority to the sovereign Interim Government of Iraq and consider this a step towards the formation of an elected and fully democratic representative government in Iraq enabling the people of Iraq to rule themselves and achieve full sovereignty and stability. 2. Reaffirm the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and national unity of Iraq, as well as compliance with the principle of non-interference in each other's internal affairs, good-neighbourly relations, stressing the right of the Iraqi people to freely determine their future and exercise full control over their natural and financial resources. 3. Welcome United Nations Security Council resolution 1546 (2004), which provides for the end of occupation, the formation of a sovereign interim Iraqi government that assumes authority, pending the election of the transitional government, which will assume the responsibility of governance in accordance with the timetable proposed for Iraq's political process. Also welcome the stipulation contained in Security Council resolution 1546 (2004) that the holding of direct democratic elections will in no case be later than 31 January 2005, to elect a transitional National Assembly, which will have responsibility to form a transitional government and draft a permanent constitution leading to a constitutionally elected Iraqi government by 31 December 2005. 4. Express support for the efforts of the Interim Government of Iraq to assume its political and security responsibilities, and strengthen the efforts of the Iraqi people to complete the political transition process. The Ministers also express support for the Iraqi efforts to reconstruct Iraq, and call upon the international community to support and to promote the appropriate conditions for the success and full realization of this effort. 5. Re-emphasize the importance of the support of the United Nations to the Iraqi people during the transition period, and its central role in the ensuing political process including the re-establishment of the governmental institutions, the preparation for holding elections and the drafting of the constitution. The Ministers also welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his special adviser in this context, and welcome the nomination of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 6. Stress that the mandate of the Multinational Forces in Iraq be terminated in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 12 of Security Council resolution 1546 (2004), or before in case the Iraqi Government should so request. Also affirm that the presence of these forces is subject to the approval of the Interim Government of Iraq and that these forces will act in accordance with international law, including the obligations under international humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions. 7. Express their concern for the continuing unstable security situation in Iraq and its negative impact on the success of the political process, and condemn all terrorist acts against civilians, governmental, humanitarian and religious institutions, as well as international organizations and diplomatic missions operating in Iraq. 8. Reaffirm the necessity of eliminating all terrorist and other armed groups present and emanating from Iraqi territory which constitute a danger to Iraq and neighbouring States. 9. Welcome the proposal by the Foreign Minister of Iraq to convene a meeting of the Interior Ministers and security officials of the neighbouring countries to address this issue. The Ministers welcome the invitation extended by the Islamic Republic of Iran to host such a meeting. 10. Condemn strongly the killing of Kuwaiti and Iranian prisoners of war and third-country nationals by the previous Iraqi regime; the Ministers also condemn the concealment of these crimes for over a decade by the previous Iraqi regime, which is considered a violation of international humanitarian law. They call for the necessity of bringing the perpetrators of these crimes against humanity to trial. 11. Call upon the Iraqi people to promote a process of national reconciliation as a basis for building Iraq's future. The Ministers reaffirm, in this regard, their desire to see Iraq at peace with itself and with its neighbours. 12. Welcome the recognition by the United Nations Security Council of the positive role of Iraqi neighbouring countries, and encourage the initiative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to develop a substantive dialogue between the neighbouring countries and members of the United Nations Security Council. 13. Affirm the importance of continuing the meetings of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Iraq's neighbouring countries and convene further meetings to discuss Iraq's developing situation. In this context, they welcome the invitation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to host the forthcoming meeting. 14. Express their appreciation to the Arab Republic of Egypt for hosting the conference. 