%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|ERITREA|SUDAN|INTERNAL SECURITY|DARFUR (SUDAN)|ARMS TRANSFERS|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|FINANCING|

Letter dated 10 August 2004 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to enclose herewith the letter dated 8 August 2004 from Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to the President of the Security Council concerning the incitement, support and training by Eritrea of the outlaws in the Darfur region (western Sudan) as part of Eritrea's continuous attempts to destabilize the Sudan and the ongoing peace process (see annex). In this regard I would like to refer you to the previous complaints of my Government against Eritrea addressed to the Security Council. I would highly appreciate it if you would circulate the present letter and its annex as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Omer B. Manis Chargé d'affaires a.i. [Original: Arabic] I wish to refer to our earlier letter dated 4 January 2004 concerning the Eritrean intervention in the Sudan to stir up dissent, provoke conflict and derail security and stability. The documents have included: 1. The latest communiqué issued by the Beja organization concerning its operation in eastern Sudan (issued at the Asmara office). 2. A joint military communiqué by the forces of the Beja Congress and the National Revolutionary Movement (liberation forces). In compliance with our duties and responsibilities, with our faith in the principles of collective security and in cooperation with the international family to resolve disputes by peaceful means, we wish to inform you once again of the persistence of the Eritrean regime in continuing its hostility to the Sudan in violation of the principles of good neighbourliness and of international laws and customs. As soon as the Government of the Sudan had signed the last three peace protocols with the popular movement, joy spread throughout the region, the continent and the world as a whole, apart from the State of Eritrea which was highly displeased that the wishes of the Sudan had been attained, through the good offices of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and with the generous support of the IGAD Partners Forum, putting an end to the longest civil war in the African continent. The position of the Eritrean Government concerning the war in south Sudan is a natural extension of its dealings with the other neighbours of Eritrea: it embarked on a war against Ethiopia and another against Yemen. In its insistence on continuing in the same path, Eritrea proceeded to adopt the outlaw groups in the Darfur region in western Sudan, occupied their encampments in Eritrean territory to train them, supply them with weapons and materiel, provide them with military and logistic facilities, place its information media at their disposal, grant diplomatic passports to their leaders and give them a headquarters from which to carry out their aggressive activities against the Sudan. The regime in Eritrea adopts this subversive attitude while the Government of the Sudan makes serious and sincere efforts to address the situation in the Darfur region which may be summarized as follows: - The Government sat down with the armed groups and signed with them the Abashi Agreement in September 2003. - The Government announced the end of major military operations and opened relief corridors. - The Government sat down with the armed groups at Injamina between 30 March and 9 April 2004 where the two sides signed a ceasefire with effect from 11 April 2004. The parties also signed the protocol on the flow of humanitarian assistance and affirmed that the dispute had been resolved by peaceful means. - On 7 April 2004, the President of the Republic set up a committee comprising the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Defence and Humanitarian Affairs to discuss the most effective means of controlling the armed and undisciplined groups, opening relief corridors and achieving security and stability in the region. - In order to ensure transparency and to inform the international community of the situation in Darfur, I made a visit on 8 April 2004 to the three provinces of Darfur accompanied by the ambassadors of the United States, France and the European Union, the directors of the United Nations offices in Khartoum, representatives of news agencies and the press, broadcasting organizations and television stations. - On 15 April 2004, the Government and the armed groups signed an agreement to establish a mechanism for the comprehensive peace and development conference in Darfur. - The United Nations sent a high-level delegation led by the Executive Director of the World Food Programme which visited the Sudan from 27 April to 2 May 2004 and studied the practical needs of the displaced persons in preparation for the establishment of the plans necessary for assisting them. The Government of the Sudan facilitated the grant of entry visas for those working in the field of humanitarian assistance. - On 7 May 2004 we received a working group comprising representatives of the headquarters of the African Union and of the United States and the European Union and discussions were held with them concerning the deployment of observers. The ceasefire was renewed for a period of 45 days from 25 May 2004. - On 8 May 2004, the President of the Republic issued Governmental decision No. 97/2004 creating a fact-finding committee concerning the allegations of breaches of human rights in Darfur. The committee was chaired by a national figure well known for his competence, impartiality and fairness, namely the former President of the Judiciary. The Committee convened a hearing in the capital with the members of Parliament for Darfur, and another with educators, activists and prominent individuals of Darfur, and it is now preparing to move to the provinces of Darfur and the republic of Chad to conclude its work. - On 28 May 2004, at the headquarters of the African Union in Addis Ababa, at a ceremony attended by representatives of the international community, the Chadian mediator and the news media, the Government and the armed groups signed an agreement on the establishment of a Ceasefire Commission and the deployment of observers. - On 4 July 2004, in Khartoum, the Government and the headquarters of the African Union signed the headquarters agreement of the Ceasefire Commission. An advance party of the Commission went to Khartoum and the city of Al-Fashir in the Darfur region and proceeded to set up the offices in preparation for the start of their work. - The Government deployed three fully equipped brigades of police in Darfur to safeguard the relief workers, the camps of the immigrants and vital installations. I am informing you, and through you the international community, of the efforts of the Government of Sudan to solve the problem in Darfur which is essentially a conflict between farmers and herdsmen over scarce natural resources. I confirm that the desire of the Sudan, which made possible the peace agreement in south Sudan after a war which had lasted five decades, will enable it to achieve a just settlement of the Darfur problem. However, that will require solidarity with the Sudan on the part of the international community. The Government of the Sudan, draws attention to the danger of the hostile conduct of the Eritrean regime which has derailed security and stability in the Sudan, and has resulted in the displacement of its citizens from their villages some of whom have taken refuge in neighbouring countries. All this has had an adverse impact on the region as a whole. The Government therefore calls on you to take the appropriate measures in compliance with the responsibilities of the United Nations for ensuring international security and peace. (Signed) Mustafa Osman Ismail Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Sudan 