%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|INTERNAL SECURITY|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|WEAPONS SURRENDER|WEAPONS DESTRUCTION|WAR CRIMES|MILITARY PERSONNEL|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|ON-SITE INSPECTION|MINE CLEARANCE|ARREST|

Letter dated 17 August 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 13 August 2004, which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Letter dated 13 August 2004 from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the monthly report on SFOR operations for June 2004. I would appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council. (Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the Stabilization Force 1. This report covers the period from 1 to 30 June 2004. 2. As at 30 June 2004, the total strength of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) was 8,729, including 289 troops from non-NATO countries. In addition, there were 25 SFOR personnel posted in Croatia. 3. On 1 June 2004, SFOR multinational brigades were designated multinational task forces, in accordance with the restructuring of SFOR into a deterrent presence posture and associated downsizing of the forces engaged in the area of operations. 4. There was no change to the status of partner/non-NATO country contributions. Istanbul Summit decisions 5. At the Istanbul Summit on 28 June 2004, NATO allies agreed to bring the SFOR mission to a successful conclusion by the end of the year. The leaders also welcomed the readiness of the European Union to deploy a new and distinct United Nations-mandated Chapter VII mission in the country, based on the Berlin plus arrangements agreed between NATO and the European Union. NATO leaders also agreed to establish a NATO headquarters at Sarajevo, with the principal task of providing advice on defence reform, and which will also undertake certain operational supporting tasks, such as counter-terrorism, while ensuring force protection; supporting the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, within means and capabilities, with regard to the detention of persons indicted for war crimes; and intelligence sharing with the European Union. The Secretary-General of NATO and the High Representative of the European Union for the Common Foreign and Security Policy met bilaterally to discuss the arrangements for implementing these decisions. 6. Although Bosnia and Herzegovina was extended an invitation to the Istanbul Summit as an observer and attended the Euro-Atlantic Partnership council events in that capacity, the country was not offered membership in the Alliance's Partnership for Peace, on account of the insufficient cooperation with the International Tribunal due in particular to obstructionist elements in the Republika Srpska. Security 7. During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina remained stable and no serious incidents were reported. 8. There were no significant acts of violence directed against SFOR personnel during the reporting period. Operational activities of SFOR 9. SFOR remained engaged in weapons collection and destruction and framework operations. 10. The results of weapons turned in or collected during the reporting period within the framework of Operation Harvest are as follows: rifles, pistols and revolvers: 527; ammunition less than 20 mm: 52,182 rounds; ammunition between 20 mm and 76 mm: 35 rounds; ammunition more than 76 mm: 6 rounds; hand grenades: 1,185; mines: 101; explosives 37.45 kg; other items including mortars, mortar rounds, rifle grenades, handmade ordnance, rockets etc: 859. 11. In order to support the reduction of unserviceable and obsolete entity armed forces ammunition and reduce ammunition quantities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, SFOR has continued to conduct Operation Armadillo II. As at 30 June 2004, the total amount of ammunition of the Republika Srpska Army (VRS) destroyed was 1,585 tons. 12. In mid-June 2004, SFOR, in cooperation with the local police, began a Harvest operation in Bjeljina. SFOR and local police confiscated 74 pieces of light infantry weapons, 12,000 rounds of ammunition, 12 kg of explosives, 43 hand grenades, 1 anti-tank missile, 2 mines and 40 rifle grenades. 13. On 23 June 2004, the Republika Srpska Director of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Special Police (MUP) reported that they had found 100 bodies wrapped in plastic in two locations, a coke plant in Tuzla and a soda plant in Lukavac. On the same day, SFOR troops searched the two plants and discovered nothing. 14. On 14 June 2004, SFOR conducted an operation which was aimed at transferring custody of a former speaker of the Srpska Sarajevo Assembly, Bosnian-Serb Milovan Cicko Bjelica, apprehended outside a café in Sokolac, to the Sokolac area Republika Srpska MUP. 15. On 16 June 2004, SFOR conducted an unannounced inspection of the Banja Luka telecommunications building and the Republika Srpska MUP headquarters. Results are forthcoming. 16. On 25 June 2004, SFOR conducted a document exploitation operation in Pale. The operation was conducted mainly in the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) executive building, the old SDS executive building, the Hotel Panorama, Liljana's Chalet and all the support buildings, to locate, seize and exploit documentation leading to the capture of Radovan Karadzic and to locate and exploit possible communication nodes associated with support to persons indicted for war crimes. 17. On 29 May 2004, detention teams from SFOR detained Jovo Simkic and Nikola Stjepanovic in their homes in Modriva. The two former VRS members were placed in custody for questioning in reference to six SA7 grip stocks found in their possession during a Harvest operation. On 19 June 2004, Nikola Stjepanovic was released by SFOR. 18. On 2 June 2004, in the town of Modrica, retired VRS Colonel Petar Milosevic was taken into custody by SFOR on suspicion of weapons smuggling. 19. On 1 June 2004, SFOR forwarded the results of the vetting process for general officer posts in the new combined armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the President's Office, and to the Bosnia and Herzegovina and Federation Defence Ministries. 20. On 9 June 2004, the Chairman of the Tri-Presidency, Sulejman Tihic, declared the candidates for the posts of generals in the joint institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Compliance by the parties 21. On 1 June 2004, in accordance with defence reforms, Republika Srpska adopted a new organizational structure for the military, controlled by a civilian-led Ministry of Defence. The new organization includes three combat-ready brigades, robust reserve components, training and logistics commands, and air and air defence assets. The proposed reorganization will reflect the smaller numbers of forces, leaving the division as the highest command reporting to the entity organizational Chief of Staff. 22. During the reporting period, entity armed forces have carried out normal training activities in compliance with the military provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement. 23. There were a total of 261 entity armed forces training and operational activities (92 Republika Srpska Army and 169 Federation Army) and 216 movements (72 Republika Srpska Army and 144 Federation Army) conducted during the reporting period. 24. The summer demining cycle is now in full swing, with four demining cycles already completed this year. The weather has enabled most tasks to start as planned and the work is going well. The two components of the Federation Army have been fully compliant during the reporting period. The Republika Srpska Army still does not have the correct number of demining teams as per the instructions to the parties and a number of letters have been sent to VRS in relation to this issue. 25. There were a total of 47 weapons/ammunitions storage site inspections during the reporting period, 16 Republika Srpska Army and 31 Federation Army. One site was closed in May and another seven are pending closure. 