%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|MILITARY PERSONNEL|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|

Letter dated 3 September 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to refer to my third special report on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) dated 16 August 2004 (S/2004/650), which was considered by the Security Council during its informal consultations on 25 August 2004. I am pleased to note that the Council members generally shared my analysis of the political situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and that they recognized the need to enhance the involvement of the United Nations in the peace process in that country. As the members of the Security Council and the troop-contributing countries are aware, I am extremely concerned about the volatile security environment prevailing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the crisis that erupted in Bukavu in May/June, and the massacre of Congolese Banyamulenge refugees in Gatumba, Burundi, on 13 August. The possibility of a further deterioration cannot be ruled out, given the speed with which events are unfolding. Pending the Security Council's decision on the recommendations contained in my third special report, I should like to propose that the Council consider taking an urgent decision to deploy emergency reinforcements to MONUC. Such reinforcements would consist of two additional infantry battalions and four attack helicopters. I feel that the Council's speedy action in this regard would help to demonstrate its continuing commitment to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It would also provide MONUC with the necessary capability to address immediate security concerns. However, these additional assets cannot meet the long-term requirement of reinforcing MONUC, pursuant to the plans outlined in my third special report. I therefore wish to stress that the proposed interim deployment should be without prejudice to the consideration of the future expansion of MONUC by the Council. I continue to believe that such an expansion would be the best way to support the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially as it enters the critical electoral period, and to reinforce the stability of the region as a whole. I should be grateful if you would bring this request to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan 