%%%WORK ORGANIZATION|MEMBERS|RECOMMENDATIONS|DIPLOMATIC VEHICLES|HOST COUNTRY RELATIONS|PERMANENT MISSIONS|TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS|HEALTH INSURANCE|AUTOMOBILE PARKING|

United Nations A/53/633 General Assembly Distr.: General 25 November 1998 Original: English Fifty-third session Agenda item 152 Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Rytis Paulauskas (Lithuania) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country” was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-third session of the General Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 52/159 of 15 December 1997. 2. At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 15 September 1998, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 33rd meeting, on 17 November 1998. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee’s consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.6/53/SR.33). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country. Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/53/26). 5. At the 33rd meeting, on 17 November, the Chairman of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country introduced the report of the Committee (see A/C.6/53/SR.33). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/53/L.13 6. At the 33rd meeting, on 17 November, the representative of Cyprus, on behalf of Bulgaria, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, France, Honduras, Malaysia, Senegal, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country” (A/C.6/53/L.13). 7. The representative of Cuba made a statement in explanation of position before the adoption of the draft resolution (see A/C.6/53/SR.33). 8. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/53/L.13 without a vote (see para. 9). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 9. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, Ibid. Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, Resolution 22 A (I). the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, See resolution 169 (II). and the responsibilities of the host country, Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel, Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has guided the deliberations of the Committee on issues affecting the United Nations community and the host country, Taking into account the increase in the profound interest and concern of many Member States in the work of the Committee, Noting that the Committee reviewed, in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly resolution 52/159 of 15 December 1997, its membership and composition with the full participation of observers, 1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 50 of its report;2 2. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that its membership be increased by four members, including one each from African, Asian, Latin American and Caribbean and Eastern European States, to be chosen by the President of the General Assembly in accordance with resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, in consultation with the regional groups; 3. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the functioning of missions; A/53/633 4. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law; 5. Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously imposed by the host country on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect, and requests the host country to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country; 6. Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem relating to the parking of diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and non-discriminatory way, with a view to responding to the growing needs of the diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this important issue; 7. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at identifying affordable health-care programmes for the diplomatic community; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country; 9. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI); 10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”. 