%%%POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|PEACEBUILDING|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|LEGISLATIVE BODIES|GENDER MAINSTREAMING|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|DISARMAMENT|MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION|EMERGENCY RELIEF|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 5064th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 October 2004, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "1. The Security Council reaffirms its previous resolutions and the statements of its President concerning the situation in Somalia, in particular resolution 1558 (2004) of 17 August 2004 and the statement by its President (S/PRST/2004/24) dated 14 July 2004. "2. The Security Council reiterates its commitment to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. "3. The Security Council commends the recent progress made at the Somali national reconciliation conference in Nairobi, including the establishment of the Transitional Federal Parliament of Somalia and the subsequent election of the Speaker of the Parliament and Transitional President, which are important steps towards the re-establishment of peace and stability in Somalia. "4. The Security Council, underscoring the importance of consolidating the gains made so far, looks forward to the formation, in the near future, of a Transitional Federal Government inside Somalia, capable of beginning reconciliation and reconstruction in a spirit of consensus and dialogue with all the Somali parties. "5. The Security Council, in this regard, encourages the Transitional Federal Parliament and the President to take further steps to select a Prime Minister and an efficient and effective Cabinet, and to develop a preliminary programme of action and timetable for the transitional period. The Council urges the transitional federal institutions to involve women fully in postconflict reconciliation and reconstruction. The Council also notes the ongoing discussion to outline possible coordination mechanisms between the transitional federal government and the international community. "6. The Security Council commends member States of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), in particular the Government of Kenya, as well as other countries and organizations for constructively supporting the Somali national reconciliation process for the past two years, and encourages them to continue their efforts in support of the cause of peace in Somalia. "7. The Security Council welcomes and expresses its support for the commitment of the African Union to assist the transitional process in Somalia, in particular through planning for a Peace Support Mission to Somalia, including options for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and encourages the international donor community to contribute to these efforts. "8. The Security Council further welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Political Office, the United Nations Country Team, the Somalia Aid Coordination Body, the European Union, the IGAD Partners Forum, the League of Arab States and others engaged in developing a peace-building framework leading to the formation of a rapid assistance package and calls on the international community to support this package as well as emergency rehabilitation and economic development programmes as security returns to Somalia. "9. The Security Council shares the Secretary-General's assessment that, `at this stage of progress in the Somali peace process, there will likely be a call for an expanded peace-building role and presence for the United Nations, in order that it may assist the Somali parties in implementing their agreement. At the same time, it is clear that any enhanced role for the Organization in Somalia must be incremental, and should be based on the outcome of discussions with the new government.' The Security Council looks forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations in this regard. "10. The Security Council urges the Somali leaders to create a favourable environment for the future Transitional Federal Government by making determined efforts to bring about improvements in the security situation on the ground and reiterates that those who persist on the path of confrontation and conflict will be held accountable. The Council will continue to monitor the situation closely." 