%%%RULES AND REGULATIONS|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|

Secretary-General's bulletin Amendments to the 100 Series of the Staff Rules (ST/SGB/2002/1) The Secretary-General, pursuant to staff regulations 12.2, 12.3 and 12.4 and staff rule 112.2 (a), hereby promulgates the text of the amendments to the 100 Series of the Staff Rules promulgated in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2002/1. The text of the amendments is attached to the present bulletin. Section 1 Purpose 1.1 The text of the Staff Rules listed below is amended for the reasons set out below in relation to each rule: (a) Rule 103.20, Education grant, is amended to permit travel by the staff member or his or her spouse to visit the child when travel by the child from the educational institution to the duty station is not possible; (b) Rule 104.3, Re-employment, is amended to specify the entitlements that are subject to adjustment when a staff member receives a new appointment in the United Nations common system less than twelve months after separation, and to clarify the methodology to be applied for that purpose; (c) Rule 104.13, Permanent appointments, is amended to reflect the changes previously made in rule 104.14; (d) Rule 105.3, Home leave, is amended to ensure consistency with the changes previously made in rule 104.14; (e) Rule 110.4, Due process, is amended to specify that a staff member shall be notified in writing of the allegations against him or her and of the right to seek the assistance of counsel at his or her own expense; (f) Rule 111.2 (i), Appeals, is amended to specify that a staff member may arrange to have his or her appeal presented to the Joint Appeals Board by counsel at his or her own expense; (g) Rule 111.2 (l), Appeals, is amended to replace the reference to the former appointment and promotion bodies by a reference to the central review bodies established by rule 104.14. 1.2 Attached for insertion in the printed copy of ST/SGB/2002/1 are new pages containing the amendments to the Staff Rules and the changes in the Staff Regulations and their annexes, and in the appendices to the Staff Rules. Section 2 Final provisions 2.1 Unless otherwise indicated, the amendments introduced in the present bulletin shall enter into force on 1 January 2004. 2.2 The following bulletins are hereby abolished: - ST/SGB/2003/8, entitled "Amendments to staff rules 110.4 (a), 111.2 (i), 210.1 (b) and 310.1 (d), and - ST/SGB/2003/10, entitled "Amendment to paragraph 1 of annex I to the Staff Regulations". (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Secretary-General CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS Provisions relating to service of the staff Article 8 The United Nations shall place no restrictions on the eligibility of men and women to participate in any capacity and under conditions of equality in its principal and subsidiary organs. Article 97 The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary-General and such staff as the Organization may require. The Secretary-General shall be appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council. He shall be the chief administrative officer of the Organization. Article 100 1. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall not seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect on their position as international officials responsible only to the Organization. 2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities. Article 101 1. The staff shall be appointed by the Secretary-General under regulations established by the General Assembly. 2. Appropriate staff shall be permanently assigned to the Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, and, as required, to other organs of the United Nations. These staff shall form a part of the Secretariat. 3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. -v- 1. The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the fulfilment of its purposes. 2. Representatives of the Members of the United Nations and officials of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization. 3. The General Assembly may make recommendations with a view to determining the details of the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or may propose conventions to the Members of the United Nations for this purpose. The General Assembly established the Staff Regulations of the United Nations according to Article 101 of the Charter by resolution 590 (VI) of 2 February 1952 and amended them thereafter by resolutions 781 (VIII) and 782 (VIII) of 9 December 1953, resolution 882 (IX) of 14 December 1954, resolution 887 (IX) of 17 December 1954, resolution 974 (X) of 15 December 1955, resolution 1095 (XI) of 27 February 1957, resolutions 1225 (XII) and 1234 (XII) of 14 December 1957, resolution 1295 (XIII) of 5 December 1958, resolution 1658 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, resolution 1730 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, resolution 1929 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, resolution 2050 (XX) of 13 December 1965, resolution 2121 (XX) of 21 December 1965, resolution 2369 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, resolutions 2481 (XXIII) and 2485 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968, resolution 2742 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, resolution 2888 (XXVI) of 21 December 1971, resolution 2990 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, resolution 3008 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, resolution 3194 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, resolutions 3353 (XXIX) and 3358 B (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, resolution 31/141 B of 17 December 1976, resolution 32/200 and decision 32/450 B of 21 December 1977, resolution 33/119 of 19 December 1978, decision 33/433 of 20 December 1978, resolution 35/214 of 17 December 1980, decision 36/459 of 18 December 1981, resolution 37/126 of 17 December 1982, resolution 37/235 C of 21 December 1982, resolution 39/69 of 13 December 1984, resolutions 39/236 and 39/245 of 18 December 1984, decision 40/467 of 18 December 1985, resolutions 41/207 and 41/209 of 11 December 1986, resolutions 42/221 and 42/225 of 21 December 1987, resolution 43/226 of 21 December 1988, resolution 44/185 of 19 December 1989, resolution 44/198 of 21 December 1989, resolutions 45/241 and 45/251 of 21 December 1990, resolution 45/259 of 3 May 1991, resolution 46/191 of 20 December 1991, resolution 47/216 of 12 March 1993, resolution 47/226 of 30 April 1993, resolutions 48/224 and 48/225 of 23 December 1993, resolutions 49/222 and 49/223 of 23 December 1994, resolution 49/241 of 6 April 1995, resolution 51/216 of 18 December 1996, resolution 52/252 of 8 September 1998, resolution 53/209 of 18 December 1998, resolution 53/221 of 7 April 1999, resolution 54/238 and decision 54/460 of 23 December 1999, resolution 55/223 of 23 December 2000, resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, resolution 56/244 of 24 December 2001, resolution 57/285 of 20 December 2002, resolution 57/307 of 15 April 2003 and resolution 57/310 of 18 June 2003. -vi- 1 January 2004 =s education is interrupted for at least one school year by national service, illness or other compelling reasons, the period of eligibility shall be extended by the period of interruption. Amount of the grant (f) The amounts to which a staff member may be entitled under the grant are set out in appendix G to these Rules. (g) The amount of the grant to be paid when the staff member=s period of service or the child=s school attendance does not cover the full scholastic year shall be prorated under conditions defined by the Secretary-General. Travel (h) A staff member to whom an education grant is payable under paragraphs (i), (ii) or (iv) of appendix G in respect of the child=s attendance at an educational institution shall be entitled to travel expenses for the child of one return journey each scholastic year between the educational institution and the duty station, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. If travel to the duty station by the child is not possible, return travel by the staff member or spouse may be authorized in lieu of travel by the child, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. (i) Two return journeys may be paid for children of eligible staff serving at designated duty stations, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Tuition in the mother tongue (j) Tuition in the mother tongue under staff regulation 3.2(c) may be reimbursed subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General. Special education grant for disabled children (k) A special education grant for disabled children shall be available to staff members of all categories, whether or not serving in their home country, provided that they have an appointment of six months or longer or have completed six months of continuous service. The amounts to which a staff member is entitled under the grant are set out in appendix G to these Rules, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Claims (l) Claims for the education grant shall be made in accordance with conditions established by the Secretary-General. Rule 103.21 Salary and allowances during mission assignments (a) The Secretary-General may designate special mission assignments, including assignments for periods of one year or more, during which a mission subsistence allowance shall be authorized in lieu of the mobility and hardship allowance under rule 103.22, the assignment grant under rule 107.20 and any post adjustment to the area applicable under rule 103.7 (a). Where such a designation has been made, the mission subsistence allowance shall be payable to staff members -25- 1 January 2004 (b) The Secretary-General shall set the rates and conditions for the mission subsistence allowance payable on each such assignment. Eligible staff members who have a dependent spouse or one or more dependent children may be authorized to receive a higher rate of mission subsistence allowance than staff members not having such dependants. Where both husband and wife are staff members who are entitled to mission subsistence allowance, and taking into account rule 104.10 (d), the allowance will be paid to each at the single rate. If they have a dependent child or children, the allowance will be paid at the dependency rate to the spouse having the higher salary level and at the single rate to the other spouse. The allowance may be paid wholly or partially in the currency of the mission area or in the form of provision of food and/or lodging in kind. (c) The Secretary-General may pay a clothing allowance to staff members who are assigned to service with a mission in a tropical or arctic area. The United Nations shall provide uniforms and accessories, but no clothing allowance, to members of the Field Service who are required to wear them. Rule 103.22 Assignment allowance (Cancelled) Mobility and hardship allowance General provisions (a) As an incentive to mobility and to compensate for hardship and non-removal of personal effects and household goods, a non-pensionable allowance composed of three elements - mobility, hardship and non-removal - shall be payable to staff members at rates approved by the General Assembly, under conditions set out in this rule and supplemented by the Secretary-General. Staff in the Professional category and above and in the Field Service category, and internationally recruited staff in the General Service category, shall be eligible for payment of the allowance when they have been initially appointed under these Rules to a duty station, or reassigned to a new duty station, under conditions which normally involve payment of the assignment grant. Mobility element (c) The mobility element of the allowance shall be payable provided that: (i) The staff member is eligible under paragraph (b) above and has served in the United Nations common system for a period of five consecutive years; and (ii) The staff member is assigned to a second or subsequent duty station. However, in the case of staff serving at headquarters duty stations or other duty stations classified in the same category for the purpose of this rule, three previous assignments shall be required, of which at least two must have been at duty stations classified at hardship levels established by the Secretary-General. APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION Regulation 4.1: As stated in Article 101 of the Charter, the power of appointment of staff members rests with the Secretary-General. Upon appointment, each staff member, including a staff member on secondment from government service, shall receive a letter of appointment in accordance with the provisions of annex II to the present Regulations and signed by the Secretary-General or by an official in the name of the Secretary-General. Regulation 4.2: The paramount consideration in the appointment, transfer or promotion of the staff shall be the necessity for securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. Regulation 4.3: In accordance with the principles of the Charter, selection of staff members shall be made without distinction as to race, sex or religion. So far as practicable, selection shall be made on a competitive basis. Regulation 4.4: Subject to the provisions of Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter, and without prejudice to the recruitment of fresh talent at all levels, the fullest regard shall be had, in filling vacancies, to the requisite qualifications and experience of persons already in the service of the United Nations. This consideration shall also apply, on a reciprocal basis, to the specialized agencies brought into relationship with the United Nations. The Secretary-General may limit eligibility to apply for vacant posts to be filled by staff members appointed for one year or longer under the 100 series of the Staff Rules to internal candidates, as defined by the Secretary-General. If so, other candidates shall be allowed to apply, under conditions to be defined by the Secretary-General, when no internal candidate meets the requirements of Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter as well as the requirements of the post. Regulation 4.5: (a) Appointment of Under-Secretaries-General and of Assistant Secretaries-General shall normally be for a period of five years, subject to prolongation or renewal. Other staff members shall be granted either permanent or temporary appointments under such terms and conditions consistent with the present Regulations as the Secretary-General may prescribe; (b) The Secretary-General shall prescribe which staff members are eligible for permanent appointments. The probationary period for granting or confirming a permanent appointment shall normally not exceed two years, provided that in individual cases the Secretary-General may extend the probationary period for not more than one additional year. Regulation 4.6: The Secretary-General shall establish appropriate medical standards that staff members shall be required to meet before appointment. Rule 104.1 Letter of appointment The letter of appointment granted to every staff member contains expressly or by reference all the terms and conditions of employment. All contractual entitlements of staff members are strictly limited to those contained expressly or by reference in their letters of appointment. Rule 104.2 Effective date of appointment (a) The appointment of every locally recruited staff member shall take effect from the date on which the staff member starts to perform his or her duties. (b) The appointment of every staff member internationally recruited shall take effect from the date on which the staff member enters into official travel status to assume his or her duties or, if no official travel is involved, from the date on which the staff member starts to perform his or her duties. Rule 104.3 Re-employment (a) A former staff member who is re-employed shall be given a new appointment or, if re-employed within twelve months of separation from service or a longer period following retirement or disability under the Joint Staff Pension Fund Regulations, he or she may be reinstated in accordance with paragraph (c) below. (b) If the former staff member is reinstated, it shall be so stipulated in his or her letter of appointment. If he or she is given a new appointment, its terms shall be fully applicable without regard to any period of former service, except as provided below: (i) Former service may be considered when establishing the level on recruitment and the record of mobility of the staff member; and (ii) When a staff member receives a new appointment in the United Nations common system less than twelve months after separation, the amount of any payment on account of termination indemnity, repatriation grant or commutation of accrued annual leave shall be adjusted so that the number of months, weeks or days of salary to be paid at the time of the separation after the new appointment, when added to the number of months, weeks or days paid for prior periods of service, does not exceed the total of months, weeks or days that would have been paid had the service been continuous. -30- 1 January 2004 (c) On reinstatement the staff member's services shall be considered as having been continuous, and the staff member shall return to the United Nations any moneys he or she received on account of separation, including termination indemnity under rule 109.4, repatriation grant under rule 109.5 and payment for accrued annual leave under rule 109.8. The interval between separation and reinstatement shall be charged, to the extent possible and necessary, to annual leave, with any further period charged to special leave without pay. The staff member's sick leave credit under rule 106.2 at the time of separation shall be re-established; the staff member's participation, if any, in the Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be governed by the Regulations of that Fund. Rule 104.4 Notification by staff members and obligation to supply information (a) Staff members shall be responsible on appointment for supplying the Secretary-General with whatever information may be required for the purpose of determining their status under the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules or of completing administrative arrangements in connection with their appointments. (b) Staff members shall also be responsible for promptly notifying the Secretary-General, in writing, of any subsequent changes affecting their status under the Staff Regulations or Staff Rules. (c) A staff member who intends to acquire permanent residence status in any country other than that of his or her nationality or who intends to change his or her nationality shall notify the Secretary-General of that intention before the change in residence status or in nationality becomes final. (d) A staff member who is arrested, charged with an offence other than a minor traffic violation or summoned before a court as a defendant in a criminal proceeding, or convicted, fined or imprisoned for any offence other than a minor traffic violation shall immediately report the fact to the Secretary-General. (e) A staff member may at any time be required by the Secretary-General to supply information concerning facts anterior to his or her appointment and relevant to his or her suitability, or concerning facts relevant to his or her integrity, conduct and service as a staff member. Rule 104.5 Geographical distribution Recruitment on as wide a geographical basis as possible, in accordance with the requirements of staff regulation 4.2, shall not apply to posts in the General Service category or in similar salary levels. -31- 1 January 2004 Local recruitment (a) The conditions under which staff members shall be regarded as local recruits for the purposes of these Rules at each duty station, including missions, are set forth in appendix B to these Rules applicable to the duty station. (b) A staff member regarded as having been locally recruited shall not be eligible for the allowances or benefits indicated under rule 104.7. Rule 104.7 International recruitment (a) Staff members other than those regarded under rule 104.6 as having been locally recruited shall be considered as having been internationally recruited. The allowances and benefits in general available to internationally recruited staff members include: payment of travel expenses upon initial appointment and on separation for themselves and their spouses and dependent children, removal of household effects, nonresident's allowance, home leave, education grant and repatriation grant. (b) Members of the Field Service and staff members recruited specifically for mission service shall not be eligible for nonresident's allowance or removal of household effects. (c) A staff member who has changed his or her residential status in such a way that he or she may, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, be deemed to be a permanent resident of any country other than that of his or her nationality may lose entitlement to nonresident's allowance, home leave, education grant, repatriation grant and payment of travel expenses upon separation for the staff member and his or her spouse and dependent children and removal of household effects, based upon place of home leave, if the Secretary-General considers that the continuation of such entitlement would be contrary to the purposes for which the allowance or benefit was created. Conditions governing entitlement to international benefits in the light of residential status are shown in appendix B to these Rules applicable to the duty station. Rule 104.8 Nationality (a) In the application of Staff Regulations and Staff Rules, the United Nations shall not recognize more than one nationality for each staff member. (b) When a staff member has been legally accorded nationality status by more than one State, the staff member's nationality for the purposes of the Staff Regulations and these Rules shall be the nationality of the State with which the staff member is, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, most closely associated. Rule 104.9 -32- 1 January 2004 Rule 104.10 Family relationships (a) Except where another person equally well qualified cannot be recruited, appointment shall not be granted to a person who bears any of the following relationships to a staff member: father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister. (b) The husband or wife of a staff member may be appointed provided that he or she is fully qualified for the post for which he or she is being considered and that the spouse is not given any preference by virtue of the relationship to the staff member. (c) A staff member who bears to another staff member any of the relationships specified in (a) and (b) above: (i) Shall not be assigned to serve in a post which is superior or subordinate in the line of authority to the staff member to whom he or she is related; (ii) Shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in the process of reaching or reviewing an administrative decision affecting the status or entitlements of the staff member to whom he or she is related. (d) The marriage of one staff member to another shall not affect the contractual status of either spouse, but their entitlements and other benefits shall be modified as provided in the relevant Staff Regulations and Rules. The same modifications shall apply in the case of a staff member whose spouse is a staff member of another organization participating in the United Nations common system. Where both husband and wife are staff members and maintain separate households because they are assigned to different duty stations, the Secretary-General may decide to maintain such separate entitlements and benefits, provided that this is not inconsistent with any staff regulation or other decision of the General Assembly. Rule 104.11 Internal candidates and internal vacancies For the purpose of staff regulation 4.4, the expression "internal candidates" means staff members previously recruited under rules 104.14 and 104.15. Vacancies for which eligibility to apply is restricted to such internal candidates shall be referred to as "internal vacancies". The conditions under which persons other than internal candidates may apply for vacancies shall be defined by the Secretary-General. Rule 104.12 Temporary appointments On recruitment, staff members may be granted one of the following types of temporary appointments: probationary appointment, fixed-term appointment or indefinite appointment. (a) Probationary appointment (i) The probationary appointment may be granted to persons under the age of fifty years who are recruited for career service. The period of probationary service -33- 1 January 2004 under such an appointment shall normally be two years. In exceptional circumstances, it may be reduced or extended for not more than one additional year. At the end of the probationary service, the holder of a probationary appointment shall either be granted a permanent appointment or be separated from service. The probationary appointment shall have no specific expiration date and shall be governed by the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules applicable to temporary appointments which are not for a fixed term. (ii) Without prejudice to the provisions of subparagraph (b) (ii) below, the SecretaryGeneral may, in appropriate cases, reduce or waive the required period of probationary service following an equivalent period of continuous service on a fixedterm appointment. (b) Fixedterm appointment (i) The fixedterm appointment, having an expiration date specified in the letter of appointment, may be granted for a period not exceeding five years to persons recruited for service of a prescribed duration, including persons temporarily seconded by national Governments or institutions for service with the United Nations; (ii) The fixedterm appointment does not carry any expectancy of renewal or of conversion to any other type of appointment; (iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (ii) above, upon completion of five years of continuous service on fixedterm appointments, a staff member who has fully met the criteria of staff regulation 4.2 and who is under the age of fiftythree years will be given every reasonable consideration for a permanent appointment, taking into account all the interests of the Organization. (c) Indefinite appointment The indefinite appointment may be granted to: (i) Persons specifically recruited for mission service who are not granted a fixedterm or regular appointment; (ii) Persons specifically recruited for service with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees or any other agency or office of the United Nations as may be designated by the SecretaryGeneral. The indefinite appointment does not carry any expectancy of conversion to any other type of appointment. The indefinite appointment shall have no specific expiration date and, except as provided in staff rule 106.2 (b) (iii), shall be governed by the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules applicable to temporary appointments which are not for a fixed term. -34- 1 January 2004 Permanent appointments (a) The permanent appointment may be granted, in accordance with the needs of the Organization, to staff members who, by their qualifications, performance and conduct, have fully demonstrated their suitability as international civil servants and have shown that they meet the high standards of efficiency, competence and integrity established in the Charter, provided that: They have completed the period of probationary service required by rule 104.12 (a) (i); The period of probationary service has been waived in accordance with rule 104.12 (a) (ii); or (iii) They have completed five years of continuous service under fixedterm appointments and have been favourably considered under the terms of rule 104.12 (b) (iii). (b) Recommendations proposing the grant of permanent appointments on the ground that a staff member whose probationary period has been either completed or waived under the terms of rule 104.12 (a) (ii) or (b) (iii) has met the requirements of this rule may be made to the SecretaryGeneral on the joint recommendation of the department or office concerned and the Office of Human Resources Management or the local personnel office. Such recommendations shall be reported to the appropriate central review body before submission to the Secretary-General. (c) Permanent appointments limited to service with one of the programmes, funds or subsidiary organs referred to in rule 104.14 (b) may be granted by its corresponding heads with the assistance of such boards as may be established in accordance with the provisions of the last sentence of rule 104.14 (b). Rule 104.14 Central review bodies Establishment (a) Central review bodies shall be established by the Secretary-General as follows: A Central Review Board at Headquarters and at designated duty stations to give advice on the appointment at and the promotion of staff to the P-5 and D-1 levels; A Central Review Committee at Headquarters and at designated duty stations to give advice on the appointment, promotion and review of staff in the Professional category up to the P-4 level, except that advice on the appointment of candidates having successfully passed a competitive examination shall be given by Boards of Examiners, in accordance with rule 104.15; A Central Review Panel at Headquarters and at designated duty stations to give advice on the appointment, promotion and review of staff in the General -35- 1 January 2004 Subsidiary panels may be established as necessary. (b) Executive heads of programmes, funds and subsidiary organs of the United Nations to whom the Secretary-General has delegated appointment and promotion functions may establish advisory bodies to advise them in the case of staff members recruited specifically for service with those programmes, funds or subsidiary organs. The composition and functions of such advisory bodies shall be generally similar to those of the central review bodies established by the Secretary-General. Membership of the Central Review Board (c) Each Central Review Board shall be composed of staff members at the D-1 level and above, as follows: Three members and an appropriate number of alternates, selected by the Secretary-General; Three members and as many alternates as those appointed under subparagraph (i), who shall be selected by the appropriate staff representative body; One additional member, with voting rights, selected jointly by the members selected by the Secretary-General and the members selected by the staff; The Assistant Secretary-General for Human Resources Management, or an authorized representative, as an ex officio non-voting member. (d) Members and alternates shall be appointed for a period of two years and shall serve for a maximum of four years. (e) Each Central Review Board shall elect its own chairperson and establish its own procedures. Membership of Central Review Committees (f) Each Central Review Committee shall be composed in a manner similar to that of the Central Review Board, except that its members shall be at the P-4 level and above. The ex officio non-voting member at offices away from Headquarters shall be designated by the head of the office concerned. Membership of Central Review Panels and subsidiary panels (g) Each Central Review Panel shall be composed in a manner similar to that of the Central Review Board, except that its members shall be composed of staff members in the Professional category or staff in the General Service and related categories whose rank is not below that of the level of the post to which appointment or promotion is contemplated. The ex officio non-voting member at offices away from Headquarters shall be designated by the head of the office concerned. -36- 1 January 2004 Functions of the central review bodies (h) Appointment and promotion (i) The central review bodies shall advise the Secretary-General on all appointments of one year or longer and on the promotion of staff after such appointment, except in the following cases: a. Appointment of persons recruited specifically for service with a mission; b. Appointment of candidates having successfully passed a competitive examination, in accordance with rule 104.15; c. Appointment at the entry level or promotion within the General Service and related categories of candidates having successfully passed an entrance test or examination, under conditions defined by the Secretary-General; (ii) The central review bodies shall review the process for compliance with the pre-approved selection criteria and shall offer recommendations. Where these recommendations are not in line with those of the relevant manager, they shall transmit their recommendations for final decision to the Secretary-General, who shall give due consideration to the recommendations of the central review bodies. (i) Review (i) The central review bodies shall review the suitability for permanent appointment of staff members holding a probationary appointment to ensure that they have fully demonstrated their suitability as international civil servants and have shown that they meet the high standards of efficiency, competence and integrity established in the Charter of the United Nations. The central review bodies may recommend conversion to permanent appointment, extension of the probationary period for one additional year or separation from service; (ii) The central review bodies shall also review proposals for the termination of permanent appointments for unsatisfactory service under staff regulation 9.1 (a). Rule 104.15 Competitive examinations (a) Boards of Examiners established by the Secretary-General shall ensure the regularity of the competitive examinations administered in accordance with conditions established by the Secretary-General. (b) Boards of Examiners shall make recommendations to the Secretary-General in respect of the following: (i) Appointment Appointment to P-1 and P-2 posts and to posts requiring special language competence shall be made exclusively through competitive examination. Appointment to posts at the P3 level shall be made normally through competitive examination; -37- 1 January 2004 (ii) Recruitment to the Professional category of staff from the General Service and related categories Recruitment to the Professional category of staff from the General Service and related categories having successfully passed the appropriate competitive examinations shall be made within the limits established by the General Assembly. Such recruitment shall be made exclusively through competitive examination. (c) Staff members appointed to the Professional level after a competitive examination shall be subject to mandatory reassignment, under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Rule 104.16 Medical examination (a) Staff members may be required from time to time to satisfy the United Nations Medical Officer, by medical examination, that they are free from any ailment likely to impair the health of others. (b) Staff members may also be required to undergo such medical examinations and receive such inoculations as may be required by the United Nations Medical Officer before they go on or after they return from mission service. -38- 1 January 2004 a. A country other than the country of nationality as the home country, for the purposes of this rule. A staff member requesting such authorization will be required to satisfy the Secretary-General that the staff member maintained normal residence in such other country for a prolonged period preceding his or her appointment, that the staff member continues to have close family and personal ties in that country and that the staff member's taking home leave there would not be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of staff regulation 5.3. b. Travel in a particular home leave year to a country other than the home country, subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General. In such a case, the travel expenses borne by the United Nations shall not exceed the cost of travel to the home country. (e) (i) Except in the case of staff members serving on probationary appointment, a staff member's first home leave shall fall due in the calendar year in which the staff member completes two years of qualifying service. A staff member appointed on probationary basis shall not be entitled to the first home leave until he or she has been granted a permanent appointment or an extension of probationary period; however, if the Secretary-General considers that it will not be possible for such a decision to be made within six months after completion of two years' service, he or she may be granted home leave subject to the other conditions of this rule. (ii) Home leave may be taken, subject to the exigencies of the service and to the provisions in subparagraph (i) above in respect of probationary appointment, any time during the calendar year in which it falls due. (f) In exceptional circumstances, a staff member may be granted advanced home leave, provided that normally not less than twelve months of qualifying service have been completed or that normally not less than twelve months of qualifying service have elapsed since the date of return from his or her last home leave. The granting of advanced home leave shall not advance the calendar year in which the next home leave falls due. The granting of advanced home leave shall be subject to the conditions for the entitlement being subsequently met. If these conditions are not met, the staff member will be required to reimburse the costs paid by the Organization for the advanced travel. (g) If a staff member delays taking his or her home leave beyond the calendar year in which it falls due, such delayed leave may be taken without altering the time of his or her next and succeeding home leave entitlements, provided that normally not less than twelve months of qualifying service elapse between the date of the staff member's return from the delayed home leave and the date of his or her next home leave departure. (h) A staff member may be required to take his or her home leave in conjunction with travel on official business or change of official duty station, due regard being paid to the interests of the staff member and his or her family. (i) Subject to the conditions specified in chapter VII of these Rules, a staff member shall be entitled to claim, in respect of authorized travel on home leave, travel time and expenses for himself or herself and eligible family members for the outward and return journeys between the official duty station and the place of home leave. -43- 1 January 2004 (j) Travel of eligible family members shall be in conjunction with the approved home leave of the staff member, provided that exceptions may be granted if the exigencies of the service or other special circumstances prevent the staff member and his or her family members from travelling together. (k) If both husband and wife are staff members who are eligible for home leave, and taking into account rule 104.10 (d), each staff member shall have the choice either of exercising his or her own home leave entitlement or of accompanying the spouse. A staff member who chooses to accompany his or her spouse shall be granted travel time appropriate to the travel involved. Dependent children whose parents are staff members, each of whom is entitled to home leave, may accompany either parent. The frequency of travel shall not exceed the established periodicity of the home leave both with regard to staff members and to their dependent children, if any. (l) A staff member travelling on home leave shall be required to spend no less than two calendar weeks, exclusive of travel time, in his or her home country. The Secretary-General may request a staff member, on his or her return from home leave, to furnish satisfactory evidence that this requirement has been fully met. (m) Under the terms and conditions established by the Secretary-General, eligible staff members serving at designated duty stations having very difficult conditions of life and work shall be granted home leave once in every twelve months. (viii) Summary dismissal. (b) The following measures shall not be considered to be disciplinary measures, within the meaning of this rule: (i) Reprimand, written or oral, by a supervisory official; (ii) Recovery of moneys owed to the Organization; (iii) Suspension pursuant to rule 110.2. Rule 110.4 Due process (a) No disciplinary proceedings may be instituted against a staff member unless he or she has been formally notified, in writing, of the allegations against him or her and of the right to seek the assistance of counsel in his or her defence at his or her own expense, and has been given a reasonable opportunity to respond to those allegations. (b) No staff member shall be subject to disciplinary measures until the matter has been referred to a Joint Disciplinary Committee for advice as to what measures, if any, are appropriate, except that no such advice shall be required: (i) If referral to the Joint Disciplinary Committee is waived by mutual agreement of the staff member concerned and the Secretary-General; (ii) In respect of summary dismissal imposed by the Secretary-General in cases where the seriousness of the misconduct warrants immediate separation from service. (c) In cases of summary dismissal imposed without prior submission of the case to a Joint Disciplinary Committee in accordance with subparagraphs (b) (i) and (ii), the staff member or former staff member concerned may, within two months of having received written notification of the measure, request that the measure be reviewed by such a Committee. A request shall not have the effect of suspending the measure. After the advice of the Committee has been received, the Secretary-General shall decide as soon as possible what action to take in respect thereof. An appeal in respect of such a decision may not be submitted to the Joint Appeals Board. (d) An appeal in respect of a disciplinary measure considered by a Joint Disciplinary Committee pursuant to either paragraph (b) or (c) may be submitted directly to the United Nations Administrative Tribunal. Rule 110.5 Joint Disciplinary Committees (a) A standing Joint Disciplinary Committee is established and shall be available to advise the Secretary-General at his or her request in disciplinary matters at Headquarters; comparable standing committees may be established in the United Nations Office at Geneva, the United Nations Office at Vienna and such other offices as may be designated by the Secretary-General. -81- 1 January 2004 Rule 110.6 Composition of Joint Disciplinary Committees (a) Each standing Joint Disciplinary Committee shall be composed of: (i) Chairpersons, appointed by the Secretary-General after consultation with the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which the Committee is established; (ii) Members appointed by the Secretary-General; (iii) Members elected by the staff at the duty station at which the Committee is established. (b) If necessary, additional members may be selected at any time in the same manner as indicated in paragraph (a). (c) The chairpersons and members of the Joint Disciplinary Committee shall be appointed or elected for two years, shall be eligible for reappointment or reelection and shall remain in office until their successors are appointed or elected as long as they are staff members assigned to the duty station of the Committee. (d) A chairperson may be removed from the Joint Disciplinary Committee by the Secretary-General after consultation with the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which the Committee is established. The members appointed by the Secretary-General may be removed by him or her. The members elected by the staff may be recalled by a majority vote of the staff at the duty station at which the Committee is established, taken at the initiative of any staff representative body at that duty station. (e) The Secretary-General shall, in consultation with the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which a Joint Disciplinary Committee is established, appoint a Presiding Officer from among the panel of chairpersons. (f) For the consideration of each case, a panel of the Joint Disciplinary Committee shall be constituted by the Presiding Officer as follows: (i) A chairperson; (ii) A member from among those appointed by the Secretary-General; (iii) A member from among those elected by the staff. The Presiding Officer, at the request of either party, may disqualify the chairperson or any member from the consideration of a specific case if in the opinion of the Presiding Officer the action is warranted by the relation of that member to the staff member whose case is to be considered or by any possible conflict of interest. The Presiding Officer may also excuse any member at that member's request from the consideration of a specific case. (i) With respect to staff members serving at a duty station at which a Board has been established or who are administered by organizational units located at such duty station, it shall be the Board; (ii) With respect to former staff members who last served at a duty station at which a Board has been established or who were administered by organizational units located at such a duty station, it shall be that Board; (iii) With respect to all other staff members and all other former staff members, it shall be the Board established in New York, provided that the Secretary-General may decide, at the request of the staff member, to refer the appeal to another one of the Boards or to establish an appropriate ad hoc body. Such staff members or former staff members may meet the time limits specified in subparagraph (a) (i) or (ii) by delivering the requisite submissions within such limits to any office of the United Nations for transmission to the appropriate Board. (e) (i) For the consideration of each appeal, the presiding officer of the appropriate Joint Appeals Board shall constitute a panel of the Board, composed as follows: a. A panel chairperson from among the chairpersons of the Board; b. A member selected from among those appointed by the Secretary-General; c. A member selected from among those elected by the staff; (ii) In constituting such panels, the maximum possible rotation of chairpersons and members of the Board shall be observed: the modalities of such rotation shall be specified in the rules of procedure of the Board. No person who has assisted the Secretary-General in a conciliation procedure referred to in paragraph (b) shall serve on a panel established to consider an appeal relating to the same case; (iii) Before a panel undertakes consideration of an appeal, the parties shall be notified of the proposed composition thereof. The presiding officer of the Board may, at the request of either party, disqualify the chairperson or either member if, in the opinion of the presiding officer, such action is warranted to ensure impartiality. He or she may also excuse the chairperson or either member from serving on the panel; (iv) Subject to the principles set out in subparagraphs (i) to (iii), the presiding officer of the Board shall fill any vacancies arising on the panel. (f) An appeal shall not be receivable unless the time limits specified in paragraph (a) above have been met or have been waived, in exceptional circumstances, by the panel constituted for the appeal. (g) At the duty station where the appeal is considered, the designated representative of the Secretary-General shall submit a written reply within two months following the date of receipt of the appeal. (h) Proceedings before a panel shall normally be limited to the original written presentation of the case, together with brief statements and rebuttals, which may be made orally or in writing, in one of the working languages of the Secretariat. (i) A staff member may arrange to have his or her appeal presented to the panel on his or her behalf by counsel, at his or her own expense. (j) Where the competence of the Joint Appeals Board is in doubt, the panel constituted for the appeal shall decide. (k) In the case of termination or other action on grounds of inefficiency or relative efficiency, the panel shall not consider the substantive question of efficiency but only evidence that the decision was motivated by prejudice or by some other extraneous factor. (l) The panel shall have authority to call members of the Secretariat who may be able to provide information concerning the issues before it and shall have access to all documents pertinent to the case. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should the panel wish to have information or documents relating to the proceedings of the central review bodies in questions involving appointment and promotion, it shall request such information or documents from the Chairperson of the appropriate central review body, who shall decide on the panel's request, taking into account the interests of confidentiality. This decision of the Chairperson of the central review body is not subject to appeal. The Chairperson of the panel shall determine which documents are to be transmitted to all members of the panel and the parties. (m) In considering an appeal, the panel shall act with the maximum dispatch consistent with a fair review of the issues before it. (n) Within one month of the date on which the consideration of an appeal has been completed, the panel shall, by majority vote, adopt and submit a report to the Secretary-General. The report shall be considered as constituting a record of the proceedings in the appeal and may include a summary of the matter as well as all recommendations that the panel considers appropriate. Votes on the recommendations shall be recorded and any member of the panel may have his or her dissenting opinion included in the report. (o) Notwithstanding the above, if the appeal involves a claim having a cumulative maximum value not in excess of one thousand and five hundred dollars ($1,500), on account of salary, emoluments or any other entitlement under the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules, such claim shall be considered a "small claim" and shall be dealt with accordingly under appropriate rules of procedure which the Joint Appeals Board competent to hear the appeal may have adopted. Such rules may require the designated representative of the Secretary-General to submit comments within thirty days of receipt of the claim from the Joint Appeals Board secretariat. (p) The final decision on the appeal will normally be taken by the Secretary-General within one month after the panel has forwarded its report, and shall be communicated to the staff member, together with a copy of the panel's report. The Secretary-General's decision and a copy of the panel's report shall also be transmitted to a designated officer of the staff representative body or bodies at the duty station at which the Joint Appeals Board is established, unless the staff member objects. (q) To enable staff members to exercise their right to make application to the Administrative Tribunal under article 7, paragraphs 2 (b) and (c), of its statute, the Secretary of the Joint Appeals Board concerned shall, at the request of the staff member, communicate to him or her the report of the panel, if the Secretary-General has not made a decision upon the report within a period of one month after the date on which the report was submitted to him or her. -88- 1 January 2004 ANNEXES TO THE STAFF REGULATIONS Annex I SALARY SCALES AND RELATED PROVISIONS 1. The Secretary-General shall establish the salary of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the salaries of United Nations officials in the Director category and above, in accordance with amounts determined by the General Assembly, subject to the staff assessment plan provided in staff regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied. If otherwise eligible, they shall receive the allowances that are available to staff members generally. 2. The Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make additional payments to United Nations officials in the Director category and above to compensate for such special costs as may be reasonably incurred, in the interests of the Organization, in the performance of duties assigned to them by the Secretary-General. Similar additional payments in similar circumstances may be made to heads of offices away from Headquarters. The maximum total amount of such payments is to be determined in the programme budget by the General Assembly. 3. Except as provided in paragraph 5 of the present annex, the salary scales and the scales of post adjustment for staff members in the Professional and higher categories shall be as shown in the present annex. 4. Subject to satisfactory service, salary increments within the levels set forth in paragraph 3 of the present annex shall be awarded annually, except that any increments above step XI of the Associate Officer level, step XIII of the Second Officer level, step XII of the First Officer level, step X of the Senior Officer level and step IV of the Principal Officer level shall be preceded by two years at the previous step. The Secretary-General is authorized to reduce the interval between salary increments to ten months and twenty months, respectively, in the case of staff subject to geographical distribution who have an adequate and confirmed knowledge of a second official language of the United Nations. 5. The Secretary-General shall determine the salary rates to be paid to personnel specifically engaged for short-term missions and conference and other short-term service, to consultants, to Field Service personnel and to technical assistance experts. 6. The Secretary-General shall fix the salary scales for staff members in the General Service and related categories, normally on the basis of the best prevailing conditions of employment in the locality of the United Nations office concerned, provided that the Secretary-General may, where he or she deems it appropriate, establish rules and salary limits for payment of a non-resident allowance to General Service staff members recruited from outside the local area. The gross pensionable remuneration of such staff shall be determined in accordance with the methodology specified in article 54 (a) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and are shown in the salary scales applicable to such staff. -93- 1 January 2004 7. The Secretary-General shall establish rules under which a language allowance may be paid to staff members in the General Service category who pass an appropriate test and demonstrate continued proficiency in the use of two or more official languages. 8. In order to preserve equivalent standards of living at different offices, the Secretary-General may adjust the basic salaries set forth in paragraphs 1 and 3 of the present annex by the application of non-pensionable post adjustments based on relative costs of living, standards of living and related factors at the office concerned as compared to New York. Such post adjustments shall not be subject to staff assessment. 9. No salary shall be paid to staff members in respect of periods of unauthorized absence from work unless such absence was caused by reasons beyond their control or duly certified medical reasons. REPATRIATION GRANT In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate and who at the time of separation are residing, by virtue of their service with the United Nations, outside their country of nationality. The repatriation grant shall not, however, be paid to a staff member who is summarily dismissed. Eligible staff members shall be entitled to a repatriation grant only upon relocation outside the country of the duty station. Detailed conditions and definitions relating to eligibility and requisite evidence of relocation shall be determined by the Secretary-General. Staff member with a spouse or dependent child at time of separation Staff member with neither a spouse nor dependent child at time of separation Professional and higher categories General Service category Years of continuous service away from home country Weeks of gross salary, less staff assessment, where applicable 12 or more APPENDICES TO THE STAFF RULES Appendix A PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR STAFF IN THE PROFESSIONAL AND HIGHER CATEGORIES AND SALARY SCALES AND PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR STAFF IN THE FIELD SERVICE CATEGORY Pensionable remuneration for staff in the Professional and higher categories (United States dollars) Effective 1 September 2003 S T E P S Level I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV Under-Secretary-General USG Assistant Secretary-General ASG Director D-2 Principal Officer D-1 Senior Officer P-5 First Officer P-4 Second Officer P-3 Associate Officer P-2 Assistant Officer P-1 Salary scale for staff in the Field Service category showing annual gross salaries and net equivalents after application of staff assessment Effective 1 January 2003 FS-7 Gross Net D Net S FS-6 FS-5 FS-4 FS-3 FS-2 FS-1 D = Rate applicable to staff members with a dependent spouse or child. S = Rate applicable to staff members with no dependent spouse or child. * The normal qualifying period for in-grade movement between consecutive steps is one year, except at those steps marked with an asterisk, for which a two-year period at the preceding step is required. Pensionable remuneration for staff in the Field Service category Appendix B SALARY SCALES FOR STAFF IN THE GENERAL SERVICE, SECURITY SERVICE, TRADES AND CRAFTS AND PUBLIC INFORMATION ASSISTANT CATEGORIES AT HEADQUARTERS Salary scale for staff in the General Service category at Headquarters Effective 1 May 2003 (Gross) (Gross pension) (Total net) (Net pension) (NPC) Dependency allowances (net per annum): Language allowances (to be included in pensionable remuneration) Child 1 932 First language 1 788 net per annum. Except for the first dependent child of a single, Second language 894 net per annum. widowed or divorced staff member 3 127 Dependent spouse 3 321 Secondary dependant 1 318 Increments: salary increments within the levels shall be awarded annually on the basis of satisfactory service. * Long-service step: Step XI at levels G-3 to G-7, step X at level G-2 and step IX at level G-1 are long-service steps. The qualifying criteria for in-grade increases to the long-service step are as follows: (a) The staff member should have had at least 20 years of service within the United Nations common system and 5 years of service at the top regular step of the current grade; (b) The staff member's service should have been satisfactory. Gross: Gross salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to total net salaries. Gross salaries are established for purposes of separation payments and as the basis for calculating tax reimbursements whenever United Nations salaries are taxed. Gross pension: Gross pensionable salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to net pensionable salaries. Gross pensionable salary is the basis for determining Pension Fund contributions under article 25 of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and for determining pension benefits. Net pension: Net pensionable salary is that part of net salary that is used to derive the gross pensionable salary. Net pensionable salary is the total net salary less the non-pensionable component, i.e., 100 per cent of total net salary. Total net: Total net remuneration is the sum of the non-pensionable component and the net pensionable salary. NPC: The non-pensionable component is that part of net salary excluded from application of staff assessment in determination of the gross pensionable salary. The non-pensionable component has been established at 0 per cent. Salary scale for staff in the Security Service category at Headquarters Step IX at levels S-4 to S-7, step XI at level S-3 and step XIII at level S-2 are long-service steps. Salary scale for staff in the Public Information Assistant and Tour Coordinator/Supervisor category at Headquarters Tour Coordinator/Supervisor and Briefing Assistanta Public Information Assistant II and Tour Coordinator Public Information Assistant I a Includes Briefing Assistant as at 1 September 1991. Reserve guides are paid by the day in accordance with the above rates. Increments: salary increments within the levels shall be effective on the first day of the pay period in which satisfactory service requirements are completed, as follows: Public Information Assistant I 6 months Public Information Assistant II 12 months No increments shall be paid in the case of staff members whose service will cease during the month in which the increment would ordinarily have been due. Dependency allowances (net per annum): Child 1 932 Except for the first dependent child of a single, Language allowances: not entitled. NPC: The non-pensionable component is that part of net salary excluded from the application of staff assessment in determination of the gross pensionable salary. The non-pensionable component has been established at 0 per cent. Salary scale for staff in the Trades and Crafts category at Headquarters VII* TC-8 TC-7 TC-6 TC-5 TC-4 TC-3 TC-2 TC-1 Net pension: Net pensionable salary is that part of net salary which is used to derive the gross pensionable salary. Net pensionable salary is the total net salary less the non-pensionable component, i.e., 100 per cent of total net salary. Appendix F SALARY SCALE FOR STAFF IN THE LANGUAGE TEACHER CATEGORY AT HEADQUARTERS XII* Language Teacher Work schedule: the yearly schedule of work consists of three terms of 13 weeks each. There is a summer recess and scheduled breaks between terms. Leave taken during the recess and the breaks in excess of the annual leave entitlement provided for in the Staff Rules is treated as special leave with pay. (a) The staff member should have had at least 20 years of service within the United Nations common system and 5 years of service at the top regular step of the current grade; The staff member's service should have been satisfactory. Gross: Gross salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to total net salaries. Gross salaries are established for purposes of separation payments and as the basis for calculating tax reimbursements whenever United Nations salaries are taxed. Gross pension: Gross pensionable salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to net pensionable salaries. Gross pensionable salary is the basis for determining Pension Fund contributions under article 25 of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and for determining pension benefits. Net pension: Net pensionable salary is that part of net salary which is used to derive the gross pensionable salary. Net pensionable salary is the total net salary less the NPC: The non-pensionable component is that part of net salary excluded from application of staff assessment in determination of the gross pensionable salary. The non-pensionable component has been established at 0 per cent. Appendix G EDUCATION GRANT ENTITLEMENTS APPLICABLE IN CASES WHERE EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES ARE INCURRED IN SPECIFIED CURRENCIES AND COUNTRIES Country/currency area Maximum admissible educational expenses and maximum grant for disabled children Maximum education grant Flat rate when boarding not provided Additional flat rate for boarding (for staff serving at designated duty stations) Maximum grant for staff members serving at designated duty stations Maximum admissible educational expenses for attendance (only when flat rate for boarding is paid) Part A Euro Austria Belgium Germany Finland France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Spain Danish krone Japanese yen Norwegian krone Pound sterling Swedish krona Swiss franc Part B United States dollar (outside the United States of America) Part C United States dollar (in the United States)* * Also applies, as a special measure, for China, Indonesia, Romania and the Russian Federation. 