%%%AIRSPACE|NICOSIA (CYPRUS)|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|

General Assembly Fifty-ninth session Agenda item 29 Question of Cyprus Security Council Sixtieth year Letter dated 3 March 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 3 March 2005, addressed to you by Mr. Reşat Çağlar, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I would be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 29, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Baki İlkin Ambassador Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government, and further to our letter dated 4 January 2005 (A/59/665-S/2005/8), I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 7 January 2005, addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative in New York and circulated as a document of the General Assembly and of the Security Council (A/59/696-S/2005/75), which yet again contains allegations of violations of the "airspace of the Republic" and "of the flight information region (FIR) of Nicosia", and to bring to your kind attention the following. In response to such false and pretentious allegations, I wish, once again, to reiterate that flights within the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus take place with the full knowledge and consent of the appropriate authorities of the State, over which the Greek Cypriot administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or right of say whatsoever. Furthermore, it should be emphasized that allegations of so-called violations of the flight information region or violations of air traffic regulations are invalid, as the civil aviation authority of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is the only competent authority to provide air traffic and aeronautical information services. As stated in our previous letters, such allegations are based on the false and illegitimate claim that the sovereignty of the Greek Cypriot administration extends over the whole island, including the territory of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This claim by the Greek Cypriot side is divorced from the existing realities in Cyprus, namely, the existence of two independent States, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction within and above its respective territory on the island. Attempts by the Greek Cypriot representatives, through often-repeated false claims, to confer legitimacy upon an illegal administration will be futile as long as the Turkish Cypriot people refuse to bow to its writs. What would indeed be conducive to a better climate on the island would be for the Greek Cypriot side to stop arrogating to itself the rights and responsibilities it does not legally have, and to cease all hostilities towards the Turkish Cypriot people. The Greek Cypriot representative's claim that Turkey is "unconstructive, arrogant and threatening" is a mockery of the truth and is an attempt to shun the grave responsibility of the Greek Cypriot leadership in squandering a unique opportunity to solve the Cyprus problem last year by rejecting your settlement plan. In stark contrast, Turkey's full and unwavering support for settlement is evident from its position both before and after the referenda in the island. In this regard, I would like to refer to your mission of good offices report (S/2004/437) dated 28 May 2004, in which you stated and I quote: "Prime Minister Erdoğan of Turkey spoke out strongly in favour of a `Yes' vote, as did Turkish Foreign Minister Gül ... By the commitments made to me by Prime Minister Erdoğan on 24 January 2004 when we met at Davos, and by Turkey's determination throughout the February meetings in New York, the talks process in Cyprus, and the culmination in Burgenstock, the effort to reach a settlement received an immeasurable boost ... Prime Minister Erdoğan's commitment to me to be one step ahead in the efforts for a solution was kept, and I appreciated the strong support of the Turkish Government, from the top down, for my efforts." Furthermore, the Greek Cypriot side should also be reminded that its counterpart is, and has always been, the Turkish Cypriot side, not Turkey, within the context of the efforts aimed at finding a settlement in the island. As for the utterances of the Greek Cypriot representatives pertaining to a political settlement in Cyprus, your remarks in the same report that: "if the Greek Cypriots are ready to share power and responsibility with the Turkish Cypriots in a federal structure based on political equality, this needs to be demonstrated, not just by words, but by action" need no further elaboration. In similar vein, in the same report you also stated that: "if they (Greek Cypriots) remain willing to resolve the Cyprus problem through a bicommunal, bizonal federation, this needs to be demonstrated. Lingering Greek Cypriot concerns about security and implementation of the plan need to be articulated with clarity and finality." Despite your reiteration of this call on various occasions, it has not yet been properly responded to by the Greek Cypriot leadership. The failure and the unwillingness of the Greek Cypriot side to do so clearly demonstrates that it is not, and has never been, interested in a mutually acceptable settlement, despite continuously professing to the contrary. I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document on the General Assembly, under agenda item 29, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Reşat Çağlar Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 