%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|CHINA|RUSSIAN FEDERATION|REGIONAL SECURITY|ASIA AND THE PACIFIC|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/53/706 S/1998/1126 27 November 1998 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: CHINESE AND RUSSIAN GENERAL ASSEMBLY SECURITY COUNCIL Fifty-third session Fifty-third year Agenda items 30, 45, 59, 71, 79 93, 101 and 102 UNITED NATIONS REFORM: MEASURES AND PROPOSALS THE SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY QUESTION OF EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION ON AND INCREASE IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL AND RELATED MATTERS GENERAL AND COMPLETE DISARMAMENT COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION CRIME PREVENTION AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE INTERNATIONAL DRUG CONTROL Letter dated 25 November 1998 from the Representatives of China and the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General We have the honour to transmit the text of the joint statement on Russian-Chinese relations on the threshold of the twenty-first century, adopted by the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. B. N. Yeltsin, and the President of China, Mr. Jiang Zemin, in Moscow on 23 November 1998 (see annex). We should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under items 30, 45, 59, 71, 79, 93, 101 and 102 of the agenda, and of the Security Council. (Signed) SHEN Guofang (Signed) Sergey LAVROV Ambassador Ambassador Deputy Permanent Representative Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations of the Russian Federation Chargé d'affaires a.i. to the United Nations English Page Annex Joint statement on the results of the Russian-Chinese summit meeting on Russian-Chinese relations on the threshold of the twenty-first century, adopted in Moscow on 23 November 1998 In the course of the sixth Russian-Chinese summit meeting, held in Moscow, the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. B. N. Yeltsin, and the President of China, Mr. Jiang Zemin, drew up agreed approaches to the main trends in the development of the world community on the threshold of the new century and came to an understanding regarding the long-term strategic prospects for the further strengthening of bilateral cooperation. In the present century, mankind has made enormous achievements in the development of spiritual and material culture, science and technology, but at the same time upheavals and conflicts have brought with them unprecedented disasters. In the view of the heads of the two States, on the basis of the lessons of history it is important to facilitate the consolidation in the world community of the understanding that peace and all-round harmonious development are basic principles which mankind must abide by in the new century. The shaping of a new international economic and political order capable in practice of ensuring the social stability of all States and just and rational reflection of the interests of the peoples of all countries can result only from the joint efforts and joint creativity of all the States of the world. In this context, the heads of the two States note that the establishment in April 1996 of equitable relations of partnership, based on trust, between the Russian Federation and China with a view to strategic cooperation in the twenty-first century rested both on a profound understanding of the history of bilateral relations and the realities of the modern world and on a common understanding of the prospects for the development of the international situation and of cooperation between the two countries. The Russian-Chinese strategic cooperation that is taking shape is not an alliance and is not directed against any third country. It excludes the appearance in interrelations of elements of a confrontational attitude, and creates conditions for the broadest possible equitable and mutually advantageous cooperation in all areas. The heads of the two States unanimously consider that the uninterrupted strengthening and practical application of the relations of partnership between the Russian Federation and China must be based on the following important principles: 1. The existing constructive nature of the evolution of international relations towards multipolarity is conducive to the creation of a balanced, stable and democratic new world order free from confrontational attitudes. This trend is objectively in line with the vital interests of all States; 2. The wealth and diversity of the modern world and the coexistence and mutual enrichment of different cultures is one of the main motive forces behind the progressive development of mankind. Recognition of and respect for the pluralism of world civilization is a necessary condition and an indisputable requirement for the shaping of a new international economic and political order. Differences in history, culture and economic and social systems must not serve as a source of conflicts or as grounds for alienation, but must become an incentive to mutual interest and mutual improvement. The twenty-first century cannot and must not be an exclusively "American", "European" or "Asian and Pacific" century characterized by the dominance of any religious or ideological system of views and values. It can and must be a period of coexistence and mutual enrichment of the cultures and traditions of the various States and regions. The Russian Federation and China, which follow this approach both in their relations with one another and in their contacts with third countries, will make their contribution to the consolidation of this trend; 3. As one century gives way to the next, globalization and regionalization are becoming vital factors that determine the state of the world economy. The Russian Federation and China support these processes, and are prepared to take a most active part in them. At the same time, the growth in interdependence of national economies has already reached a stage at which the question of ensuring the economic security of sovereign States is entering the category of the most topical issues. In this connection, particular importance attaches to strict observation of equality and mutual advantage in trade and economic relations and of the principles of open regionalism, to the elimination of all forms of discrimination in international trade and to the prevention of attempts to use currency and financial levers to impose political and economic conditions that infringe the legitimate national interests of any given country. The lessons of the financial crisis afflicting a whole series of regions and States indicate that in a period of difficulties it is advisable to support one another, overcoming the difficulties through joint efforts, and not to use them for self-interested purposes; 4. The United Nations has a central role to play in world affairs. Its activity most fully and visibly embodies the growing potential of the multipolar world order, and is gradually relegating to the sidelines of history unilateral or narrowly national approaches to resolving world affairs. Accordingly, a policy of support for and comprehensive strengthening of the United Nations is for the Russian Federation and China one of the most important components of foreign policy strategy. Strengthening the authority and role of the United Nations in the world will facilitate a carefully prepared and rational reform of the Organization which will make it possible to retain all the mechanisms by means of which it operates that have already approved their effectiveness in practice while at the same time ensuring increased effectiveness of its activities and enabling it to take into account the realities of the modern world. A special place in the process of reform of the United Nations is occupied by the improvement of the work of the Security Council. Under no circumstances must the primary responsibility of the Council under the Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security be called in question. Any attempts to circumvent the Council risk undermining the existing mechanism for the maintenance of peace, creating chaos in international affairs and establishing the primacy of force over international law. Any expansion of the Council must be based on strict compliance with the principle of equitable geographical distribution and on broad consent, and ideally consensus, among the States Members of the United Nations; 5. The marked improvement in relations between the major Powers after the ending of the cold war, and especially in recent years, has become an important positive factor in the development of the international situation. In order to establish a new world economic and political order, there is a need not only to maintain and strengthen this trend but also to ensure conditions such that the major Powers will not engage in efforts aimed at expanding existing or creating new military and political alliances, drift into confrontation or various forms of deterrence of one another or permit a contest for the division of various regions into spheres of influence. In today's world, there are no problems of principle between the major Powers which cannot be settled by means of equitable dialogue conducted in a spirit of partnership and cooperation; 6. The heads of the two States called for the continuation of the process of reduction of nuclear armaments, and in so doing emphasized the exceptional importance of maintaining and strengthening the treaty on the limitation of anti-missile defence systems, which has been and remains a cornerstone of the maintenance of strategic stability in the world; 7. Revival of the economies of the developing countries and enhancement of their constructive role in world affairs are of vital importance in advancing mankind along the road of peace and prosperity. The Russian Federation and China confirm their readiness to strengthen their cooperation with developing States, and call upon the developed countries to promote still more actively the constant progress of the States of Asia, Africa and Latin America; 8. On the difficult road to the establishment of a just and reliable world order, there are a number of serious challenges capable of undermining that process that need to be overcome. In this connection, the Russian Federation and China deem it necessary to express their attitude of principle towards some of the most acute conflict situations whose escalation is capable of leading to the emergence of real threats to the international community. The situation in Kosovo continues to cause concern. It is extremely urgent to find a speedy political solution to this problem. The use of any kind of force can only exacerbate the confrontation in the territory. A mutually acceptable settlement in Kosovo must be based on respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and the universally accepted principles of international law and respect for the lawful rights of the members of all ethnic groups living in Kosovo. With respect to the situation in South Asia, the Russian Federation and China confirm the positions stated by them in the United Nations and other multilateral meetings, and emphasize the exceptional importance for the global efforts to achieve non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and nuclear disarmament of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The Russian Federation and China call on all States that have not yet done so to accede to these treaties forthwith, without any reservations. They also welcome the renewal of political dialogue in South Asia, and express the hope that it will facilitate a settlement of the unresolved issues and the strengthening of security and stability in the region. A solution to the crisis in Afghanistan cannot be achieved by force of arms. The way to the establishment of peace in that long-suffering country lies only through the establishment of a representative government which will take full account of the lawful rights and interests of all the ethnic, religious and political groups in Afghan society. The United Nations and all States concerned to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan are called upon to bring pressure to bear on the parties to the conflict with a view to halting military action, initiating a negotiating process and finding political solutions to the problems that exist. Solving the problems of the Korean peninsula is of great importance to ensuring stability in the Asia and Pacific region. This would be facilitated by a continuation of the inter-Korean dialogue in any format acceptable to both parties. The strengthening of dialogue, confidence and cooperation within the regional forum of the Association of South-East Asian Nations will promote the strengthening of peace, stability and security in the Asia and Pacific region; 9. Improvement of the existing mechanism for dialogue at various levels, especially summit-level and high-level dialogue, is of great importance for the development of strategic cooperation between the Russian Federation and China. To this end, the heads of the Russian Federation and China are promoting to the full the possibility of an exchange of views on the most important issues using a closed telephone line, and also by means of correspondence. The heads of the two States agreed that the seventh Russian-Chinese summit meeting will take place in China in 1999. Joint measures will be taken to increase the practical output from the operation of the mechanism of regular meetings between the heads of the Russian and Chinese Governments. The heads of Government will hold their fourth regular meeting in Moscow in the spring of 1999. The parties will conduct careful preparations for that meeting with a view to achieving constructive results at it. To this end, steps will be taken for the practical implementation of the agreements already reached in the area of trade and economic cooperation, and efforts will also be made to diversify such cooperation by introducing new forms and bringing it into line with generally accepted international practice. Priority attention will be paid to medium-sized and major projects and to the stepping up of economic links between Russian and Chinese regions. Efforts will be continued to intensify consultations on urgent international problems and coordinate positions on them. The competent state departments of the two countries will continue work on joint action to combat all forms of organized illegal activity, including illegal trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, smuggling and illegal migration. Efforts to halt ethnic separatism and religious extremism will be stepped up. The two States intend to implement in practice the agreements on confidence-building in the military sphere and reduction of armed forces in the border region. The practice of holding in-depth high-level consultations on various aspects of ensuring security will continue. The two States consider that the five-party meeting held in Almaty on 3 July 1998 and the Declaration on its results that was adopted open up good prospects for strengthening security and cooperation in Central Asia. The Russian Federation and China will pay great attention to the expansion and orderly organization of contacts and exchanges between the peoples of the two countries, and to satisfying their mutual eagerness to acquaint themselves with each other's history, culture, traditions, customs and realities. The activity of social organizations and mass media aimed at creating in both countries an accurate and positive image of each other will be encouraged. The Russian-Chinese Committee for Friendship, Peace and Development will be called upon to play an increasing role in these efforts. As this century gives way to the next, the heads of the Russian Federation and China solemnly proclaim the devotion of their countries to the ideals of peace, justice and cooperation, and also their desire to do everything within their power to ensure in the twenty-first century genuine material, political, legal and other guarantees for the strengthening of a world order that will create conditions for the comprehensive development of mankind and spare it from wars, oppression, destruction and violence. 