%%%OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|PROJECT MONITORING|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM|STAFFING|INTERNAL OVERSIGHT|RESULTS-BASED BUDGETING|

United Nations Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2004 and programme of work for 2005 General Assembly Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 34 (A/60/34) United Nations * New York, 2005 A/60/34 ISSN 0255-1969 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. Contents Paragraphs Page Mission statement iv Preface by the Chairman v Annual report for 2004 Reform of the Joint Inspection Unit Reports issued in 2004 Follow-up system and implementation of recommendations Relationship with other oversight bodies Administrative issues Work programme for 2005 Annexes Composition of the Joint Inspection Unit Staffing and budget List of participating organizations Percentage share of participating organizations in the cost of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2004 As the only independent external oversight body of the United Nations system mandated to conduct evaluations, inspections and investigations system-wide, the Joint Inspection Unit aims: (a) To assist the legislative organs of the participating organizations in meeting their governance responsibilities in respect of their oversight function concerning management by the secretariats of human, financial and other resources; (b) To help improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the respective secretariats in achieving the legislative mandates and the mission objectives established for the organizations; (c) To promote greater coordination between the organizations of the United Nations system; (d) To identify best practices, propose benchmarks and facilitate information-sharing throughout the system. In accordance with article 10, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, I am pleased to submit this annual report. For the first time this year, the Unit is presenting in a single document an account of its activities for the period 1 January to 31 December 2004, as well as a description of its programme of work for the current year. This innovation, which reflects the process of change and reform undergone by the Unit in 2004, aims to provide Member States with a more comprehensive and dynamic picture of our work, and an annual report which is more informative and substantive. As in previous years, the report provides information on the composition of the Unit, its staffing and budget and the participating organizations but does so in annexes, so as to separate this information from the substantive core of the report. The report shows that 2004 was indeed a critical year for the reform of the Unit, with in-depth discussions among Member States about the methods but also the raison d'être of the Unit, as well as adoption by the latter of several instruments to steer its work and make it more effective. With these internal instruments and the guidance received from Member States, we have put in place the fundamentals of reform that we needed, and are satisfied that we now have all the elements to support a qualitative leap in the work of the Unit, which we hope will be felt in 2005. The Unit will now build on these developments to ensure that Member States, who expressed their support in General Assembly resolution 59/267, derive the greatest benefits possible from its cumulative experience of agency operations, strategic perspective and knowledge of best practices, and its unique position as the only independent external oversight body of the United Nations system. We were pleased to note that in 2004, both Member States and secretariats were already engaging the Unit more frequently, either with requests for full reviews of specific topics or for discussions on a number of management and oversight issues, and we will pursue our outreach efforts to increase this positive interaction. Ion Gorita Chairman Geneva, May 2005 Chapter I A. Reform of the Joint Inspection Unit 1. During the year 2004, the Unit pursued the review which it had initiated in 2003 on its statute and working methods. Progress achieved in 2003 and at the beginning of 2004 was described in a report and two addenda submitted to the General Assembly. While it awaited a General Assembly decision on some of the issues outlined in those reports, the Unit continued to implement changes in other fields that did not require legislative approval or direction. 2. Those changes, many of which have already been highlighted in a conference room paper submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, relate to the selection of topics for reports and the adoption of the annual programme of work along the lines of the Strategic Framework adopted in 2003. The Strategic Framework stated that in order to enhance the relevance, timeliness, quality, cost-effectiveness and impact of its activities and to make optimum use of its limited resources, the Unit would proactively and systematically identify those specific and cross-organizational priority issues and areas at risk where its involvement is expected to add maximum value. As noted in chapter II, two important sources, among others, are now used for that purpose: an analysis of the agenda and documentation of governing bodies, and management assessments of participating organizations carried out periodically by the Unit. 3. In 2004, the Unit adopted a common methodology for conducting the management assessment exercise, and prepared a checklist of questions to guide its work and ensure that it yields coherent analyses across participating organizations. Resource limitations do not allow the management assessment to be undertaken for all participating organizations yearly, but eight organizations were reviewed in this first year. Once all organizations have been reviewed comprehensively, the assessments can be updated yearly. 4. The value, relevance and timeliness of the Unit's output are a direct factor of the quality of the support that it receives from its secretariat. As in any organization, ongoing training in the latest thinking and techniques is essential to maintain and improve the high-quality skills of the staff and various initiatives were undertaken in that regard. More frequent participation of the JIU secretariat's staff members in various professional forums, whether on auditing, investigations, evaluation or results-based management, for instance, was also encouraged as a means to update their expertise. That has proved very beneficial and will be continued. 5. In its resolution 59/267 of 23 December 2004, the General Assembly stated its views with regard to a number of important issues, including the selection of inspectors, the responsibilities of the Chairman, the main focus of the Unit's work and the system of follow-up to its reports. The Unit is currently in the process of examining what changes need to be brought to its internal working procedures so that they reflect fully the provisions of the resolution. Although they welcome the adoption of the resolution, members of the Unit are fully conscious that reform itself has not ended and they will pursue their efforts to enhance its effectiveness and the relevance of its work to its participating organizations. B. Reports issued in 2004 6. The Unit issued 10 reports, 1 note and 1 confidential letter during 2004, as described below. Most reports were system-wide in coverage. 7. JIU/REP/2004/1, Multilingualism and access to information: Case study on the International Civil Aviation Organization. The report is the second in a series of case studies that follow a general report on implementation of multilingualism in the United Nations system, issued in 2002. As with the previous case study, the report makes a limited number of specific recommendations, related to both policy and management matters, and aimed at providing the different target audiences with better access to the information issued by the Organization. The report was considered by the ICAO Council at its 172nd session, in June 2004. 8. JIU/REP/2004/2, Review of the Headquarters agreements concluded by the organizations of the United Nations system: human resources issues affecting staff. The Inspectors decided to undertake this system-wide report based on recent debates regarding the work-life concerns of staff members of the organizations of the United Nations system and the impact of such concerns on productivity within those organizations. The report examined the practical implementation of headquarters agreements and explored how those agreements impact upon the efficiency of United Nations organizations in the area of human resources management. The report aimed to contribute to the elaboration of model rules for future headquarters agreements and, where possible, the amendment of existing agreements. 9. The report included seven recommendations aimed, inter alia, at enhancing awareness of the privileges, immunities and other benefits for staff and officials within United Nations organizations and among local administrations, public services and business communities in the various host countries; and ensuring equal and most-favoured treatment granted to United Nations organizations by some host countries, as well as uniformity in future and/or updated headquarters agreements. It is expected that the report will be considered during the May 2005 resumed session of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly. 10. JIU/REP/2004/3, Administration of justice -- Harmonization of the Statutes of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal and the International Labour Organization Administrative Tribunal. The General Assembly, in resolution 57/307, requested the Joint Inspection Unit to continue to study the possibility of harmonizing the statutes of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal and the International Labour Organization Administrative Tribunal and to submit a report for consideration at its fifty-ninth session. 11. The report concluded that there are only three major differences between the Tribunals and they relate to the election and appointment of members; the authority of the Tribunals to order specific performance by the executive heads; and the amount of compensation that may be awarded by the Tribunals. The recommendations put forward in the report highlighted the need to amend the United Nations Administrative Tribunal statute to bring it into conformity with the International Labour Organization Administrative Tribunal statute in those areas. The report was considered during the debates of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 12. JIU/REP/2004/4, Review of Management and Administration in the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. This report, the seventh in the series of comprehensive reviews of administration and management of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, had the overall objective of improving the management and administration of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) by contributing to the ongoing reform exercises undertaken by UNHCR. The recommendations, designed to strengthen and rationalize existing UNHCR processes and practices, addressed both field and headquarters operations including: the conversion of the post of Assistant High Commissioner into a post of Deputy High Commissioner in charge of all programmes/operations; the introduction of biennial budgeting from 2006-2007, while preserving the flexibility to respond to emergencies; reform of the Inspector General's Office to ensure, inter alia, full operational independence of the function; and timely registration/re-registration of programme beneficiaries as a basis for efficient planning and use of resources. 13. UNHCR agreed with most of the recommendations and committed itself to implement them. It disagreed with the conversion of the Assistant High Commissioner post into a Deputy High Commissioner post, opting instead to create a new Assistant High Commissioner for Protection; a decision has yet to be taken by the Executive Committee on this, as well as on the introduction of biennial budgeting and reform of the Inspector General's Office. 14. JIU/REP/2004/5, Overview of the series of reports on managing for results in the United Nations system. The series itself consists of reports JIU/REP/2004/6, on implementation of results-based management in the United Nations organizations, JIU/REP/2004/7, on delegation of authority and accountability; and JIU/REP/2004/8, on managing performance and contracts. In response to paragraph 18 of resolution 59/267, in which the General Assembly decided that the Unit would "set out management criteria and methods for assessment of management performance and effectiveness", the report submits a list of critical success factors through which concepts developed in recent years with regard to results-based management can be operationalized. Benchmarks, to be used by organizations to measure their actual progress in the implementation of results-based management reforms, are identified in three general areas (corresponding to the three reports) that were found to constitute the main pillars of a solid results-based management system. That innovative approach was well received by the secretariats of participating organizations, which were consulted at all stages of preparation of the reports. The Unit also received positive feedback from Member States. The International Labour Office has since asked the Unit to conduct an evaluation of the Office's implementation of strategic management and budgeting based on the benchmarks defined in the series of reports. The Unit itself intends to use that benchmarking framework in future reviews of management and administration of the Latin American arm of the World Health Organization (WHO), known as the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO), and on its report on the use of results-based management in peacekeeping operations of the United Nations. 15. JIU/REP/2004/9, Procurement practices within the United Nations system. The objective of the report was to identify opportunities for increasing procurement efficiency and effectiveness within the United Nations system, focusing on productivity enhancement, improved cooperation and coordination, and technological innovations. In reviewing the state of procurement services and practices of the United Nations system, the report found that the procurement function had evolved over the past 10 years from a relatively obscure administrative activity to a financially high-profile and high-risk function, accounting in 2002 for about US$ 4.6 billion, or 37 per cent of the organizations' combined regular and extrabudgetary resources. That significant growth in expenditures was, however, not accompanied by efficiency measures in the system-wide organization and operation of procurement services, with the exception of procurement reforms at United Nations Headquarters in the 1990s. 16. The report's 10 recommendations therefore focused on enhancing the productivity of procurement services, through measures such as benchmarking practices; increased training of procurement staff; strengthening of common procurement services for co-located organizations, especially in New York, Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi and field duty stations; and the introduction of electronic procurement methods or e-procurement. 17. JIU/REP/2004/10, Harmonization of the conditions of travel throughout the United Nations system. In the light of the drastic changes in the travel industry in recent years and the requirements for increased economy of resources and efficiency, some organizations of the United Nations system have adapted their travel policies and have streamlined travel procedures. The JIU report compares various elements of travel, including categories, class and means of travel, stopovers, subsistence allowances, terminal expenses and lump-sum option, identifies best practices and proposes actions to introduce them and harmonize travel policies throughout the system. In particular, the report identifies potential opportunities for savings in the areas of lump-sum and processing of travel claims and recommends modifying relevant rules and provisions. The General Assembly will probably consider the report at its sixtieth session. 18. JIU/NOTE/2004/1, Knowledge management at the International Labour Organization. The Joint Inspection Unit had initially decided to include in its programme of work a system-wide report on knowledge management, as there is a growing consensus that the effective and productive management of knowledge is a critical factor for the success of an organization and that knowledge is a valuable strategic resource that requires constant renewal; yet not many organizations have started building their capacity to manage knowledge. However, the project was subsequently postponed owing to the higher priority assigned to other issues. Nevertheless, given the special interest shown by the ILO secretariat in the subject, this more limited note was prepared, with a view to contributing to the development of knowledge management activities within the ILO and to helping the organization consolidate a knowledge management strategy. Others 19. At the request of the Secretary General of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the Unit also carried out in 2004 a confidential review of the adequacy of internal controls at that organization. C. Follow-up system and implementation of recommendations 20. Over the last few years, and as reported in previous annual reports, the Unit has worked steadfastly to establish and then strengthen a system of follow-up to its recommendations. Member States have expressed on several occasions their support to and interest in these efforts and in resolution 59/267, the General Assembly stressed that the Unit should include in its annual reports information on the implementation and results achieved by organizations in their follow-up to the JIU recommendations as endorsed by their legislative bodies, and the arrangements put in place by participating organizations for reporting on the above. Accordingly, the Unit asked its 23 participating organizations to provide it with information on the implementation of approved/accepted JIU recommendations for the reports issued during the previous three years. 21. From the information obtained and that already available in the Unit's own tracking matrix, the Unit notes that for the period 2002-2003, out of 19 reports, 10 (or 53 per cent) can be counted as having been "positively considered" by one or several governing bodies, as appropriate. It should be noted that because of the delay between the submission of reports and their consideration by governing bodies, the information could be analysed meaningfully only for the period 2002-2003. More importantly, it also appears that the status of implementation of recommendations is particularly advanced for five of the reports (JIU/REP/2002/1, 3, 6, 9 and 11). For instance, nine organizations have reported implementing several recommendations in JIU/REP/2002/3, on support costs related to extrabudgetary activities. As for JIU/REP/2002/9, on management information systems, its recommendations are partially or fully being implemented by eight organizations. Those figures are naturally a reflection of the special relevance of the topics addressed in the reports to the concerns of the organizations system-wide. 22. At the same time, the Unit also notes the clear impact of certain of its single-agency reports that have focused on reviewing the administration and management in a given organization. Among them, the report on the management review of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) (JIU/REP/2003/6) was endorsed by both the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council. The Commission requested the Joint Inspection Unit to assist it to monitor systematically the implementation of Commission resolution 2004/73 and to submit to the Commission at its sixty-third session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session a follow-up comprehensive review of the implementation of the decisions of the Commission and other United Nations intergovernmental bodies regarding the management, programmes and administration of OHCHR, in particular, with regard to their impact on the recruitment policies and composition of the staff, containing any concrete proposals for corrective action, if required, for the implementation of the relevant intergovernmental bodies' resolutions. Similarly, as described in chapter II, several recommendations in JIU/REP/2004/4 on the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) are being implemented by UNHCR. 23. The Unit is particularly pleased with the detailed contents of the information provided by FAO, UNESCO, WFP and WHO on the implementation of JIU reports. This information, as well as that provided by the United Nations, is now available on the Unit's website. It is hoped that other organizations will emulate this example and fully comply with the follow-up system agreed upon with them. The preliminary results for the forthcoming year's exercise indicate that indeed many are now complying with the requirements of the follow-up system. 24. The information available to the Unit so far on the implementation of its recommendations nevertheless remains insufficient to measure in exact terms the impact of these recommendations and the Unit will pursue its own efforts to make additional progress in that regard. In particular, it will seek to introduce for each of its recommendations success indicators, either quantitative or qualitative, in order to be able to report in the medium term not only on the number of recommendations implemented but more importantly on their impact on participating organizations. 25. It should also be recalled that in paragraph 27 of resolution 59/267 on the Unit, the General Assembly reaffirmed "its request to the executive heads of the participating organizations that have not yet done so to take the steps necessary to facilitate the consideration of and action on the system of follow-up to the reports of the Unit", and invited the "legislative organs concerned to consider the system and take action in that regard". The Unit has initiated dialogue with participating organizations that have yet to adopt the follow-up system and will continue discussions with them on particular modalities which may be applicable. D. Relationship with other oversight bodies 26. During 2004, regular contacts were held with other oversight bodies whether in the preparation of specific reports or in general efforts to define common areas of interest and possible duplication or overlap. As in previous years, a tripartite meeting was held with the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Board of Auditors of the United Nations. At the meeting, hosted by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in New York on 16 November 2004, it was agreed to modify the format of the annual gathering to make it more cost-effective and ensure follow-up at the working level throughout the year to recommendations taken by the principals. Decisions were also taken regarding the development of a biennial consolidated oversight workplan, coordination of training activities and possible improvements in reporting mechanisms on oversight recommendations. 27. The Unit will now resume discussions with the Office of Internal Oversight Services on possible coordinated evaluations and other joint projects. Generally, dialogue between internal and external oversight bodies at the United Nations has become a continuous process and a daily occurrence rather than an annual event. There is a growing awareness that while their mandates and functions are clearly distinct and complementary, these bodies share a common objective of ensuring the most effective and efficient use of resources of the Organization and that together they should seek ways to contribute to that objective. The Unit is also promoting that type of dialogue with oversight bodies in other organizations of the United Nations system. E. Administrative issues 28. The Unit is compelled to bring to the attention of the General Assembly difficulties and delays which it encountered in 2002, 2003 and 2004 in obtaining visas for official travel of some of its members as well as some members of its Secretariat. In several instances, missions to United Nations Headquarters by certain Inspectors had to be cancelled or postponed owing to the difficulty in securing visas. Inspectors, who are nominated and approved by the General Assembly, should have unimpeded access to all United Nations duty stations, including United Nations Headquarters, for the entire duration of their mandates. The impact of delays faced by Inspectors on the effective discharge by the Unit of its responsibilities is serious, and could impede its efforts to strengthen its investigation capacity in accordance with paragraph 1 of article 6 of the Unit's statute, which states that "the Inspectors shall make on-the-spot inquiries and investigations, some of which may be without prior notification, as and when they themselves may decide, in any of the services of the organizations". 29. Despite repeated efforts by the United Nations Secretariat to ensure that the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit is complied with, and the status, rights and obligations of its members fully respected, the matter has yet to be resolved satisfactorily. Therefore, the General Assembly may want to call on all Host Countries to facilitate the process of visa delivery so as to ensure that Inspectors have prompt access to all offices of participating organizations. 30. On another issue, the Unit hopes that discussions initiated in 2004 with the Secretariat of the United Nations on restrictions placed by the Organization's current appointment and selection procedures on recruitment by the Unit of candidates from other organizations of the United Nations system will come to a positive conclusion shortly. 31. In adopting its programme of work for 2005, the Unit kept in mind the request of the General Assembly that it focus mainly on identifying means to improve management and for ensuring that optimum use is made of available resources, as stipulated in paragraphs 1 to 3 of article 5 of the statute, as well as the need for promoting a system-wide approach and developing management criteria and the principle of accountability as called for in paragraphs 14, 18 and 20 of General Assembly resolution 59/267. In accordance with the new procedure described in chapter I regarding the selection of topics for reports, the Unit used the following sources to identify subjects for its 2005 work programme: its management assessments; an analysis of common points in the agenda of legislative bodies of its participating organizations; reviews undertaken by other oversight bodies in recent years; and proposals received from the secretariats of these organizations or formulated by individual Inspectors. Evaluation of the implementation of results-based budgeting in peacekeeping operations 32. In its resolution 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, the General Assembly requested the Joint Inspection Unit to submit at its resumed sixtieth session an evaluation of the implementation of results-based budgeting in peacekeeping operations. 33. In 2004, as indicated in paragraph 14 above, the Joint Inspection Unit issued a series of reports on managing for results in the United Nations system. In conducting the requested evaluation, the JIU intends to apply the benchmarking framework developed in that series of reports to the administration and management of peacekeeping operations, while identifying any relevant criteria and indicators applicable to the assessment of the achievement of objectives specific to such operations. The objective of the evaluation is to test the level of implementation of results-based management in peacekeeping operations and to make recommendations on how to adapt results-based management principles, methodology and techniques to the specific needs of those operations. Review of management and administration in the World Intellectual Property Organization 34. The report is the eighth in the series of comprehensive reviews of administration and management of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. In a first phase, the Unit prepared an abbreviated review focusing on headquarters review, budget and financial issues, personnel practices and oversight activities. A number of recommendations were made to strengthen the organization. They included the need for an external desk review for WIPO, freezing the budget until the review has been completed, as well as measures to rationalize personnel practices and strengthen the effectiveness and independence of the oversight function. Other issues will be addressed at a later date in a second, expanded review. Common services in Vienna: Buildings Management Service 35. The management of the buildings complex known as the Vienna International Centre is a subject of ongoing interest to both Member States and the concerned secretariats, as has been demonstrated by the request of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to the Unit to include in its 2005 work programme, only three years after the completion of its report on common and joint services at Vienna (A/58/258), a more detailed review of the Buildings Management Service currently managed by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). The financial management and control services provided by UNIDO, including reporting functions for project implementation and financial control, will be reviewed in the report, which will also endeavour to determine, in consultation with all parties, including the Host Government, the most suitable provider of, and location for, buildings management services in Vienna. A second review of headquarters agreements concluded by United Nations system organizations: provision of headquarters premises and other facilities by host countries 36. This will be the Unit's second review of the headquarters agreements concluded by the United Nations system organizations. Headquarters agreements cover a wide variety of issues of concern to the organizations themselves, to the host countries and other member States, Permanent Missions and their staff, as well as the staff members of the organizations, other officials and their families. While the first review focused primarily on the impact of headquarters agreements on the working environment of staff, the second review will deal with the provision of headquarters premises and other facilities by host countries. It will attempt to identify differences between, and best practices in, various headquarters agreements and make recommendations for possible harmonization of such provisions. Review of administration and management of regional commissions: Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 37. The Unit will undertake an administrative and management review of ESCAP designed to contribute to and enhance the current reform efforts being undertaken by the Commission. The review will try to identify challenges faced and achievements made by the Commission in the implementation of results-based management and examine the role of the Commission in the overall strategic framework of economic and social development in the Asian and Pacific region, taking into account the active contributions in that regard by other regional and financial organizations. Oversight lacunae 38. Internal oversight mechanisms assist the Executive Heads of United Nations system organizations in carrying out their responsibilities and external oversight bodies assist member States in reviewing the management and proper functioning of the organizations. The focus of the investigative function of internal oversight is on alleged violations. One of the objectives of the report is to establish whether there are internal mechanisms in place to review allegations of wrongdoing against officials from the highest echelons of the organizations, if so, whether they are sufficient, and who is ultimately responsible for determining the outcome of such investigations. The report will also examine whether reviews should be undertaken of existing oversight bodies (the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ), the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC), the JIU and the Board of Auditors) and, if so, who should be empowered to undertake such reviews. Further, it will consider whether current oversight mechanisms are equipped to deal with major risks that may arise in the United Nations system. United Nations system staff medical coverage 39. The report has been included in the JIU programme of work on the basis of formal proposals by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and UNIDO. Their concern stems from the fact that in the context of zero budget growth policies and practices adopted within the United Nations system, the soaring costs of medical coverage for staff and retirees may soon negatively affect the capacity of United Nations organizations to implement substantive programmes. 40. The report will endeavour to provide Member States with a comprehensive overview of the United Nations system staff medical coverage, a comparison of it with the best practices in non-United Nations entities, and a number of viable options for more effectively controlling the concomitant budgetary outlays without negatively affecting this important element of the overall conditions of service in the United Nations system. The United Nations system's role in disaster reduction and response 41. Inclusion of the above item in the JIU programme of work for 2005 derives from an original proposal by WHO for a study on the role of WHO in disaster reduction and response, aimed inter alia at establishing more streamlined procedures for rapid resource mobilization in emergency situations and promoting disaster reduction. The JIU will: (a) identify the objectives and goals of the United Nations system as well as guiding principles set out by various United Nations system legislative bodies for emergency relief assistance and disaster reduction and recovery; (b) assess how the activities undertaken by the organizations of the system in that field have been carried out in the most economical manner with the optimal use of available resources; and (c) provide an external evaluation of the status of and opportunities for further improving coordination and consistency in the response of the United Nations system at the country and global levels to disaster and complex situations. 42. The investigation will take into account, among others, current work on the establishment of a regional early-warning system, particularly for tsunamis in the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia regions, and an institutional review of the tripartite arrangement between the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Inter-Agency Secretariat for the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Implementation of results-based management in the International Labour Organization 43. The Governing Body of the ILO requested its Director-General to arrange for an external evaluation of the implementation of results-based management in the International Labour Organization and the International Labour Office, to be submitted for its consideration during its 294th session, to take place in November 2005. The Director-General, in turn, requested the JIU to undertake the review. 44. Its purpose is to assess the status of implementation of results-based management in the ILO and present a set of conclusions and recommendations to the Governing Body with a view to assisting it in setting the future direction for the results-based management approach and aligning results-based management with best practices within and outside the United Nations system. The review, however, is also intended to serve as a management tool for the International Labour Office to enable it to implement more effectively the policy decisions and management practices adopted by the Governing Body. The review itself would serve to promote organizational learning in improving performance for results. The impact of voluntary contributions on programme delivery 45. The study, originally proposed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and identified in the context of the Unit's own internal management assessment exercise, will assess the manner, methods and procedures followed in different United Nations agencies for raising voluntary contributions and improving resource mobilization and the extent to which extrabudgetary funds are used for core activities in the United Nations system. Follow-up on JIU series of reports on peacekeeping 46. In its resolution 54/16 of 29 October 1999, the General Assembly emphasized the need for effective follow-up to reports of the Joint Inspection Unit. By the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, the JIU had prepared a series of reports on peacekeeping. Ten years later, it would seem appropriate to provide Member States with an overview of progress and setbacks experienced by the United Nations in the implementation of the recommendations contained therein, especially in the area of the examination of the root causes of conflict and their prevention. 47. In the preparation of that follow-up report, JIU, taking into account article 5 of its statute, will endeavour to explore new opportunities for making United Nations peacekeeping activities more cost-efficient. Particular attention will be paid to the conclusions of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change and such recent initiatives as the Alliance of Civilization. Annex I 1. The composition of the Unit for the year 2004 was as follows. (The member's term of office expires (or expired) on 31 December of the year indicated in parentheses): Mr. Ion Gorita (Romania), Chairman (2005) Ms. M. Deborah Wynes (United States of America), Vice-Chairman (2007) Ms. Doris Bertrand (Austria) (2005) Mr. Even Fontaine Ortiz (Cuba) (2007) Mr. Sumihiro Kuyama (Japan) (2004) Mr. Wolfgang Münch (Germany) (2005) Mr. Louis-Dominique Ouedraogo (Burkina Faso) (2005) Mr. Tang Guangting (China) (2007) a Mr. Christopher Thomas resigned his position effective 30 June 2004. Mr. Christopher Thomas (Trinidad and Tobago)a Mr. Victor Vislykh (Russian Federation) (2007) Mr. Muhammad Yussuf (United Republic of Tanzania) (2007) 2. At the 93rd plenary meeting of its fifty-eighth session, on 5 August 2004, the General Assembly appointed Mr. Tadanori Inomata (Japan) for a term of office beginning on 1 January 2005 and expiring on 31 December 2009. 3. In accordance with article 18 of its statute, which provides that each year the Unit shall elect from among the Inspectors a Chairman and Vice-Chairman, the Unit elected Ion Gorita (Romania) as Chairman and M. Deborah Wynes (United States of America) as Vice-Chairman for the calendar year 2005. 1. The overall composition of the secretariat that assists the Joint Inspection Unit remains unchanged and consists of 19 staff members, although the completion of several information technology-related projects allowed the redeployment in 2004 of one Information Technology Officer (P-3) as Research Officer (P-3), thus strengthening the research capacity of the Unit. Therefore, during the period under consideration (the year 2004), the posts were as follows: 1 D-2 (Executive Secretary), 2 P-5 (senior research officers), 3 P-4 (research officers), 3 P-3 (3 research officers), and 10 General Service staff, including 6 research assistants. 2. The total appropriation for the JIU for 2004 was US$ 4,885,000. JIU appropriation for 2004 Object of expenditure Amount (in United States dollars) Temporary posts salaries (Inspectors) Established posts salaries Common staff costs Representation allowances General temporary assistance Individual contractors Other hospitality Consultants Other official travel Data-processing services Rental broadcasting facilities Rental office furniture and equipment Communications Maintenance office automation equipment Supplies and materials Acquisition office automation equipment Total a The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the World Food Programme (WFP), which is also a subsidiary body of the FAO, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the International Trade Centre (ITC) and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS). In accordance with its statute, the Joint Inspection Unit performs its functions with respect to the United Nations, including its programme, funds and offices,a and with respect to the following organizations which have accepted its statute in accordance with its provisions: International Labour Organization (ILO) Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) World Health Organization (WHO) Universal Postal Union (UPU) International Telecommunication Union (ITU) World Meteorological Organization (WMO) International Maritime Organization (IMO) World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) World Tourism Organization (WTO) International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Percentage share of participating organizations in the cost of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2004 United Nationsa World Food Programme United Nations Development Programme United Nations Population Fund United Nations Office for Project Services United Nations Children's Fund a United Nations includes here the United Nations Secretariat, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, the International Trade Centre, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 05-40235 (E) 210705 