%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|SUICIDE BOMBINGS|ISRAEL|TERRORISM|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|PALESTINIANS|PALESTINE QUESTION|

General Assembly Sixtieth session Agenda items 14 and 108 The situation in the Middle East Measures to eliminate international terrorism Security Council Sixtieth year Identical letters dated 27 October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council I am writing to draw your attention to a horrific terrorist attack perpetuated against Israel yesterday. During the afternoon rush, a 20-year-old Palestinian terrorist associated with the Islamic Jihad terrorist organization entered a crowded open-air market in the Israeli city of Hadera and detonated himself in front of a restaurant. This barbaric attack left 5 people murdered and 55 people wounded. Yesterday's attack is one of many fatal suicide-bombing attacks carried out by the Islamic Jihad terrorist organization in recent months, including the suicide bombing at the shopping mall in the Israeli city of Netanya in July 2005. Despite the increasing activity of Islamic Jihad and other terrorist organizations within Palestinian jurisdiction, the Palestinian Authority has yet to take any concrete measure to prevent terrorism and bring to justice terrorist organizations. Palestinian security officers remain inert in the face of this growing threat. Recently, for example, Qassam rockets were launched from Gaza against Israel from a location adjacent to the living quarters of Palestinian security officers and no actions were taken by Palestinian Security forces to prevent it or prosecute the terrorists. Israel remains committed to taking all steps to advance the peace process, as demonstrated by our recent disengagement from the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank. We expect the Palestinian Authority to adopt the same resolve. Unfortunately, despite their international obligations, the Palestinian Authority has yet to create or implement any strategy to combat terrorism. Palestinian terrorism remains the obstacle to any progress towards peace. Furthermore, there are clear indications that Islamic Jihad, along with other terrorist organizations, is financed and given shelter by other member States in the region. This is in direct contradiction to international law and presents serious security threats to regional stability. Israel urges the international community to reaffirm in clear and certain terms its absolute intolerance of terrorism and the aiding and/or sheltering of terrorist organizations. Israel further calls upon the international community to require the Palestinian Authority to uphold its obligations and immediately combat Palestinian terrorism in all its forms. I should be grateful if you would arrange to have the text of the present letter circulated as a document of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, under agenda items 14 and 108, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Ambassador Dan Gillerman Permanent Representative 