%%%INTERNATIONAL LAW|DIPLOMATIC PROTECTION|SHARED NATURAL RESOURCES|ARMED CONFLICTS|DEPORTATION|UNILATERAL ACTS OF STATES|RESERVATIONS AND DECLARATIONS|EXTRADITION|CONSULTATIONS|ADVISORY SERVICES|REPORT PREPARATION|PERIODIC REPORTS|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|EXPERTS|DOCUMENTS|MEETING RECORDS|TRUST FUNDS|CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|INTERPRETING|

Sixtieth session Agenda item 80 Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Ms. Shermain Jeremy (Antigua and Barbuda) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session" was included in the provisional agenda of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 59/41 of 2 December 2004. 2. At its 17th plenary meeting, on 20 September 2005, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 11th to 20th and 22nd meetings, from 24 to 26 and on 28 and 31 October, and from 1 to 3 and on 16 November 2005. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.6/60/SR.11-20 and 22). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session. 5. The Chairman of the International Law Commission at its fifty-seventh session introduced the report of the Commission: chapters I to III, VI, VIII and XII at the 11th meeting, on 24 October; chapters IV, IX and X at the 13th meeting, on 26 October; and chapters V, VII and XI at the 17th meeting, on 31 October (see A/C.6/60/SR.11, 13 and 17, respectively). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.60/L.14 6. At the 22nd meeting, on 16 November, the representative of Jordan, on behalf of the Bureau, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session" (A/C.6/60/L.14). 7. At the same meeting the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/60/L.14 without a vote (see para. 8). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 8. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session, Emphasizing the importance of furthering the codification and progressive development of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development of international law and its codification, Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which, given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law Commission, Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar, Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt with in the report and for discussions on specific topics, Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commission as a body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between the two bodies, Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, 1. Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session,1 and recommends that the Commission continue its work on the topics in its current programme, taking into account the comments and observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in debates in the General Assembly; 2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the work accomplished at its fifty-seventh session, and encourages the Commission to complete its work on those topics that are near completion during its fifty-eighth session, taking into account the views expressed by Governments during the debates of the Sixth Committee, and any written comments that may be submitted by Governments; 3. Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of having their views on the following, which were adopted by the Commission at its fifty-sixth session: (a) The draft articles and commentary on diplomatic protection; (b) The draft principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities; 4. Invites Governments to provide information to the International Law Commission, as requested in chapter III of its report, regarding: (a) Shared natural resources; (b) Effects of armed conflicts on treaties; (c) Responsibility of international organizations; (d) Expulsion of aliens; (e) Unilateral acts of States; (f) Reservations to treaties; 5. Endorses the decision of the International Law Commission to include the topic "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)" in its programme of work; 6. Invites the International Law Commission to continue taking measures to enhance its efficiency and productivity; 7. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue taking cost-saving measures at its future sessions without prejudice to the efficiency of its work; 8. Takes note of paragraph 502 of the report of the International Law Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 1 May to 9 June and from 3 July to 11 August 2006; 9. Welcomes the enhanced dialogue between the International Law Commission and the Sixth Committee at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the two bodies, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued practice of informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth Committee and the members of the Commission attending the sixty-first session of the Assembly; 10. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the International Law Commission to adhere as far as possible to the structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider presenting concise and focused statements; 11. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to enable high-level discussions on issues of international law; 12. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the Commission in its further work; 13. Takes note of paragraphs 503 to 509 of the report of the International Law Commission with regard to cooperation with other bodies, and encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of article 16, paragraph (e), and article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and other bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such cooperation; 14. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law Commission and in formulating their comments and observations; 15. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing assistance to the International Law Commission; 16. Approves the conclusions reached by the International Law Commission in paragraph 498 of its report, and reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and summary records of the Commission; 17. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and that an increasing number of participants, in particular from developing countries, will be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, and appeals to States to continue to make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar; 18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to continue considering ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar; 19. Also requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, together with such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following established practice; 20. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its report containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by the Commission; 21. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law Commission at the sixty-first session of the General Assembly commence on 23 October 2006. 