%%%SANCTIONS|TRADE BOYCOTTS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CUBA|FOREIGN RELATIONS|UNITED STATES|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|TERRORISM|CIVIL SOCIETY|

Sixtieth session Agenda items 18 and 108 Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba Measures to eliminate international terrorism Letter dated 1 November 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to attach the Declaration by the organizations that participated in the Third Forum of Cuban civil society against the embargo and the annexation (see annex). I should be grateful if the Declaration could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda items 18 and 108. (Signed) Orlando Requeijo Gual Ambassador Permanent Representative Declaration by the organizations that participated the Third Forum of Cuban civil society against the embargo and the annexation 1. Meeting in Havana today, 31 October 2005, we, the representatives of a broad spectrum of Cuban civil organizations and associations, express our strongest condemnation of the renewed acts of aggression perpetrated by the reactionary Government of the United States of America and demand the immediate and unconditional lifting of the criminal embargo against our people. 2. On Tuesday, 8 November, the United Nations General Assembly will again discuss and vote on the draft resolution entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba". Today's meeting, which represents a follow-up to the Second Forum of Cuban civil society against the embargo and against the annexation, held on 15 October 2004, supplements the actions carried out in Cuba and around the world to denounce the consequences of the embargo for our people. 3. The goal of this policy is to crush our socialist revolution, conducted in the name of José Martí, as well as the example of justice and hope it represents for our people and for the world. We have resolutely resisted almost half a century of brutal aggression, paying a high price for our indomitable will to defend the right to national independence and a life of dignity. These attempts to reinstate capitalism and reimpose imperial domination on the Cuban nation are doomed to fail. We shall not yield; nor shall we surrender the revolution. We shall defend it to the bitter end. 4. The embargo has a significant impact on the country's economy: it has been and will remain -- until it is dismantled -- the fundamental obstacle to our development. Overtly criminal in nature, its influence extends to all areas of national life, affecting health, education, food security, sports, culture, transport, housing and the environment. Despite these difficulties, the iron will of the people and their determination to advance have enabled the country to achieve high levels of social development. 5. The Government of the United States of America, fascist and genocidal in origin, is responsible for grave crimes against humanity. In its thirst for power and domination, it attacks and occupies nations, massacres innocent civilians, violates international laws, perpetuates an unjust and criminal world order, fabricates the meanest lies to justify its devious designs, impoverishes entire continents, endangers environmental sustainability, scorns life and stifles the yearnings for development, justice and peace of peoples around the world. 6. The American Far Right and the vengeful Mafioso organizations of Cuban origin based in Florida -- which cannot forgive us for having forged a true revolution -- have devised a plan for Cuba. It is the Bush plan for annexation, which seeks to return us to the disgraceful situation of the past and eliminate the Cuban nation at any cost. We shall not allow ourselves once more to become pariahs in our own land. We shall preserve the dignity that we have won through the sacrifice of our noblest sons and daughters. 7. We, the representatives of the Cuban NGOs assembled here, condemn the appointment of a paid imperial agent to coordinate the so-called "transition" to capitalism in Cuba. Our resistance will thwart his devious designs. 8. We reject the acts of subversion aimed at financing and artificially building an internal counter-revolution in thrall to the interests of the power attacking us. Our people love their country and scorn the traitors and mercenaries who attack it. 9. We demand respect for the rights of Cuban families and the right of our peoples to maintain and develop ties of solidarity, cooperation and friendship. We claim respect for the right of Cuban NGOs to pursue cooperative exchanges and relations that respect our national independence and dignity. 10. We denounce the intensification of the anti-Cuban propaganda campaigns and acts of slander designed to create a pretext for acts of aggression and the genocidal embargo. The accusations that Cuba is promoting terrorism, conducting research programmes for the production of biological weapons, and encouraging drug trafficking and acts of espionage and destabilization are totally false. Cuba has been a bastion of the fight against international terrorism and drug trafficking. Our biotechnology programmes are concerned solely with the health of our people and of those peoples around the world which need our medicines and our medical expertise. It is not Cuba but poverty -- engendered by centuries of colonial exploitation and exacerbated by the implementation of neo-liberal doctrines -- that is the main cause of the destabilization and crisis afflicting the underdeveloped countries of the southern hemisphere. 11. We appeal to the world's governments, international agencies and NGOs to resist and denounce American attempts to destabilize and discredit the example of valour, courage and solidarity set by the Cuban revolution. 12. We demand that the United States Government unconditionally lift the economic, financial and commercial embargo against Cuba and cease its aggressive policy against our people, which are in violation of international law and the will of the United Nations General Assembly, as expressed in a series of Assembly resolutions since 1992. 13. We demand that the United States Government stop protecting the terrorist Luís Clemente Posada Carriles and proceed with his immediate extradition to Venezuela. The hypocritical and shameless attitude of this Government, which claims to be the champion of anti-terrorism, is laughable. The complicit silence in the face of this immoral behaviour is shameful. We Cuban NGOs condemn the acts of State terrorism committed against our people. 14. We demand the immediate release of the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters being held in imperial maximum security jails, the victims of the hatred and impotence of the failed enemies of the Cuban nation, despite the fact that the Atlanta Court of Appeals overturned the fraudulent ruling by which they were unjustly sentenced. 15. In the face of this increased aggression, we hereby reaffirm our determination to intensify the revolution and build a country that is even more independent, united and just, preserving the social progress we have achieved, and defending to the bitter end the unity of the people around Fidel Castro and the revolution. Onward to victory! Havana, 31 October 2005 "Year of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas" [dpp. 6-16 inserted here] Total number of organizations: 175 