%%%PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|SECURITY MANAGEMENT|BUILDING SECURITY|DUTY STATIONS|PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION|SECURITY AND SAFETY STAFF|STAFF SECURITY|

Sixtieth session Agenda item 123 Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Status of work in the implementation of infrastructure projects to strengthen the security and safety of United Nations premises 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to section XI, paragraph 57, of General Assembly resolution 59/276, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of that resolution, which would include, under paragraph 9, a report on progress in implementation of the security-strengthening infrastructure projects. It will be recalled that in response to earlier Assembly resolutions, the implementation of the security-strengthening infrastructure projects was reported periodically in the context of the budget performance reports, most recently in the second performance report for the biennium 2002-2003 (A/58/558/Add.1). Since that report, in its resolutions 58/295 and 59/276, section XI, the Assembly has approved funding for an additional programme of security-strengthening projects. The present report summarizes the work undertaken and/or planned by the Secretariat during the years 2004 and 2005 in implementing all security-strengthening projects approved so far. 2. It will be recalled that by its resolution 56/286, the General Assembly decided to appropriate an amount of $47,795,400 for security-strengthening infrastructure projects at Headquarters and offices away from Headquarters. Following consideration of the Secretary-General's phase I and phase II proposals for strengthening security measures (A/58/756, A/59/365 and Add.1), by its resolutions 58/295 and 59/276, section XI, the Assembly approved additional projects for the biennium 2004-2005 at a total cost of $54,205,600. 3. Accordingly, the total cost of the programme approved by the General Assembly in its resolutions 56/286, 58/295 and 59/276 amounts to $105,705,100 (at revised 2004-2005 rates), to be financed from the regular budget and, with respect to Vienna, on a cost-shared basis with other organizations located at the Vienna International Centre. As of 30 September 2005, an amount of $70,531,800 has been committed with respect to that programme, representing 67 per cent of the total approved costs of $105,705,100. The status of utilization of approved funds by duty station is summarized in the table below. Furthermore, a detailed description of the implementation of individual projects is provided in the annex to the present report and in summary form by duty station in paragraphs 4 to 15 below. Status of utilization of funds approved for the implementation of the security-strengthening infrastructure projects by duty station (Thousands of United States dollars) Duty station Approved by resolution 56/286 (June 2002) Approved by resolution 58/295 (June 2004) resolution 59/276 (Dec. 2004) Recosting* and adjustments Total cost of the approved programme Funds committed by end-September 2005 Uncommitted balance Headquarters United Nations Office at Geneva United Nations Office at Vienna** United Nations Office at Nairobi Economic Commission for Africa Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Total * 2004-2005 first performance report recosting and adjustments. ** The programme at the United Nations Office at Vienna is financed on a cost-shared basis with other organizations located at the Vienna International Centre. A. Headquarters 4. Security measures approved for Headquarters have been largely implemented, with final testing and commissioning of most projects scheduled for March 2006. Ninety-one per cent of the resources approved for the Headquarters programme have been utilized as at the end of September 2005. One project, namely the acquisition of four portable vehicle barriers, estimated at $800,000, remains at the initial phase of implementation. Specifications for that project have been issued and procurement is in progress. Two projects, namely, the installation of ballistic partitions in the General Assembly Hall and in the Security Council Chambers and the installation of sensors and air protection devices, at a total cost of $2,150,600, have been deferred to the capital master plan. Furthermore, the construction of an off-site non-governmental organization resource centre and an off-site mail processing facility project, at a total cost of $2,650,000, while not being part of the capital master plan will be implemented concurrently with the capital master plan implementation. 5. Delays in overall implementation against the initially foreseen time frame were caused by a number of factors, including deficiencies identified in the construction documents, difficulties encountered by the general contractor in mobilizing its subcontractors and the need to modify the initial design to meet current conditions on the ground and requirements of evolving technologies. B. United Nations Office at Geneva 6. Sixty-one per cent of the total resources approved for the United Nations Office at Geneva (UNOG) programme in the amount of $41,044,200 had been utilized by the end of September 2005. Of nine projects approved by the General Assembly in its resolutions 56/286 and 58/295, four projects, at a total cost of $8,075,900, have been postponed owing to various reasons, as detailed in part II of the annex to the present report, including the need to integrate three of those projects with the global access control project. Implementation of the five remaining projects is in progress. However, the completion date has been revised against the schedule previously reported to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, with a delay in their implementation of 12 to 18 months, owing to the reasons detailed in part II of the annex. Of the five projects, the installation of blast-proof film and the perimeter protection projects are near completion, with the exception of planned improvements to the Place des Nations gate, which is dependent upon construction by the host country in that area. 7. Of four projects approved by the General Assembly in section XI of its resolution 59/276 for a total cost of $1,718,200, the protection of oversized glazed facades is almost completed. The other three projects are still in the early stages of implementation. Owing to its priority, at the initiative of the Secretariat, one additional project related to the renovation of the armoury room, at a total cost of $47,500, has been implemented from within the overall resources approved for security-strengthening projects at UNOG. The priority given to this project reflects the need to bring the storage and safekeeping of firearms in line with the host country's regulations. C. United Nations Office at Vienna 8. The security-strengthening programme approved for Vienna is financed on a cost-shared basis with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. Of 15 projects approved by the General Assembly, one project, namely, installation of a new fence around the Vienna International Centre, has been implemented. The 14 remaining projects are at various stages of implementation but, in general, a delay is being experienced ranging from 12 to 24 months against the initially foreseen schedule reported to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. In terms of the utilization of funds, by the end of September 2005, 20 per cent of the programme for Vienna had been implemented. 9. As detailed in part III of the annex to the present report, the delay in implementation of some projects reflects the need to link them to the ongoing asbestos removal project, and the integration of others with the global access control project. Measures implemented so far include the installation of a vehicle recognition system and the installation of blast-proof film in all main areas. Other projects approved in the biennium 2004-2005 are in the early stages of design and product research. D. United Nations Office at Nairobi 10. Of 10 projects approved for the United Nations Office at Nairobi (UNON), 5 projects have been completed. Thirty-nine per cent of the total funds allocated for the programme ($4,986,000) has been utilized. Delays ranging from 6 to 12 months against the schedule initially foreseen and reported to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session are being experienced for the implementation of the remaining projects. 11. The design phase for the remaining projects, namely the relocation of the commissary and gift shop and the construction of a loading bay, has been completed. Construction is expected to commence in the second quarter of 2006. The project to upgrade the UNON life safety system, approved by the General Assembly in section XI of its resolution 59/276, has been initiated and the selection of a design consulting firm is currently in progress. E. Economic Commission for Africa 12. In total, 13 projects have been approved by the General Assembly for the Economic Commission for Africa. Of the total approved programme of $2,565,900, funds in the amount of $1,801,900, or 70 per cent of the approved programme, have been utilized. The projects approved in 2003 by the Assembly in its resolution 56/286 have been fully implemented. The revised implementation timetable of the remaining projects reflects a delay ranging from 6 to 12 months against the timetable reported to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. 13. For the projects which are currently under implementation, the security measures include the installation of blast-proof film, which is almost completed, the construction of the off-site pass, identification and accreditation centre as well as security improvements to the existing perimeter wall. Contracts are expected to be in place for all remaining projects by the end of the year and the construction work is expected to begin in 2006. F. Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 14. All the security-strengthening projects approved by the General Assembly for the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific have been largely completed. Of the approved total cost of $921,100, the amount of $875,200, or 95 per cent has been committed. Two projects are still under implementation, including the installation of an intruder alarm system, which is being finalized, and the upgrading of the closed-circuit television system, which is at the contractor selection stage. The remaining work is expected to be completed during the first half of 2006. G. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 15. Of the total programme of $998,100 for the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the amount of $255,500, or 26 per cent, has been utilized. The installation of blast-proof film has been completed at ECLAC headquarters and its Mexico City and Bogotá offices, and is under implementation at other local ECLAC offices. The design phase of all remaining projects, intended to be implemented concurrently, has been completed and procurement action has been initiated for the construction phase. The implementation of these projects in Santiago depends on construction of the ECLAC Security and Safety Unit, which has experienced some delay against the initially foreseen schedule. Annex Status of implementation of security-strengthening security projects I. Headquarters Project resolution 56/286 (December 2004) approved funding committed by end- September Balance Status of implementation Projects completed as reported in A/58/756 Fully implemented Improvements to the fire alarm system Fully implemented, except for the fan shutdown system in the Conference building, which is expected to be completed by the end of 2006 Installation of blast-proof protection film on all windows Protection of executive floors Construction of an interior security control centre Construction work is in progress and is planned to be completed by February 2006. See notes 1 and 2 Installation of a complex-wide access control and alarm monitoring system Construction work is in progress and is planned to be completed by February 2006. See notes 1, 2 and 3 Installation of a physical security barrier around the perimeter Construction work is in progress and is planned to be completed by December 2005. See notes 1 and 2 Overhaul of the perimeter lighting system Construction work is completed. See notes 1 and 2 Installation of secure electric utility vault grates Construction work is completed. Additional work is required to integrate the monitoring surveillance response plan into the security control centre. See notes 1 and 2 Installation of six additional physical vehicle barriers Four portable vehicle barriers Specifications have been issued. Procurement action is in progress. The project is planned to be completed by April 2006 Installation of ballistic partitions in the General Assembly Hall and Security Council Chambers Alternative options to secure the General Assembly Hall and the Security Council Chambers have been designed. Project implementation was deferred to the capital master plan Installation of sensors and air protection devices Project deferred to the capital master plan Construction of an off-site non-governmental organization resource centre and an off-site mail facility Project deferred and will be implemented concurrently with the capital master plan implementation Subtotal 2004-2005 first performance report recosting and other adjustments Note 1: Final testing and commissioning for these projects will be completed by the end of March 2006. Note 2: The strengthening security construction projects, originally scheduled for completion by June 2005, are now scheduled for final testing and commissioning by the end of March 2006. Project delays are the result of deficiencies in the construction documents. Further delays resulted from the time taken by the construction contractor to mobilize, as well as its inability to manage its subcontractors. Additional delays resulted from modifications to the design to meet current conditions and technologies, and programme changes proposed by the United Nations. Note 3: The short fall in this project is being covered through a transfer of $2,766,500 from the regular alterations budget. Approved by resolution 58/295 resolution Total approved funding Funds committed by end-September 2005 Relocation of mail and pouch shipping and receiving operations; new Door 30 mail inspection/delivery area Project implementation was delayed by a decision to hire a general contractor to implement the full project instead of using subcontractors for each component monitored by the existing consortium. The project design completed in 2004 had to be supplemented with detailed construction designs so that a general contractor could review and bid for the full implementation. The construction is scheduled for mid-2006 with construction completion in 2007 Provision of full perimeter protection, including improvement of access control at the Chemin de Fer gate, the Pregny gate and the Place des Nations gate Chemin de Fer gate: completed. Pregny gate: scheduled for completion in March 2006. Place des Nations gate: delayed pending the completion of the construction undertaken by the host country in the area. Fences: project on schedule with masonry work postponed to spring 2006. Funds committed exclude elements of the project which are dependent on the global identity and access control project Improvement of the intermediate area surveillance, including lighting and video surveillance, in underground garage area This project has been put on hold by the Steering Committee since December 2004 pending the finalization of the plan on the global identity and access control project, which will address lighting and CCTV installations Creation of a security control centre Infrastructure works to continue in 2006, together with the implementation of the global identity and access control system. Expected completion date of December 2006, pending decisions on the access control project Installation of air and water intake protection structures This project has been put on hold by the Steering Committee since December 2004 pending the finalization of the plan on the global identity and access control system since the latter would cover, inter alia, intrusion detection Installation of plastic film on windows Blast film has been installed in all main buildings. Depending on weather conditions, all remaining areas are expected to be completed by year-end Upgrading of the public address system for emergency announcements Construction work commenced in late September 2005 and is planned to be completed by March 2006 Building partitioning for fire protection, including in the conference area Detailed design work scheduled to be undertaken by the Swiss Fire Institute in early 2006. The project is in part dependent on the global identity and access control project as it will impact the partitioning of the buildings. Expected completion date by end-2007 Closing of parking lots and creation of a 25-metre no-vehicle zone Project on hold pending the design of a concept for the stand-off zone by the end of 2005. Expected completion date by end-2007. This project has been delayed owing to a reprioritization of projects by the Steering Committee Protection of oversized glazed facades Bids received for the supply of bullet-proof windows are under review. Completion of the work expected in January 2006. The replacement of the existing facade of Hall XIV and Room XVI is under bidding process and work is expected to be completed by mid-2006 Installation of fire protection devices in all buildings in the Palais des Nations Detailed design work scheduled to be undertaken by the Swiss Fire Institute in early 2006. Expected completion date by end-2007. This project has been delayed owing to a reprioritization of projects by the Steering Committee Installation of sprinkler systems Detailed design work scheduled to be undertaken by the Swiss Fire Institute in early 2006. Expected completion date by end-2007. This project has been delayed owing to a reprioritization of projects by the Steering Committee. Armoury room Priority additional project, funded from the redeployment of funds from the installation of plastic films, to renovate an existing room to be the armoury room for the storage and safekeeping of firearms as per host country standards. Completion expected by December 2005 Approved by resolution 59/276 Installation of perimeter fence surveillance and alarm system CCTV -- Bidding process under way. Alarm systems -- Specifications under preparation. The completion date is dependent on the implementation of the global access control project Constructional reinforcement of perimeter gates and posts, including vehicle crash barriers Technical evaluation for the selection of the design consultant under way. Completion expected by the end of 2006 Installation of remote closing and locking devices for building access Design under preparation. Project implementation linked to the asbestos removal project currently in progress in the complex with completion expected by October 2006 Installation of door alarm system and CCTV upgrades Statement of work completed. Contract documents under preparation. Expected completion date of May 2006 Installation of vehicle recognition system and screening equipment for vehicle search Licence plates recognition system completed. Specification for under vehicle monitoring system under review with expected completion by mid-2006 Installation of blast-proof film on windows of the Centre Installation of blast-proof film completed in all main areas. Remaining installation to be completed by the end of 2005 Installation of stationary chemical monitoring system Research of products ongoing Installation of HVAC access control, protection and alarm system Market research ongoing. Project implementation in part dependent on the implementation of the global access control project Reconstruction and upgrading of security control centre Design completed and under review. Project implementation in part dependent on the implementation of the global access control project Installation of stationary explosive detection system for vehicles Market research ongoing Installation of stationary explosive detection system for pedestrians Construction to preclude straight-line approach to vehicular access points and installation of speed bumps within the perimeter roads Design proposals made. Agreement of host country awaited for gates 3 and 4. Expected completion by the end of 2006 Installation of perimeter gates enforcements Design criteria under review. Design of gates 3 and 4 dependent on host country approval. Expected completion by the end of 2006 Reinforcement of perimeter posts -- Gate 1 remodelling Design criteria under review. Project implementation in part dependent on host country approval for land adjacent to the gate Approved by resolution Additional improvement of gates and barriers and reinforcements of perimeter fence Construction of the registration booth for conference participants in the visitors' pavilion Installation of blast-proof protection film on windows of the entire complex Earthwork and civil work for barriers, turnstiles and planter boxes around the UNON entrance Relocation and construction of new security booths Projects as reported in A/58/756 The elements of the project, related to CCTV and lighting and which had been pre-encumbered, were put on hold pending the implementation of the global ID and access control project Installation of a perimeter alarm system and fence -- phase 3 Completion of 50 per cent of the project, with full completion expected by end-2005. The delay is due to substandard delivery by the contractor Relocation of the commissary and gift shop from the main premises The design phase has been completed and the projects are in the tender phase. Construction work is expected to begin in mid-2006 Construction of one-stop shop off loading bay for all agencies Upgrade of life safety systems Tender documents have been received and evaluation of the documents is currently in progress. The work is expected to begin in mid-2006 approved funding Installation of blast-proof protection film on windows at ECA headquarters and the ECA subregional offices Expected completion by the end of 2005 Construction of an off-site pass, identification and accreditation centre premises Under construction Improvements to physical security and reinforcement of the existing perimeter wall Construction of a new perimeter security wall around the additional land granted by the host Government Contractor has been selected Upgrading of the closed-circuit television system at the United Nations Conference Centre and installation of a closed-circuit television perimeter intrusion detection system Contract expected to be awarded by the end of 2005 Installation of a fire alarm notification system in office buildings Evaluation of contractors under way, with contract expected to be awarded by the end of 2005 Installation of automatic vehicle bomb-scanning system at the main entrance Physical installation completed, certification is in process Installation of blast-proof film on windows on the ESCAP premises Installation completed. Awaiting arrival of small replacement stock Installation of 4 hydraulic in-ground road blockers at all major entrances and installation of 20 static bollards to prevent vehicle ramming at vulnerable perimeter locations Road blockers and bollards fully installed and operational, required unforeseen modifications will be completed by February 2006 Upgrading of the closed-circuit television system, including computerizing the control centre for improved monitoring and coverage Expected award of contract by the end of 2005 and work completion by February 2006 Installation of an intruder alarm system for all fire escape doors and accessways into the buildings Completion of 50 per cent of the project. Requisition has been issued for the remaining work Fully implemented with the exception of elements of the project, initially pre-encumbered in 2002-2003, but which were later postponed to be implemented jointly with the construction of the new premises for the Security and Safety Unit. With respect to the latter, the design work has been completed Installation of blast-proof protection film on windows at the ECLAC premises Modification of the southern entrance. Construction of an off-site pass and identification centre at the southern entrance area of the ECLAC complex This project will be implemented jointly with the construction of the new premises for the Security and Safety Unit. Design completed and approved by the Department of Safety and Security in September 2005. Procurement process under way Construction of a crash barrier This project will be implemented jointly with the construction of the new premises for the Security and Safety Unit Additional modules for the Security and Safety Unit Installation of blast-resistance film on windows at national and regional offices Installation completed in the ECLAC subregional headquarters in Mexico City and in the Bogotá national office. The project is under implementation in other offices Grand total 