%%%MILITARY ACTIVITY|IRAQ|UNITED STATES|UNITED KINGDOM|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/53/760 S/1998/1188 17 December 1998 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: RUSSIAN GENERAL ASSEMBLY SECURITY COUNCIL Fifty-third session Fifty-third year Agenda item 54 CONSEQUENCES OF THE IRAQI OCCUPATION OF AND AGGRESSION AGAINST KUWAIT Letter dated 17 December 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Belarus to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to draw your attention to the statement made on 17 December 1998 by the President of Belarus concerning the missile and bomb strikes against Iraq (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 54, and of the Security Council. (Signed) A. Sychou Permanent Representative of Belarus to the United Nations English Page Annex Statement made on 17 December 1998 by the President of Belarus The missile and bomb strikes against Iraq by the United States of America and the United Kingdom on 17 December 1998 are a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and go far beyond the scope of Security Council resolutions concerning Iraq. Belarus believes that actions by States or coalitions of States in circumvention of the Security Council, which has primary responsibility for, and plays a central role in, the maintenance of international peace and security, are unacceptable. The use of force by the international community is an extraordinary and extreme measure that can be invoked only in cases of a serious threat to international peace and security and when the political and diplomatic possibilities for settling the conflict have been exhausted. Belarus calls upon the United States of America and the United Kingdom to halt immediately their strikes against Iraq. Belarus also hopes that Iraq will comply fully and without delay with all the relevant Security Council resolutions. A solution in keeping with the interests of international peace and security and the imperatives of international law should be found within the framework of the Security Council and should be strictly observed by all members of the international community. This applies, above all, to the permanent members of the Security Council. The missile and bomb strikes do not solve the problem; they cause the death of innocent civilians and destabilize the situation in the entire region. Belarus is deeply distressed at the attempt to solve problems of international security by the use of force and in contravention of Security Council resolutions, which seriously undermines the existing system of international security and international law. 