%%%ARMS LIMITATION|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|CHILE|GREECE|GUATEMALA|JORDAN|MEXICO|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS|ENVIRONMENTAL LAW|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|NUCLEAR WEAPONS|CHEMICAL WEAPONS|BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS|

Sixtieth session * A/60/50 and Corr. 1. Item 98 (g) of the preliminary list* General and complete disarmament Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Introduction Replies received from Governments Chile Greece Guatemala Jordan Mexico 1. On 3 December 2004, the General Assembly adopted resolution 59/68, entitled "Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control", in paragraph 4 of which the Assembly invited all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General information on the measures they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the resolution and requested the Secretary-General to submit a report containing this information to the Assembly at its sixtieth session. 2. Pursuant to that request, on 25 February 2005, a note verbale was sent to Member States inviting them to provide information on the subject. The replies received are contained in section II below. Additional replies received will be issued as addenda to the present report. II. Replies received from Governments [Original: Spanish] [13 May 2005] Arms control in Chile is governed by Act No. 17798, which is currently being amended. Our country would like to join the Missile Technology Control Regime, the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Australia Group. These are the lead organizations working to control exports related to conventional weapons and biological and chemical weapons. Furthermore, in the field of environmental norms, Chile enacted Supreme Decree No. 95 of 2001, which, in article 3, paragraph (d), stipulates that nuclear reactors and facilities and related installations should be subject to evaluation for their impact on the environment. Nuclear facilities are defined as plants that use nuclear fuels and materials and plants that process nuclear materials, including installations that reprocess irradiated nuclear fuels. Related installations are defined as storage depots for nuclear or radioactive materials associated with nuclear reactors or facilities. [Original: English] [18 May 2005] Greece does not have, nor has it ever had, any programme for the manufacture, stockpiling, acquisition or destruction of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons. Greece has a strong environmental policy and the appropriate legal instruments for the implementation of this policy. The Hellenic Armed Forces comply fully with this policy and implement to the letter the applicable legal provisions. Special attention is given to the environmental norms during the destruction of redundant or obsolete arms and ammunition. The protection of the environment will be a key criterion in the selection of a foreign destruction facility/contractor for the destruction, by 2008, of the antipersonnel landmines stockpile of Greece, pursuant to the provisions of the Ottawa Convention of 1997. Greece is currently a signatory to international treaties and conventions related to the protection of the environment. The relevant legislation adopted by the European Union is also implemented by Greece. [19 May 2005] Guatemala has no nuclear weapons; however, it considers it extremely important that countries with such weapons should, in accordance with international agreements on disarmament that they have signed, be mindful of environmental harm. [Original: Arabic] [11 May 2005] 1. A country with a small surface area and dry climate, Jordan is largely dependent on its meagre natural resources. The sustainable use of those resources is therefore a matter to which the Jordanian State attaches the utmost importance. As is commonly known, environmental, economic and social considerations are taken into account in development plans that are based on the principle of sustainable development. Environmental protection has thus received considerable attention from the Jordanian planners of various economic, military and social projects, as clearly evidenced in the Jordanian Environmental Protection Act of 2003 and by Jordan's signature of these international environmental conventions and treaties and relevant agreements, including those on disarmament and arms control. 2. Examples of Jordan's observance of environmental norms in agreements on disarmament and arms control include the following: (a) The Jordanian armed forces have cleared the minefields in the Jordan valley, where the areas concerned were rehabilitated and reclaimed for agricultural purposes and subsequently returned to their owners; (b) Jordan has destroyed its stockpile of mines, following the necessary environmental measures and precautions during the process, which took place in specially dug trenches situated well away from inhabited areas, pastureland, protected natural regions and special environmental areas. The areas for clearance were also selected in conjunction with the Ministry of Water and Irrigation in order to ensure that the underground water, which is Jordan's main source of water, would be unaffected. At the end of the clearance operations, the resulting waste was collected and scientifically buried in dumps intended for dangerous waste; (c) The Jordanian armed forces generally promote preservation of the environment by complying with the Jordanian Environment Protection Act and with international environmental laws and norms when performing their military activities and by participating in environmental projects throughout the Kingdom, including projects for the rehabilitation of waste dumps and old phosphate mines and afforestation projects. [16 May 2005] Mexico reaffirms its view that the drafting and implementation of disarmament and arms control agreements should be carried out in accordance with relevant conventional or customary environmental norms. In fact, Mexico's pro-disarmament position is based not solely on a concept of security that rests exclusively on political and military criteria but also on a broader concept of security that takes into account environmental considerations. It is clear to Mexico that the existence of certain weapons, in particular weapons of mass destruction, presents a permanent danger to the environment, when one considers the difficulties associated with the development, production and stockpiling of such weapons. The negative impact caused by the use of weapons of mass destruction on the various forms of life on earth is obvious. Mexico therefore feels that the environmental dimension should always be borne in mind in the drafting and implementation of disarmament and arms control agreements, especially with regard to the drafting of provisions concerning liability and verification measures relating to the implementation of the provisions of such instruments. A specific example of the importance that Mexico attaches to environmental aspects of the implementation of disarmament, arms control and security agreements can be seen in Mexico's work on the amendment of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. In the framework of the process to amend the Convention, Mexico has joined Belgium, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Slovenia, Sweden and Switzerland in an effort to include environmental damage as a crime punishable under the Convention. Mexico is also in favour of establishing criminal liability for environmental damage resulting from attacks on a nuclear installation. 