%%%TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|SANCTIONS|DEVELOPING ISLAND COUNTRIES|DESERTIFICATION|HUMAN REPRODUCTION|

Vice-President: Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia) In the absence of the President, Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia), Vice-President, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m. Reports of the Second Committee The Acting President: I would like to inform members that, as reflected in today's Journal, action on draft resolution A/60/L.43 under agenda item 45, "Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special session: implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS", is postponed to a later date to allow time for a review of its programme budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft resolution A/60/L.43 as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget implications is available. The General Assembly will consider the reports of the Second Committee on agenda items 38, 49, 50 and its sub-items (a) to (c), 51, 52 and its sub-items (a) to (d), (e) together with (i) and (f) to (h), 53, 54 and its sub-items (a) to (d), 55 and its sub-items (a) and (b), 56 and its sub-items (a) to (c), 57 and its sub-items (a) and (b), 58 and its sub-items (a) and (b), 59, 73 (b) and 116. I request the Rapporteur of the Second Committee, Mr. Abdulmalik Alshabibi of Yemen, to introduce the reports of the Second Committee in one intervention. Mr. Alshabibi (Yemen), Rapporteur of the Second Committee (spoke in Arabic): I have the honour to present for the consideration of the Assembly the following reports of the Second Committee on the agenda items allocated to it by the Assembly at its sixtieth session. Under agenda item 38, entitled "Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 14 of document A/60/484, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under agenda item 49, entitled "Information and communication technologies for development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/485, the adoption of one draft decision. Agenda item 50 is entitled "Macroeconomic policy questions". Under sub-item (a), entitled "International trade and development", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of document A/60/486/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 50, entitled "International financial system and development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/486/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 50, entitled "External debt crisis and development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/60/486/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under item 51 of the agenda, entitled "Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 14 of document A/60/487, the adoption of one draft resolution. However, the following corrections should be made to operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution: the comma after "Monterrey Consensus" should be deleted, and the words "date to be determined during the period 2008-2009" should be replaced with the words "time between 2008 and 2009". Agenda item 52 is entitled "Sustainable development". Under sub-item (a), entitled "Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 14 of document A/60/488/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions and, in paragraph 15, one draft decision. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 52, entitled "Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/488/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 52, entitled "International Strategy for Disaster Reduction", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 15 of document A/60/488/Add.3, the adoption of two draft resolutions. Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 52, entitled "Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of document A/60/488/Add.4, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (e), entitled "Sustainable development in mountain regions", and sub-item (i) of agenda item 52, entitled "Rendering assistance to poor mountain countries to overcome obstacles in socio-economic and ecological areas", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/488/Add.5, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (f) of agenda item 52, entitled "Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy, including the implementation of the World Solar Programme 1996-2005", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/60/488/Add.6, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (g) of agenda item 52, entitled "Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 24 of document A/60/488/Add.7, the adoption of two draft resolutions. Under sub-item (h) of agenda item 52, entitled "Convention on Biological Diversity", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/60/488/Add.8, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under agenda item 53, entitled "Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 11 of document A/60/489, the adoption of one draft resolution. Agenda item 54 is entitled "Globalization and interdependence". Under sub-item (a), entitled "Globalization and interdependence", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/490/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 54, entitled "Science and technology for development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/490/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 54, entitled "International migration and development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 15 of document A/60/490/Add.3, the adoption of two draft resolutions. Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 54, entitled "Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document A/60/490/Add.4, the adoption of one draft resolution. Agenda item 55 is entitled "Groups of countries in special situations". Under sub-item (a), entitled "Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 13 of document A/60/491/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 55, entitled "Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/60/491/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Agenda item 56 is entitled "Eradication of poverty and other development issues". Under subitem (a), entitled "Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006)", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 11 of document A/60/492/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 56, entitled "Women in development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/60/492/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 56, entitled "Human resources development", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document A/60/492/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution. Agenda item 57 is entitled "Operational activities for development". Under sub-item (a), entitled, "Operational activities for development of the United Nations system", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/493/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 57, entitled "South-South cooperation: economic and technical cooperation among developing countries", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/493/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Agenda item 58 is entitled "Training and research". Under sub-item (a), entitled "United Nations Institute for Training and Research", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of document A/60/494/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 58, entitled "United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document A/60/494/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution. Under agenda item 59, entitled "Towards global partnerships", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 13 of document A/60/495, the adoption of one draft resolution. Agenda item 73 is entitled "Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance". Under sub-item (b), entitled "Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions", the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 26 of document A/60/496 and Corr.1, the adoption of five draft resolutions. Under agenda item 116, entitled "Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly", the Committee recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/60/497, the adoption of one draft decision. The Second Committee, on the recommendation of the General Committee of the General Assembly, was requested to discuss agenda item 125, entitled "Programme planning". The Committee's recommendations in that regard are contained in the annex to document A/C.5/60/11. Finally, delegations with queries about technical corrections to the texts of draft resolutions adopted by the Second Committee should communicate them to the secretariat of the Second Committee prior to the final issuance of those texts as resolutions of the General Assembly. Before I conclude, I take this opportunity to thank most sincerely the Chairman of the Second Committee, Mr. Aminu Bashir Wali of Nigeria, as well as the Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Stefano Toscano of Switzerland, Mr. Juraj Koudelka of the Czech Republic and Mr. Selwin Charles Hart of Barbados, for their extraordinary collaboration and partnership during this most challenging and successful session of the Second Committee. Finally, I thank the secretariat for its outstanding assistance to me and to all members of the Bureau. The Acting President: If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Second Committee which are before the Assembly today. It was so decided. The Acting President: I give the floor to the United States. Mr. Marsh (United States of America): I assume, Sir, that you intend that we should consider these matters seriatim, item by item. Is that correct? The Acting President: Yes. Mr. Toscano (Switzerland): I have requested the floor in my capacity as Vice-Chair of the Second Committee. I have a number of corrections to make to some of the draft resolutions on which the Assembly is about to take action, under the sustainable development cluster. I would like to make those corrections, Sir, when you want me to do so. The Acting President: I believe that you can make the corrections before the adoption of the relevant draft resolution. Alternatively, you can give them to the secretariat. The positions of delegations regarding the recommendations of the Second Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that "When the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee." May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats. Before we begin to take action on the recommendations contained in the reports of the Second Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was done in the Second Committee, unless the secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. This means that where separate votes or recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the Second Committee. With regard to co-sponsorship of draft resolutions in the Second Committee, I would like to clarify for members at the outset that the Assembly is acting on draft resolutions recommended for adoption by the Second Committee. And as such, those draft resolutions are no longer open to additional sponsorship by Member States in the plenary. Any corrections that delegations may have concerning the reports of the Second Committee, including the lists of sponsors of draft resolutions contained in the Committee's reports, should be submitted to the secretariat of the Committee for the issuance of corrigenda. In that connection, I would urge delegations to approach the Committee secretariat at the end of the meeting with their corrections. Agenda item 38 Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources Report of the Second Committee (A/60/484) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote has been requested. A recorded vote was taken. In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Against: Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America. Abstaining: Albania, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Tuvalu. The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to 6, with 8 abstentions (resolution 60/183). [Subsequently, the delegation of Trinidad and Tobago informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour; the delegation of Nauru informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.] The Acting President: I call on delegations wishing to speak in explanation of vote after the vote. Mr. Sermoneta (Israel): We deeply regret that the Second Committee has once again become a political platform for advancing one-sided, unbalanced and inaccurate information regarding the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The Second Committee has a vital responsibility before it. Addressing issues that neither enhance our work nor provide pragmatic solutions to the conflict are of no service to any party. The resolution just adopted represents an abuse of the mandate of the Second Committee. It is unfortunate that those who adhere to a myopic, singular political agenda continue to suppress its important priorities and exploit this forum. Ultimately, the important ideals that this institution aspires to serve -- integrity, fairness and effectiveness -- are likewise undermined. Israelis and Palestinians have an important process in place, agreed upon by the Quartet, by which the two parties will engage in direct bilateral negotiations in pursuit of a lasting peace agreement. The resolution just adopted undermines those efforts and prejudges issues to be addressed in those negotiations. As in past years, Israel voted against this biased and counter-productive resolution. Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation has asked for the floor to make a general statement. Once again, the international community, through the General Assembly, has reaffirmed the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan and their sovereignty over their natural resources. And once again, we have listened as the representative of the occupying authorities ignored the opinion of the international community, despite the fact that the vast majority of delegations voted in favour of the resolution, which received 156 votes in favour. That strong support reflects the international community's commitment to achieving peace based on decisions and resolutions of international legitimacy and its deep concern with respect to grave Israeli practices, including the use of the natural resources belonging to the Syrian Golan and the occupied Palestinian territories. Those practices deprive the inhabitants of the resources of those areas. The resolution also transmits the international community's concern at the fact that the occupying Power is dumping various kinds of waste materials that are harmful to the environment in the occupied Arab territories and its concern at the impact of that dumping on the environment and on the health of the Arab civilian population living under the yoke of the occupation. The Acting President: I call on the observer for Palestine. Mr. Hijazi (Palestine): My delegation has requested the floor to make a general statement. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the esteemed Member States who voted in favour of the resolution just adopted, which addresses an issue of critical importance to the Palestinian people. Through that action, the international community reaffirms its commitment to international law and the rights established under that law. The adoption of the resolution also sends a clear message to the Palestinian people, whose rights and resources remain under seizure by the occupying Power, that the international community stands with them and their inalienable right to a life of dignity and prosperity, in which their natural resources are employed for their benefit. Additionally, the adoption of the resolution demonstrates the international community's overwhelming support for holding all States to the same standards and the same responsibilities, clearly demonstrating that no Member of the Organization is above international law and covenants. A people's permanent sovereignty over its natural resources is part and parcel of its inalienable right to self-determination as established by international law, and it must be safeguarded by the international community in the interest of peace and stability. The resolution just adopted, which gained the support of the international community, provides such legal and moral protection. Claiming that these resolutions are irrelevant is an assault on the will of the international community, which has repeatedly tried to uphold international law and the principles for which this Organization stands. The adoption of this resolution is repeated annually only because of the belligerence of the occupying Power. If this action is irrelevant to the principles of the United Nations and the obligations of its Members, what, then, is relevant? Those accusations reflect the bankruptcy of the accuser, which has run out of all excuses and justifications for continuing to snub the international community and the laws by which that community lives. The United Nations is for all its Members, and the resolutions adopted by its Members are relevant because they represent the will of Members, who constitute the United Nations. Once again, on behalf of the Palestinian people, I would like to thank Member States for their support of the resolution just adopted. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 38? Agenda item 49 Information and communication technologies for development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/485) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on the draft decision, entitled "Report of the Secretary-General on information and communication technologies for development: progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/295". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision recommended by the Second Committee? The draft decision was adopted. The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 49. Agenda item 50 Macroeconomic policy questions Report of the Second Committee (A/60/486) The Acting President: May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Second Committee? The Acting President: The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 50. (a) International trade and development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/486/Add.1) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We shall now take a decision on those draft resolutions. Draft resolution I is entitled "International trade and development". In the Committee, operative paragraph 13 of draft resolution I was adopted by a vote. However, the Secretariat has been notified that there is no request for a separate vote in plenary meeting on operative paragraph 13. We shall therefore proceed to take action on draft resolution I. I now put to the vote draft resolution I. Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. United States of America. Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Draft resolution I was adopted by 121 votes to 1, with 51 abstentions (resolution 60/184). [Subsequently, the delegation of Trinidad and Tobago informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.] The Acting President: We turn now to draft resolution II. I give the floor to the representative of the United States, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before action is taken on draft resolution II. Mr. Marsh (United States of America): We would like to explain our vote before action is taken on draft resolution II concerning "Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries". The United States opposes the draft resolution. It serves as a direct challenge to the prerogative of sovereign States to conduct their commercial relations freely. Every sovereign State has the right to decide with whom it will or will not trade. Member States should understand, moreover, that the draft resolution is aimed at undermining the international community's ability to respond effectively to acts that by their very nature and enormity are offensive to international norms. There must be consequences for such actions; otherwise, offending States will have no incentive or reason to abandon them. Unilateral and multilateral economic sanctions can be an effective means to achieve legitimate foreign policy objectives. They constitute an influential diplomatic tool. The United States is not alone in holding that view or in following that practice. The United Nations Charter itself provides for the use of sanctions to change the behaviour of those who would challenge, or seek to undermine, international norms. It should be remembered that not too long ago, the unilateral and multilateral economic sanctions imposed on the racist regimes in South Africa and in what was then Rhodesia underscored the international community's solidarity with the people of those countries, who were fighting for their dignity and freedom. Through those steps, positive change was realized. It is therefore a question not of so-called coercion against developing countries, but of extending a hand of support to their peoples when their Governments have coerced them. The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled "Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries". Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Draft resolution II was adopted by 120 votes to 1, with 50 abstentions (resolution 60/185). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 50? (b) International financial system and development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/486/Add.2) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/186). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 50? (c) External debt crisis and development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/486/Add.3) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/187). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 50 and of agenda item 50 as whole? Agenda item 51 Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/487) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution as orally corrected. I call on the representative of Barbados. Mr. Hart (Barbados): Four further minor corrections to the text of the draft resolution need to be made before we proceed to adopt it by consensus. The corrections are consistent with the agreement reached at the Second Committee's meeting on 19 December, and are additional to the corrections made by the Rapporteur of the Second Committee. In operative paragraph 4, the semicolon after "uneven" should be replaced with a comma, followed by the word "and". In the same paragraph, the semicolon after "services" should be replaced with a comma. In the chapeau of operative paragraph 5, the semicolon after "Consensus" should be replaced with "and". Also in the chapeau, the semicolon and the word "and" after "Millennium Development Goals" should be replaced with a full stop. The final sentence of the chapeau would then read, "In this regard". The Acting President: May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as orally corrected? The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/188). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 51? Agenda item 52 Sustainable development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it three draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 25 of its report. I give the floor to the representative of Switzerland. Mr. Toscano (Switzerland): I am speaking in my capacity as Vice-Chairman of the Second Committee. Corrections need to be made to a number of draft resolutions under the sustainable development cluster in order to bring the texts into line with what was decided in the Second Committee. The draft resolutions in question are those on the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-third session, draft resolution I in document A/60/488; on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, contained in document A/60/488/Add.1; on the follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, contained in document A/60/488/Add.2; on the protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind, contained in document A/60/488/Add.4; on the International Year of Deserts and Desertification, 2006, draft resolution I in document A/60/488/Add.7; and on the Convention on Biological Diversity, contained in document A/60/488/Add.8. I will submit the corrections in writing. On behalf of the Committee, I request that they be reflected in the final version of the draft resolutions. The Acting President: The Secretariat will take note of the comments of the representative of Switzerland, which will be reflected accordingly. We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I to III. Draft resolution I, entitled "Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-third session", was adopted by the Second Committee and was orally corrected by the Rapporteur earlier this morning. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution I, as orally corrected? Draft resolution I, as orally corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/189). The Acting President: The Second Committee adopted draft resolution II, entitled "Global Code of Ethics for Tourism". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 60/190). The Acting President: The Second Committee adopted draft resolution III, entitled "International Year of the Potato, 2008". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 60/191). The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 52. (a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.1) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 14 of its report and a draft decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph 15 of the same report. We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I and II and on the draft decision. The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I, entitled "International Year of Planet Earth, 2008". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 60/192). The Acting President: Draft resolution II, entitled "Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development", was adopted by the Second Committee and has been orally corrected. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution II, as orally corrected? Draft resolution II, as orally corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/193). The Acting President: We turn now to the draft decision, entitled "Document on actions taken in organizing the activities of the International Decade for Action, `Water for Life', 2005-2015". The Acting President: I will now give the floor to those representatives who wish to speak in explanation of position on the decisions just taken. Mr. Noghès (Monaco) (spoke in French): I would like to speak in explanation of position on the resolution entitled "International Year of Planet Earth, 2008". The Principality of Monaco regrets that, for technical reasons, it was not in a position to join in sponsoring draft resolution I contained in contained in document A/60/488/Add.1 declaring 2008 the International Year of Planet Earth. We fully share the sponsors' interest in Earth sciences and support all local, national, regional and international initiatives designed to protect planet Earth. In particular, since the holding of the Earth Summit in 1992, the Principality of Monaco has made sustainable development a priority objective at the domestic level and in the context of international cooperation. It will endeavour to make the best use of 2008 to develop viable communities, particularly in developing countries. Mr. Salazar Pineda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to reaffirm the position of President Chavez with regard to the outcome document of the 2005 summit (resolution 60/1). That document was the result of a process of consultations that was neither democratic nor transparent. The negotiating process, which concluded in September, was unworthy of the intergovernmental character of the Organization and did not live up to its principle of the sovereign equality of States. Given those circumstances, the document did not meet the development expectations of our countries and States and failed to guarantee respect for the sovereign right to self-determination, national independence and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has historically stood by small island developing States in their aspirations to development and prosperity, and in recent years we have joined a number of multilateral and regional cooperation mechanisms. At the multilateral level, we have joined with other countries of the South in carrying out activities in response to their particular needs. We would also like to express our solidarity with the small island developing States in the context of the natural disasters to which they have so often been subjected. Our commitment to and solidarity with them will remain unflagging. My delegation did not oppose the consensus on draft resolution II. However, the resolution makes reference to the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. My country has expressed reservations about paragraphs 26 and 27 of the Strategy, since they make explicit reference to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which contains provisions relating to the delimitation of maritime boundaries -- a Convention to which we are not party. We reiterate, therefore, that, under international customary law, the norms established by that Convention are not applicable to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, apart from those it explicitly recognizes or may recognize in the future by incorporating them into its domestic legislation. My delegation did not oppose the consensus on the adoption of the draft resolution. But given the references to the 2005 Summit Outcome and to the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela dissociates itself from those paragraphs of the resolution that refer to those documents. We would like to place on record that the present statements apply to all draft resolutions that make reference to those documents. Mr. Roelants de Stappers (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium was not in a position to sponsor draft resolution I, entitled "International Year of Planet Earth, 2008", when it was adopted in the Second Committee. My country would like to inform the General Assembly that it fully supports the resolution. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 52? (b) Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.2) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution, as orally corrected earlier this morning. The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as orally corrected? The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/194). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 52? (c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.3) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 15 of its report. We will now take a decision on the two draft resolutions. The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I, entitled "International Strategy for Disaster Reduction". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 60/195). The Acting President: The Second Committee adopted draft resolution II, entitled "Natural disasters and vulnerability". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 60/196). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 52? (d) Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.4) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. A separate, recorded vote has been requested on operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution. If there is no objection to that request, I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Japan, United States of America. Israel. Operative paragraph 7 was retained by 170 votes to 2, with 1 abstention. The Acting President: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution as a whole. The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution as a whole. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/197). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 52? (e) Sustainable development in mountain regions (i) Rendering assistance to poor mountain countries to overcome obstacles in socio-economic and ecological areas Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.5) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled "Sustainable mountain development". The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/198). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items (e) and (i) of agenda item 52? (f) Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy, including the implementation of the World Solar Programme 1996-2005 Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.6) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled "Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy, including the implementation of the World Solar Programme". The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/199). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 52? (g) Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.7) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 24 of its report. I call on the observer for Palestine. Mr. Hijazi (Palestine): I wish to make a statement on draft resolution I, on the International Year of Deserts and Desertification, 2006. My delegation would like to point out that, throughout the lengthy negotiations on the draft resolution, we were positive and transparent in our dealings with all delegations in an attempt to reach a consensus. Unfortunately, the insistence of some parties on advancing certain interests, while failing to take into consideration the legitimate concerns of others involved, resulted in a lack of consensus on the draft resolution. The draft resolution does not contain language singling out one country. Instead, it contains language that ensures balance. It welcomes a positive planned step by a Member, while not ignoring that Member's reprehensible actions in the same regard. Omitting a reference to the actions giving rise to concern while praising a step in the planning would send the wrong message, regardless of the Member involved. Hence, this is a matter of principle, not attitude, as some have suggested. What the draft resolution achieves is balance and genuineness, rather than imbalance. The Acting President: We shall now take action on the draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in its report. Draft resolution I is entitled "International Year of Deserts and Desertification, 2006". A separate vote has been requested on the fourth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I. Is there any objection to that request? As there is none, I shall put the fourth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I to the vote. Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Albania, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Ireland, Jamaica, Kenya, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay. The fourth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I was retained by 54 votes to 33, with 68 abstentions. [Subsequently, the delegations of Brazil, Colombia, Eritrea, Myanmar, Namibia, Saudi Arabia and Somalia informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour; the delegations of Fiji and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote against; the delegations of Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Malawi, Panama, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Solomon Islands and Trinidad and Tobago informed the Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.] The Acting President: A separate vote has also been requested on the seventh preambular paragraph of draft resolution I. Is there any objection to that request? In the absence of objection, I shall put the seventh preambular paragraph of draft resolution I to the vote. A recorded vote has been requested. Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay. Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Pakistan, Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Cameroon, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Liberia, Mali, Nepal, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). The seventh preambular paragraph of draft resolution I was retained by 97 votes to 27, with 25 abstentions. [Subsequently, the delegations of the Bahamas, Colombia, Fiji, Mozambique and Saint Kitts and Nevis informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour; the delegations of Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia and the Sudan informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote against; the delegations of Burundi, Kenya and Trinidad and Tobago informed the Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.] The Acting President: We shall now put draft resolution I, as a whole, to the vote. Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cyprus, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Syrian Arab Republic. Albania, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Draft resolution I was adopted by 120 votes to 1, with 47 abstentions (resolution 60/200). [Subsequently, the delegations of Panama, Somalia and Trinidad and Tobago informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour; the delegation of the Sudan informed the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.] The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to delegations wishing to speak in explanation of vote after the vote. Mr. Marsh (United States of America): With respect to draft resolution I, entitled "International Year of Deserts and Desertification, 2006", deserts and desertification present challenges to the international community and to Member States, but they also present positive examples of international cooperation. We regret that what should have been a wholly constructive resolution has been marred because a few Member States decided to use it to voice grievances of dubious relevance to the International Year of Deserts and Desertification. For that reason, the United States abstained in the vote. Mr. Carmon (Israel): Israel is a known leader in research on desertification and land degradation. The Jacob Blaustein Institute for Desert Research, in the Negev region, where the international conference we are hosting will take place, is considered to be among the world's top institutions in this field. Israel's initiative to include language welcoming that international conference, to be held in cooperation with other Member States, academic institutions and the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification was motivated by our desire to take part in raising public awareness of desertification and land degradation and to share our proven experience and expertise in that field as part of the celebrations of the International Year, all for the benefit of the international community, in particular the countries affected. It is regrettable that a handful of delegations -- or rather, one delegation in particular -- sabotaged a straightforward resolution and the technical issue it represents, with utter disregard for the importance of the issue at hand, all for the sake of making a political point. Israel believes that such contemptible manoeuvres should be continually challenged, especially in the General Assembly Hall, and rejected. It is for that reason that we called for a separate vote on the fourth preambular paragraph of the resolution. We would like to convey our appreciation to those delegations which have supported us in that initiative and to those which have opposed the politicized amendment, thus sending the right message to the amendment's initiators. I can promise you, Mr. President, and all members that, despite the efforts to discriminate against it, Israel will continue to be proactively and positively involved in the work of the General Assembly, in particular in areas where it can contribute, based on its knowledge and experience, to addressing the issues at the top of the global agenda. Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Syria voted against the draft resolution on the International Year of Deserts and Desertification for one simple reason: one delegation's politicization of the issue. That was also why Syria voted against the seventh preambular paragraph. That paragraph notes that the Israeli occupation authorities will hold an international conference entitled "Deserts and desertification". Israel's convening of the conference is intended to deceive the international community in an act of hypocrisy and persuade it of Israel's contribution to combating desertification at the regional and international levels. But in fact, the Israeli authorities are exacerbating desertification and environmental degradation in the occupied Arab territories of Palestine and Syria. Consider what Israeli tanks and war machinery are doing to the land and the environment of the occupied Palestinian territories in particular. Numerous reports of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly note that Israel is carrying out many activities in occupied Arab lands that contribute to the degradation of the soil, such as uprooting trees and destroying wells used by Arab farmers. Israel also draws a large volume of underground water, affecting the area's river courses. Through those practices, Israel is destroying the environment of the occupied Arab territories. Further, it is burying nuclear and toxic wastes from Israeli industrial sites. The resolution just adopted and the resolution on the permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources, both clearly and frankly reflect the international community's deep concern at those Israeli practices. Syria welcomes the retention of the fourth preambular paragraph, proposed by the Arab Group, concerning Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian territories. Syria reaffirms its support for all that is set out in the resolution on the International Year of Deserts and Desertification, in particular its welcoming of the conference on the protection of deserts and combating desertification, to be held by the friendly State of Algeria. Our vote on this draft resolution was due to one simple reason: the seventh preambular paragraph's politicization of the issue. That is not at all in line with the principal objective of the International Year of Deserts and Desertification. Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to explain its vote on the fourth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I. Guatemala voted against the retention of the fourth preambular paragraph because we believe that its content neither contributes nor is relevant to the aim of the resolution just adopted. Guatemala voted in favour of the resolution on the permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the Syrian Golan over their natural resources. That resolution is the source of the language contained in the fourth preambular paragraph of draft resolution I, just adopted. Guatemala believes that the earlier resolution was the most appropriate place to deal with the substantive content of the fourth preambular paragraph of the present draft resolution. Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I have requested the floor to speak in explanation of vote after the votes on the fourth and seventh preambular paragraphs of draft resolution I and to state very clearly that Nigeria fully believes in the objectives of the International Year of Deserts and Desertification. We were party to the consensus on resolution 58/211 in 2003 and maintain that position. Although we abstained in the vote on the fourth preambular paragraph, that should not in any way suggest that we have shifted our position on the two-State policy for an independent Israel coexisting with an independent State of Palestine. We fully believe in this, and support both States. Therefore, our vote today should not be interpreted as a shift in Nigeria's policy. The Acting President: We have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after the vote. Draft resolution II is entitled "Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa". A separate vote has been requested on operative paragraph 18 of draft resolution II. Is there any objection to that request? As there is no objection, I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 18 of draft resolution II, on which a separate vote has been requested. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Operative paragraph 18 was retained by 168 votes to 2. [Subsequently, the delegations of Panama and Trinidad and Tobago informed the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.] The Acting President: The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution II, as a whole. The Second Committee adopted draft resolution II as a whole. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 60/201). The Acting President: I give the floor to the representative of Qatar on a point of order. Mr. Al-Athba (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Many delegations seem to be having problems regarding their voting intentions -- a result of the absence of texts in certain languages, in particular Arabic. We would like that problem to be avoided in the future. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 52? (h) Convention on Biological Diversity Report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.8) We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as orally corrected? The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/202). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 52 and of agenda item 52 as a whole? Agenda item 53 Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) Report of the Second Committee (A/60/489) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/203). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 53? Agenda item 54 Globalization and interdependence Report of the Second Committee (A/60/490) The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 54. (a) Globalization and interdependence Report of the Second Committee (A/60/490/Add.1) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled "Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence". The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/204). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 54? (b) Science and technology for development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/490/Add.2) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/205). The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 54. (c) International migration and development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/490/Add.3) Before proceeding further, I should like to inform members that action on draft resolution II, entitled "International migration and development", has been postponed to a later date to allow time for a review of its programme budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft resolution II as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget implications is available. The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution I. The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I, entitled "Facilitation and reduction of the cost of transfer of migrant remittances". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/206). The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 54. (d) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin Report of the Second Committee (A/60/490/Add.4) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled "Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin and returning such assets, in particular to the countries of origin, consistent with the United Nations Convention against Corruption". The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/207). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 54? Agenda item 55 Groups of countries in special situations Report of the Second Committee (A/60/491 and Corr.1) The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 55. (a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries Report of the Second Committee (A/60/491/Add.1) The Acting President: I should like to inform members that action on the draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 13 of its report, entitled "Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries: high-level meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010", has been postponed to a later date to allow time for the review of its programme budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget implications is available. (b) Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation Report of the Second Committee (A/60/491/Add.2) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/208). The Acting President: I give the floor to the representative of Azerbaijan on a point of order. Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): The delegation of Azerbaijan submitted a letter to the Secretariat in the context of agenda item 55 (b). It reached the Secretariat by the required date, but I believe that, because of a delay, the translation service was not able to translate it into all official languages in time for it to be reflected in the report. I request that the record reflect the fact that the letter was available. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 55? Agenda item 56 Eradication of poverty and other development issues Report of the Second Committee (A/60/492) The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 56. (a) Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (19972006) Report of the Second Committee (A/60/492/Add.1) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/209). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 56? (b) Women in development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/492/Add.2) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/210). The Acting President: I give the floor to the representative of Nicaragua, who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the draft resolution just adopted. Mr. Cano (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation was pleased to join the consensus on the resolution just adopted. We would like, however, to express one reservation with regard to the text. The fourth preambular paragraph of the resolution contains the term "sexual and reproductive health". The Republic of Nicaragua would like to reaffirm the reservations that it has expressed on previous occasions, including during the 1994 Cairo International Conference on Population and Development. The Acting President: I give the floor to the observer of the Holy See. Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): My delegation is pleased to welcome the resolution on women in development. While it supports the resolution, it understands that the terms used in the fourth preambular paragraph -- "preventive health information" and "sexual and reproductive health" -- as well as the reference to reproductive rights contained in the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly referred to in the second preambular paragraph and in operative paragraph 3 of the resolution, do not include either the right to abortion or access to it as a service. Nor do we understand those terms to constitute an expression of support for such. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 56? (c) Human resources development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/492/Add.3) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/211). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 56 and of agenda item 56 as a whole? Agenda item 57 Operational activities for development Report of the Second Committee (A/60/493) The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 57. (a) Operational activities for development of the United Nations system Report of the Second Committee (A/60/493/Add.1) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on the draft decision. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. The draft decision was adopted by 172 votes to 1. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 57? (b) South-South cooperation: economic and technical cooperation among developing countries Report of the Second Committee (A/60/493/Add.2) The draft resolution, entitled "South-South cooperation", was adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/212). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 57 and of agenda item 57 as a whole? Agenda item 58 Training and research Report of the Second Committee (A/60/494) The Acting President: May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Second Committee? The Acting President: The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 58. (a) United Nations Institute for Training and Research Report of the Second Committee (A/60/494/Add.1) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/213). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 58? (b) United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy Report of the Second Committee (A/60/494/Add.2) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 60/214). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 58 and of agenda item 58 as a whole? Agenda item 59 Towards global partnerships Report of the Second Committee (A/60/495) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. I give the floor to the representative of the Czech Republic to make an oral correction to the text of the draft resolution. Mr. Koudelka (Czech Republic): I am speaking in my capacity as Vice-Chairman of the Second Committee. It has been brought to my attention that a small editorial change needs to be made to the draft resolution. In operative paragraph 12, a colon should be inserted after the words "the promotion of". The Acting President: We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as orally corrected? The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/215). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 59? (b) Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions Report of the Second Committee (A/60/496 and Corr.l) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it five draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 26 of its report. I give the floor to the representative of Djibouti. Mr. Omar (Djibouti): I shall be submitting to the Secretariat a minor editorial correction to draft resolution II, "Economic assistance for the reconstruction and development of Djibouti". The Acting President: The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolutions I to V. Draft resolution I is entitled "International cooperation and coordination for the human and ecological rehabilitation and economic development of the Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan". The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 60/216). The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled "Economic assistance for the reconstruction and development of Djibouti". The Second Committee adopted draft resolution II, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly too wishes to adopt draft resolution II, as corrected? Draft resolution II, as corrected, was adopted (resolution 60/217). The Acting President: Draft resolution III is entitled "Humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation for Ethiopia". The Second Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 60/218). The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is entitled "Assistance for humanitarian relief and the economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia". The Second Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 60/219). The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled "Humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation for El Salvador and Guatemala". The Second Committee adopted draft resolution V without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 60/220). The Acting President: I give the floor to the representative of the United States, who wishes to speak in explanation of position on draft resolution II, which has just been adopted. Mr. Marsh (United States of America): My delegation would like to note its regret that the language in operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution II, concerning Djibouti, does not conform to the language that was agreed upon during our negotiations on the draft resolution. Neither does it conform with the language that is normally used in United Nations resolutions dealing with the relationship between the United Nations and international organizations, including the Bretton Woods institutions, that are not part of the United Nations system. The governing bodies of those organizations determine their actions. It is inappropriate for the United Nations to request or even encourage them to do anything. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 73? Agenda item 116 (continued) Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly Report of the Second Committee (A/60/497) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action on the draft decision. The Second Committee adopted the draft decision, entitled "Programme of work of the Second Committee for the sixty-first session of the General Assembly". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 116. The General Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of all the reports of the Second Committee before it. Postponement of the date of recess The Acting President: I would like to draw the attention of members to the date of recess of the current session. Members will recall that at its 61st plenary meeting, on 8 December 2005, the General Assembly decided that the sixtieth session would recess on Thursday, 22 December 2005. However, given that the Fifth Committee has not yet completed its work and that the relevant documents are not yet available to the General Assembly, I would like to propose to the Assembly that it postpone the date of recess of the current session until Friday, 23 December 2005. In the absence of objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees to that proposal. The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 