%%%SATELLITES|SPACE TECHNOLOGY|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Report on the Fifth United Nations/International Academy of Astronautics Workshop on Small Satellites in the Service of Developing Countries: Current and Planned Small Satellite Programmes (Vancouver, Canada, 5 October 2004)* Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Background and objectives Attendance Summary of presentations Conclusions and recommendations A. Background and objectives The Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III) recommended, inter alia, that the joint development, construction and operation of a variety of small satellites offering opportunities to develop indigenous space industry should be undertaken as a suitable project for enabling space research, technology demonstrations and related applications in communications and Earth observation. Additional recommendations emanated from the activities of the Technical Forum held at UNISPACE III. In accordance with those recommendations, the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat has substantially extended its existing cooperation with the Subcommittee on Small Satellites for Developing Nations of the International Academy of Astronautics (IAA). At the 1999 meeting of the IAA Subcommittee, it was agreed that the fiftyfifth International Astronautical Congress, which was to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 2 to 6 October 2000, would be an ideal opportunity to review the status of programmes in Latin America. It was further agreed that the Workshop should be open to participants from other regions, but that the situation in Latin America would be used as an example of how developing countries could benefit from small satellites and that that topic should form the core of the discussion. The report of the first United Nations/IAA Workshop (A/AC.105/745) was submitted to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its thirty-eighth session, in 2001. Based on the positive response from participants and from member States of the Committee, it was decided that that regular activity should continue, with emphasis on different aspects of the issue and the specific needs of individual regions. The second Workshop was held in Toulouse, France, on 2 October 2001, the third in Houston, United States of America, on 12 October 2002 and the fourth in Bremen, Germany, on 30 September 2003. The corresponding reports (A/AC.105/772, A/AC.105/799 and A/AC.105/813) were submitted to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its thirty-ninth, fortieth and forty-first sessions, in 2002, 2003 and 2004, respectively. At its forty-sixth session, in 2003, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space endorsed the programme of workshops, training courses, symposiums and conferences planned within the framework of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications by the Office for Outer Space Affairs for 2004. Subsequently, the General Assembly endorsed the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2004 in its resolution 58/89 of 9 December 2003. 