%%%REFUGEE ASSISTANCE|REFUGEE PROTECTION|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/AC.96/1018 .. September3 October 2005 ENGLISH Original: ENGLISH AND FRENCH EXECUTIVE COMMITEE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER'S PROGRAMME Fifty-sixth session 3-7 October 2005 REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE I. INTRODUCTION 1. At its fifty-fifth session in October 2004, the Executive Committee adopted a decision which set out the issues to be examined by the Standing Committee in its programme of work for 2005. This report provides a summary of the implementation of this programme. 2. The Standing Committee held three meetings in 2005: in March, June and September. A planning meeting of Executive Committee members in December 2004 established the calendar of meetings and determined the distribution of the different agenda items in 2005. This is provided in Annex I. 3. A detailed account of the work undertaken at each of the meetings of the Standing Committee in 2005 is contained in the following reports: Report of the Thirty-second meeting of the Standing Committee (A/AC.96/1007); Report of the Thirty-third Meeting of the Standing Committee (A/AC.96/1017); and Report of the Thirty-fourth Meeting of the Standing Committee (A/AC.96/1019). A list of documents relating to these meetings is provided in Annex II. A. Programme budgets and funding 4. At each of its meetings, the Standing Committee considered updates on overall programme budgets and funding through which it was kept informed of programme requirements, budgetary measures and funding levels. These updates included information on the evaluation of the pilot phase of Operational Reserve Category II and on the advantages and disadvantages of biennialization of the programme budget. The Committee adopted decisions at its March and June meetings. At the June meeting, the Committee also considered the Global Report on UNHCR's activities in 2004. At the September meeting, the Annual Programme Budget for 2006, including the Report of the ACABQ, and the recommendations on the biennialization of the programme budget were reviewed by the Standing Committee. B. International Protection 5. In March, the Standing Committee received an oral update on the implementation of the Agenda for Protection. The June meeting included: a debate on the Note on International Protection, including the latest information on implementation of the Agenda for Protection; a progress report on statelessness; an update on the mass influx study; and presentations on local integration and complementary forms of protection. C. Regional activities and Global Programmes 6. Regional reviews of UNHCR's programmes and activities in all five regions - Africa and the Sudan/Chad situation; the Americas; Asia and the Pacific; Central Asia, South-West Asia, North Africa and the Middle East (CASWANAME); and Europe - were considered comprehensively at the Standing Committee's meeting in March. In addition to the regional reviews, the Committee also considered the Office's Global Programmes and partnerships, covering operational agreements with United Nations agencies as well as sector-specific initiatives. This comprehensive review of regional and global activities was articulated around the global objectives contained in the Global Appeal for 2005 and emphasized the progress and problems encountered with respect to the implementation of the Agenda for Protection. In September, the Standing Committee considered safety and security issues. D. Programme/Protection policy 7. UNHCR's Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS in 2005-2007 was considered at the March Standing Committee meeting. In June, the Committee discussed the Report on the High Commissioner's five commitments to refugee women, and received a presentation on Project Profile. In September, the Committee considered the relevance of UNHCR's activities to the Millennium Development Goals. E. Coordination 8. The Committee considered elements for UNHCR's oral update to ECOSOC at its June meeting and received an update on coordination issues at its September meeting. F. Management, financial control, administrative oversight and human resources 9. In March, the Committee received an update on management reforms and discussed the proposal to create a post of Assistant High Commissioner (Protection). An oral update on the work of the Inspector General's Office was also considered. 10. In September, the Standing Committee undertook a preliminary review of financial and budgetary documentation being submitted to the fifty-sixth session of the Executive Committee. The Committee received reports on UNHCR's information and communications technology strategy and on internal audit. It considered the Report of the Board of Auditors to the General Assembly on the Accounts of the Voluntary Funds Administered by UNHCR for the period ended December 2004, and discussed measures taken or proposed in response to recommendations in the Report of the Board of Auditors for 2003. 11. At its March and June meetings, each of its meetings in 2005, the Standing Committee received an updates on measures being taken to follow up on the recommendations of the Board of Auditors for financial years 2002 and 2003. . At its September meeting, UNHCR reported on the recommendations of the Board of Auditors for the financial year 2004, as well as measures it was taking to implement them. G. Governance 12. At its March meeting, the Standing Committee adopted the work programme for 2005 as proposed at the December 2004 planning meeting of the Committee. In June, under governance issues, the Committee considered suggestions for the High Commissioner's opening speech at the fifty-sixth session of the Executive Committee. H. Consultations 13. In accordance with its standard practice, the Standing Committee held informal consultations in the course of the year on issues requiring in-depth discussion. These included consultations on the use of the Operational Reserve; the proposal to create a post of Assistant High Commissioner for Protection; enhancing the independence of the Office of the Inspector General; a proposal to biennialize the programme budget; an outline of UNHCR's budget for 2006; staff safety and security; the issues to be covered in the two thematic conclusions on international protection for 2005; and, UNHCR's role in the United Nations collaborative response to situations of internal displacement. III. . STANDING COMMITTEE DECISIONS In accordance with the authority vested in it by the Executive Committee, the Standing Committee adopted a number of decisions which are annexed to the reports of the different Standing Committee meetings, as follows: Report of the Thirty-second Meeting of the Standing Committee (A/AC.96/1007) Decision on programme budgets and funding for 2005 Decision on the review of the Operational Reserve Category II Report of the Thirty-third Meeting of the Standing Committee (A/AC.96/1017) Decision on overall programme budgets and funding for 2005 CALENDAR STANDING COMMITTEE PROVISIONAL WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2005 32nd Meeting 8-11 March 2005 33rd Meeting 28 - 30 June 2005 34th Meeting 21 - 22 September 2005 PROGRAMME Budgets and Funding Update on budgets and funding Evaluation of pilot phase of Operational Reserve Category II Biennialization of the Programme Budget - analysis of pros & cons Global Report (2004) Annual Programme Budget 2006, including the Report of the ACABQ Recommendation on biennialization of the Programme Budget iNTERNATIONAL PROTECTION Oral update on implementation of the Agenda for Protection Note on International Protection, including information on implementation of Agenda for Protection Statelessness Mass Influx study Presentations on (a) local integration (b) complementary forms of protection Draft conclusions to be prepared for ExCom's 56th session include: General conclusion on international protection, complementary forms of protection, and local integration; a conclusion on asylum procedures is scheduled for 2006 REGIONAL ACTIVITIES AND GLOBAL PROGRAMMES Strategic presentations on Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific, CASWANAME, and Europe These and the following presentation on Global Programmes and Partnerships will be closely referenced to the Global Objectives and Agenda for Protection, including where applicable the analysis of protracted situations and updates on international burden/responsibility-sharing in mass influx situations Global Programmes and Partnerships Information on partnerships will cover operational agreements with agencies of the UN family, as well as sector-specific initiatives supported by member Governments Safety and security issues ProgramME / Protection Policy Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS in 2005-7 Report on the High Commissioner's Five Commitments to Refugee Women Presentation on Project Profile Relevance of UNHCR activities to the Millennium Development Goals MANAGEMENT, FINANCIAL CONTROL, ADMINISTRATIVE OVERSIGHT AND HUMAN RESOURCES Update on management reforms Including information on outcomes so far of the review of Headquarters processes and commentary on JIU recommendations other than the three addressed to ExCom Proposal to create a post of AHC (Protection) In the context of revised Terms of Reference following a review of the senior management structure and taking into account the comments made in 2004 by ACABQ and the Standing Committee as well as relevant aspects of the Headquarters process review Matrix on follow-up to the recommendations of the Board of Auditors on the accounts for 2003 Oral update on the work of the Inspector-General's Office Voluntary funds administered by the High Commissioner: Accounts for the year 2004 Report of the Board of Auditors to the General Assembly on the Accounts of the Voluntary Funds Administered by UNHCR for the period ended December 2004 Including status of follow-up to the recommendations of the Board of Auditors for the year 2003 Measures taken or proposed in response to recommendations in the Report of the Board of Auditors for 2004 Internal Audit Update on Human Resources issues UNHCR's IT strategy and implementation thereof Coordination Elements for UNHCR's oral update to ECOSOC Update on coordination issues Governance Suggestions on issues for inclusion in High Commissioner's opening speech at fifty-sixth session of the Executive Committee 56TH SESSION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER'S PROGRAMME: 3 - 7 OCTOBER 2005 STANDING COMMITTEE DOCUMENTATION ISSUED DURING 2005 32nd Meeting (8-11 March 2005) EC/55/SC/CRP.1/Rev.1 Provisional Annotated Agenda EC/55/SC/CRP.2 Standing Committee Work Programme for 2005 EC/55/SC/CRP.3 Update on management reforms: UNHCR's response to the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit EC/55/SC/CRP.4 Proposal to create a post of Assistant High Commissioner (Protection) EC/55/SC/CRP.5 Programme budgets and funding in 2004, and projections for 2005 EC/55/SC/CRP.6 Review of Operational Reserve Category II EC/55/SC/CRP.7 Biennialization of the UNHCR Programme Budget A Preliminary Discussion Paper EC/55/SC/CRP.8 Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS for 2005-2007 and Add. 1 Regional Strategic Presentation Summary on Bureau for Africa Regional Strategic Presentation Summary on Operation for the Sudan Situation Regional Strategic Presentation Summary on Bureau for the Americas Regional Strategic Presentation Summary on Bureau for Asia and the Pacific Regional Strategic Presentation Summary on Bureau for CASWANAME Regional Strategic Presentation Summary on Bureau for Europe Strategic Presentation Summary on Global Programmes: Activities and Partnerships Matrix on follow-up to the recommendations of the Board of Auditors on the accounts for 2003 and for 2002 33rd Meeting (28-30 June 2005) EC/55/SC/CRP.9 Draft report of the thirty-second meeting of the Standing Committee EC/55/SC/CRP.10 Provisional annotated agenda EC/55/SC/CRP.11 Update on programme budgets and funding in 2005 and projections for 2006 EC/55/SC/CRP.12 Note on International Protection and Corr.1 EC/55/SC/CRP.13 UNHCR's activities in the field of statelessness: Progress Report EC/55/SC/CRP.14 International cooperation and burden and responsibility sharing in mass influx situations EC/55/SC/CRP.15 Local integration and self-reliance EC/55/SC/CRP.16 Providing international protection including through complementary forms of protection EC/55/SC/CRP.17 Report on the High Commissioner's five commitments to refugee women EC/55/SC/CRP.18 Provisional annotated agenda EC/55/SC/CRP.19 Draft report of the thirty-third meeting of the Standing Committee (28 - 30 June 2005) EC/55/SC/CRP.20 Biennialization of the Programme Budget EC/55/SC/CRP.21 Update on staff safety and security management EC/55/SC/CRP.22 Update on programme budgets and funding for 2005 EC/55/SC/CRP.23 UNHCR's information and communications technology (ICT) and Corr.1 strategy and implementation thereof EC/55/SC/CRP.24 Proposed post of Assistant High Commissioner (Protection) and Corr. 1 EC/55/SC/INF.1 Relevance of UNHCR's activities to the Millennium and Corr.1 Development Goals EC/55/SC/INF.2 Update on Coordination Issues 