%%%GLOBALIZATION|ECONOMIC INTEGRATION|INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION|INTERDEPENDENCE|INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|

Second Committee Summary record of the 21st meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 1 November 2004, at 2.30 p.m. Chairman: Mr. Balarezo (Peru) Contents Agenda item 87: Globalization and interdependence (continued) (a) Globalization and interdependence (b) International migration and development (c) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin (d) Culture and development (e) Integration of the economies in transition into the world economy The meeting was called to order at 2.38 p.m. (a) Globalization and interdependence (A/59/312) (b) International migration and development (A/59/325 and A/59/73) (c) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin (A/59/203) (d) Culture and development (A/59/202) 1. Mr. Alim (Bangladesh) endorsed the statement made by Qatar on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and, referring to the Secretary-General's report on Globalization and Interdependence (A/59/312), stressed that the benefits of globalization were asymmetrically distributed. Although globalization enhanced choice and opportunities, it excluded millions of people, disrupted their lives, threatened their jobs or swept away their traditions. However, reversing the liberalization of trade to a situation of autarky would rather damage the economy of Bangladesh. Globalization had introduced liberalization and openness in the economy. The reduction of tariff and non-tariff barriers had dismantled quantitative restrictions on imports and deregulated import procedures, turning the country into one of the most liberal economies in the world. 2. Liberalization should occur simultaneously at the national and global levels. Developed countries should fulfil their commitments to support the efforts of developing countries. Market access enhancement, long-term debt relief and increased official development assistance (ODA) could boost the development efforts of low-income countries. Some current trade policies of developed countries should be changed accordingly. Promoting the consistency of economic, social and environmental policies required coordinated action at the national, regional and global levels in such areas as international macroeconomic and financial stability, regulation of expanding global markets, environmental sustainability and addressing pandemics, organized crime and terrorism. Greater coordination and dialogue between developed and developing countries were necessary in that connection, and the decision-making process should be broad, democratic and conducive to the participation of developing countries in order to achieve greater balance and support for their development objectives. To that end, developing countries should enjoy a broader space to formulate policies and full autonomy to apply them. Liberalization should be based on diversity, mutual respect, tolerance, peaceful coexistence and each country's right to define its own way of participating in the globalization process, whose negative effects could be neutralized through concerted efforts of the international community and the United Nations' crucial role as defined in the conferences of Monterrey and Johannesburg. 3. One dramatic effect of globalization, related in particular to wealth distribution, had been the significant increase of migration to developed countries in the 1990s. An estimated 175 million people or 3 per cent of the world population lived currently outside their countries of birth and the annual official flow of migrant remittances was vital to their efforts to promote economic growth, development and poverty alleviation. The United Nations could help to establish legal norms and standards regarding migration to ensure that the countries of origin, transit and destination and the migrants themselves would benefit from it as much as possible. 4. Some 3.5 million Bangladesh citizens lived abroad and their remittances, which covered about 30 per cent of payments for imports, contributed significantly to the country's gross national product (GNP) and balance of payments. Bangladesh had even set up a Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare and Overseas Employment. The benefits derived from international migration by the communities of origin and destination could be greater if they cooperated and engaged in dialogue with a view to protecting the international migrants' human rights, promoting the access of poor and undocumented workers to official channels, softening regulations to facilitate the flow of funds to the countries of origin and significantly reducing remittance costs. 5. Mr. Baum (Switzerland) said that migration was one of the most salient and complex aspects of globalization and the international community should work together at all levels to create the basic conditions necessary for maximizing the advantages of migration while minimizing its drawbacks. Switzerland actively supported two complementary and mutually enhancing processes. The first one was the Bern Initiative, launched by Switzerland and aimed at formulating non-binding of guidelines based on common principles regarding migration, and general recommendations on governance, designed to strengthen cooperation on matters of migration among countries of origin, transit, and destination. The social benefits from migration and migrants should be underscored and the negative effects of clandestine migration combated, particularly by stepping up preventive measures in the struggle against human trafficking. Regional consultations held in China, Chile, Ethiopia and Hungary had resulted in drawing up the International Agenda for Migration Management (IAMM), scheduled for adoption at the Bern II conference to be held in Switzerland on 16 - 17 December 2004. The second process was related to the Global Commission on International Migration, the first body responsible for considering migration at the global level. Created by interested Member States, including Switzerland and Sweden, with the support of the United Nations Secretary-General, it had been mandated to prepare a comprehensive, detailed and consistent analysis of migration for use by the international community, multilateral institutions and civil society. Switzerland urged the international community to support both processes in order to promote a better understanding of the phenomenon of migration and thereby enrich the debate on that major global challenge in view of the high-level discussions to be held in New York in 2006. 6. Regarding the relation between international protection of refugees and migration management, a clear distinction should be drawn between them, without overlooking the complexity of migratory movements and their interaction with the various waves of refugees. In that connection, Switzerland supported the Convention Plus initiative, launched by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to promote refugee protection measures by developing new conventions, and participated actively in the initiative, cooperating with South Africa in the area of irregular secondary movements. 7. Mr. Owade (Kenya), having endorsed the statement made on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, stated that the globalization aspect most problematic for developing countries had been trade liberalization and the change in trade guidelines from import substitution to outward openness through the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers. The shift had obviously benefited some national-economy sectors, whose competitiveness had increased, but in other sectors the deluge of imports and unfair competition had caused loss of jobs and livelihood, thereby aggravating income inequalities and the gap between rich and poor. 8. Trade liberalization had produced major success stories, especially in Asia, but not in Sub-Saharan Africa, where most countries still grappled with shocks stemming from having opened up their economies to foreign competition. While it was hoped that eventually the process would yield positive results, there was a critical need to ease the pain of adjustment, inter alia by ensuring that World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations occurred in a satisfactory manner. Kenya welcomed the resumption of negotiations in Geneva, and in particular the progress achieved with regard to agricultural subsidies and market access. 9. Developing countries were required to control expenditure and government intervention in the economy, usually through spending cuts in the social sectors that largely benefited the poor. Although it was important to maintain stable currencies and adequate foreign exchange reserves, macroeconomic management should be prudent and not penalize national welfare programmes. Macroeconomic policies intended to check inflation and the budget deficit should not be an end in themselves but means of improving the quality of life. Under its economic recovery strategy, Kenya had been able to reconcile stability of basic macroeconomic indicators and trade liberalization with social intervention aimed at enabling the poor to face the adverse effects of globalization and liberalization. One such form of intervention had been the introduction of free primary education, which had resulted in a spectacular increase of enrolment rates. Such policies were followed up through a monitoring and evaluation programme for reviewing their social and environmental impact. 10. Kenya was a member of regional integration structures, such as the East African Community (EAC), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), aimed at providing the region with a strategic framework and mechanisms for averting marginalization. Monetary and financial cooperation had materialized in the form of a customs union among the three member States of EAC, which had contributed significantly to commercial integration in the region and the conclusion of sectoral agreements. 11. Kenya supported ongoing debates on the rights of migrants, an ever more important category of workers whose remittances not only supported their families but also contributed to financing development. It was necessary to take measures for reducing the costs of international remittances, especially of small amounts, and to engage in dialogue with major financial institutions on that issue. 12. Corruption threatened economic growth, social development and efforts to strengthen democracy, undermining the public's moral sense and confidence in the public sector. The United Nations Convention against Corruption reflected the importance of the problem. It was an unparalleled legal instrument already signed by many countries. Kenya had been the first country to sign and ratify that convention after its adoption in December 2003. Kenya was taking steps to align national legislation with the Convention's provisions and urged other States to support that instrument by speeding up its ratification and implementation. 13. Mrs. Mammadova (Azerbaijan) said that globalization offered an opportunity to contribute to the process of building a world order based on equality rather than dominance and dependence. Azerbaijan welcomed the report of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization, and in particular its focus on human resource development. The reform process at national level should be adequately supported at the international level through relevant adjustments in international trade and the financial system toward greater openness, fairness and justice. Capital flows, including foreign direct investment (FDI), were an essential component of globalization inasmuch as they expanded the capital market and introduced technical innovation. Technology transfer and the dissemination of information and communication technologies (ICTs) toward developing countries on preferential or favourable terms were also crucial. 14. A stronger public-private partnership sector was required in combating corruption. To fight economic and financial crime more effectively, the Azerbaijani Government had established a legislative framework regarding business and trade licenses with a view to protecting the entrepreneurs' rights and interests, had recently enacted a law on banks requiring financial institutions to verify the identity of clients and ultimate beneficiaries of financial transactions, and prohibited anonymous bank accounts. Azerbaijan had ratified the Council of Europe's Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and was a signatory to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, an important global framework for international anti-corruption cooperation to be implemented in all States, including the developing countries, which should receive capacity-building assistance to that end. 15. Regarding the transition and integration process, exogenous factors were crucial to the region's economic revitalization, which was underpinned by the ongoing macroeconomic and institutional reforms. That process was advancing at unequal speeds in the various countries. By 2002, out of 27 countries 20 had not recovered their pre-transition level of real gross domestic product (GDP). It was therefore necessary to broaden and deepen integration as a prerequisite for sustaining growth and reducing poverty in countries with economies in transition. Azerbaijan was currently negotiating for World Trade Organization (WTO) membership. Commodity dependence and the isolation of landlocked countries from world markets should be recognized as factors contributing to their economic vulnerability and taken fully into account in the negotiation process as reasons for accession on preferential terms. 16. The regional dimension of the role of the United Nations system in promoting a broadly shared development should be reinforced and the efforts of regional commissions to assist countries with economies in transition to build effective partnerships for development should be promoted. In that connection, Azerbaijan supported the draft resolution submitted under agenda item 87(e) in the belief that the proposed text described common concerns and ways of addressing them. 17. Mr. Daniel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), speaking on behalf of the member States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) that were Member States of the United Nations, said that the consequences of money laundering were bad for business, development, governance and the rule of law. Countries that welcomed "dirty money" as a growth engine in the short run could subsequently find it difficult to attract solid long-term foreign direct investment (FDI), which sought stability and good governance and which could help to ensure sustainable development and growth. 18. In response to General Assembly resolution 58/205 of 23 December 2003 and the Secretary-General's appeal, CARICOM member States had established national, regional and international legislation against money laundering and taken further related measures. They had become - or were interested in becoming - parties to a series of significant treaties, conventions, agreements and protocols related to the global combat against corrupt and criminal activities; and continued to cooperate closely with the United States and the United Kingdom in programmes against drug trafficking and other initiatives aimed at eliminating corrupt and illicit acts. 19. Financial intelligence units in the region had increased the level of reporting suspicious activities and implementing anti-money-laundering legislation. Their investigations and intelligence sharing had led to significant results. Transparency was crucial and none of the CARICOM member States was on the list of Non-Cooperative Countries and Territories (NCCTs) of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) or considered a haven for corporate tax evasion and laundering of terrorist assets. However, the elimination of corruption still faced obstacles. Corrupt practices in the international financial sector were not limited to relations between developed countries in the North and developing ones in the South but constituted a global problem whose solution required multilateral cooperation. Conditions favourable to corruption should not be allowed to take root in CARICOM and undermine the stability of its democratic small developing States. The international community, including civil society, should continue to promote acceptable political approaches conducive to a broader participation of CARICOM member States in decision-making and in defining international standards, not for charity but in the interest of an emerging culture. 20. Mr. Benmellouk (Morocco) endorsed the statement made on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and said that, although globalization offered enormous opportunities and contributed to global economic growth, differences within and between countries obviously persisted and in fact increased. Globalization was a complex phenomenon that had led not only to larger markets and enterprises but also to various anomalies and unacceptable situations, including the exploitation of women and children, growth of organized crime, environmental deterioration, overexploitation of natural resources and social exclusion. Fulfilling international commitments would contribute to creating national and international environments conducive to economic growth and the integration of developing countries into the world economy. 21. The major challenge was to manage the unequal impact of globalization and create conditions permitting all nations to benefit from it and attain the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). At the national level, democratic political institutions and a healthy, transparent and competitive economic environment should be established, human rights and the rights of workers should be respected and women should participate in political and economic decision-making. Evidently, however, the countries of the South would be unable to build sustainable democratic political and economic systems against an unfavourable international environment. They could not combat poverty and hunger, if governance were not improved at the international level. 22. One of the main obstacles to the achievement of development goals in the context of globalization was the absence of consistent national, regional and international policies. The multilateral trade system should be adapted to the specific needs of developing countries in order to enable them to increase their exports and generate resources. Financing standards should be reviewed with a view to allowing poor countries sufficient freedom of action and promoting sustainable global development. Moreover, capital flows should meet the needs of poor countries, while developed countries should respect their commitments regarding official development assistance (ODA). Furthermore, international governance and the decision-making process in the international financial institutions (IFIs) should improve. The report of the technical group constituted by Brazil, Chile, France and Spain contained proposals that deserved careful consideration. 23. Mr. Rahman (Malaysia) endorsed the statement made on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and said that in recent years globalization had expanded rapidly, taking by surprise many countries, especially developing economies that, faced with the multifaceted problems that it posed, felt that their interests were not taken into account. Malaysia had benefited in many ways from trade liberalization and foreign direct investment. It was among the world's top 15 most globalized countries. Globalization was unavoidable and the nations and peoples could and should benefit from it, but it was crucial to manage it appropriately. Although globalization offered new opportunities for distributing wealth and promoting creativity, excellence and other crucial ingredients of a solid economy, it also could marginalize many developing countries that lacked the capacity necessary for dealing with its consequences. Malaysia and many other countries in Asia had run that risk during the 1997 financial crisis, prompted by the activities of financial speculators in an unregulated international financial system. 24. The international community, especially the developed countries, should establish equitable financial and international trade standards meeting the needs and difficulties of developing countries, permitting a fair distribution of the advantages of the globalization process and promoting exports, investment and sustainable economic development. In that respect, Malaysia hoped that the agreement recently reached by the World Trade Organization (WTO) General Council under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) would lead to a rapid, just and mutually beneficial conclusion of the Doha Round by helping the developing countries to address their problems and meet the requirements of globalization. 25. Attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) would no doubt enable the developing countries to deal more effectively with the problems posed by globalization. Malaysia welcomed the commitment to seek solutions to the problem of financing for development, especially through official development assistance (ODA) and innovative funding methods, and concurred with the Secretary-General that a major obstacle to achieving the MDGs in a globalized world was lack of coherence in policies implemented at the national, regional and global levels. Promoting trade liberalization standards was not consistent with putting up new obstacles. 26. More crisis anticipation and prevention efforts were necessary, particularly concerning the international financial system's monitoring role and its capacity to detect crises that could undermine national economies and the economic environment at the regional and global levels. While pursuing the surveillance of developing countries, the international financial institutions (IFIs), including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), should scrutinize more closely the policies that were implemented by major developed countries and had a global economic impact. Enhancing the participation of developing countries in policy formulation, especially in IFIs and multinational financial institutions, was crucial to promoting information and transparency. Malaysia was keen on shaping a globalized world that would be less discriminatory and more participatory, equitable and inclusive; and on ensuring cooperation among bodies that had the capacity and authority to undertake action to that effect. Globalization would be beneficial to all, if it were implemented with a sense of responsibility. 27. Mr. Fonseca-Filho (Brazil), speaking on behalf of the Rio Group, said that globalization provided development opportunities, but also posed risks, such as exclusion. Indeed, it was only fragmentarily and marginally that, because of internal and external circumstances, some countries managed to become integrated into the world economy. 28. Promotion of development in the context of globalization and interdependence should focus on attaining the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and, to that effect, national and international trade and development prospects should concur and financial, monetary and technological policies should be coordinated at the international level by modern States respectful of the principles of social responsibility and equity and aware of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development. 29. The responsibility of developing countries in the area of democracy and governance was indisputable, but international pressures, whose impact was amplified by globalization, should not be allowed to throw into chaos economies known to be solid. The developed countries continued to adopt policies, especially in the area of trade, that impaired and even defeated their policies in other areas, such as official development assistance (ODA). In a globalized world, developing countries, particularly the small vulnerable economies, needed increased ODA, debt relief measures, international trade liberalization and consideration of new sources of funding. 30. The continuing decline of international cooperation in favour of medium-income States gave cause for concern. Most of them had a pool of trained workers and an economic and commercial potential that, appropriately used, would strengthen international peace and security. International migration could contribute to the economic growth of the developing countries and was of key interest to the countries of origin, transit and destination. Member States and private sector bodies should take measures to reduce the costs of fund transfers to the workers' communities of origin and governments should develop programmes and incentives to channel those remittances into productive investments. 31. The High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development scheduled to be held in the General Assembly in 2006 would offer an opportunity to discuss those issues and to share experience and exchange information on migration flows. Brazil welcomed the decision taken on 1 August 2004 by the World Trade Organization (WTO) General Council, which provided the basis and guidelines for the next negotiation stage; the report of the Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization, chaired by the Presidents of Finland and Tanzania; and the report of the Commission on the Private Sector and Development, known as the Martin-Zedillo report. It was also necessary to underscore the importance of the meeting of world leaders convened by the Presidents of Brazil, Chile, France and Spain on innovative mechanisms for funding the fight against hunger and poverty. 32. To render globalization and development compatible and seek synergies between them, it was necessary to strengthen multilateral institutions and dialogue among them, to enhance the developing countries' participation in their decision-making systems, to forge a consensus allowing developing countries sufficient space in applying development policies in the context of globalization, to preserve cultural heritage and to respect cultural identities, human rights, gender equity, democracy and the links between cultural diversity and human development. It was also necessary to promote and support, at the economic, political, social and cultural levels, measures aimed at developing a globalization ethic, streamlining the idea of global schemes to protect the vulnerable sectors and effectively linking democracy and development. 33. Ms. Nieto (Ecuador) endorsed the statement of the Group of 77 and China and the statement of Brazil and said that it was necessary to protect fully the rights of migrants, who satisfied the needs of some sectors of the developed economies and were usually underpaid or lacked access to social services. Accordingly, Ecuador urged all governments and civil society sectors, especially in the developed countries that received migrant workers, to protect their rights - without discrimination - in recognition of the highly positive aspects of international migration. 34. Aware of the complexity of the phenomenon, Ecuador was prepared to cooperate in seeking viable solutions through strict monitoring to reduce illegal migration. That called for active cooperation among the countries of origin, recipient countries and international agencies on international migration issues. It was also necessary to strengthen international cooperation in combating human trafficking. To that end, it was crucial to strengthen coordination, train officials, formulate effective policies and enact relevant legislation. 35. Migrants' remittances to their countries of origin amounted to only 7 percent of their total income: the balance of 93 per cent remained in the countries of destination. In the case of Ecuador, remittances had been crucial to the economy, inasmuch as they strengthened consumption, thereby boosting production and employment, particularly in some sectors of activity, such as construction. Accordingly, it was necessary to reduce fund transfer costs, which diminished funds going into savings and investment in the countries of origin. Lastly, Ecuador expected that the High-Level Dialogue on International Migration, scheduled to take place in 2006, would contribute significantly to progress in that area. 36. Mr. Musambachime (Zambia) endorsed the statements of the Group of 77 and China and said that globalization had, on the one hand, introduced open market policies that had facilitated technology transfer, efficient utilization of natural resources, production and management strategies conducive to rapid industrialization and integration into the world economy, and, on the other hand, given rise to unsustainable consumption patterns. In some cases the demand for raw materials had resulted in environmental degradation. Because of unequal degrees of economic development at national, regional and global levels, benefits were distributed unevenly between developing and developed countries. 37. Zambia was struggling to attain the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) while striving to build the capacities necessary for dealing with an increasingly competitive economic development environment. To address globalization's adverse effects on developing countries, there was an urgent need to strengthen global partnerships for development based on the fulfilment of commitments and support for enhanced market access, long-term debt relief and increased Official Development Assistance (ODA) to developing countries. 38. Globalization had posed many challenges to developing economies, especially Least Developed Countries (LDCs), such as Zambia. Consideration should be given to the different levels of economic development in various regions with a view to assisting developing economies and enabling them to compete with the developed countries on favourable terms. Moreover, developed countries should honour the commitments agreed upon at international fora in order to help the developing countries in their endeavour to achieve sustainable economic growth and thereby to implement the Millennium Declaration. 39. Mr. Subedi (Nepal) endorsed the statement made by the Group of 77 and China and said that the flows of knowledge, technology, information, communications, capital and trade across countries and continents were a testimony to the fact that the globe had become a borderless village, a global village. However, the world was divided into rich in the North and poor countries in the South. The gulf between them was widening. Currently, 75 percent of the world population lived on less than 25 percent of the global income. Some progress had been achieved in integrating the economies in transition into the world economy, but the integration processes were hindered by a multitude of factors such as increasing dependence on trade partners, lack of knowledge and technology, need for basic and better infrastructure and insufficient diversification of trade. The international community, particularly the developed countries and international financial institutions (IFIs), should pave a "smooth and efficient path" to facilitate the integration of economies in transition into the world economy. 40. Migration, which was not only a movement of persons but also of capital and services, had contributed to the process of globalization, generated employment and prompted the inflow foreign currency into developing countries. Better reception of migrant workers from the developing world in the developed countries would enhance the labour markets, easing the shortage of labour in the developed economies and reducing its surplus in developing countries. The world should be aware of the significant contribution made by migrant flows to the economic and social development of the countries of origin and destination. 41. Nepal applauded the decision of the General Conference of the International Labour Organization (ILO) in favour of a fair deal for migrant workers in the global economy; appreciated the ongoing work of the Global Commission on International Migration (GCIM) and its efforts to propose a "framework for the formulation of a coherent, comprehensive and global response" to international migration in 2005; was satisfied with the outcome of the work of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization, which emphasized the need for a "fair globalization" that created "opportunities for all"; and welcomed the initiative of the Government of Peru to host a special ministerial-level international conference on migration in Lima in 2005. Nepal looked forward to participating in the High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development scheduled to be held in 2006. 42. Only a world based on equity, equality and justice could make civilization meaningful and fruitful. The distribution of globalization's opportunities and benefits should be judicious, balanced and transparent. It should be guided by the principles of protecting the sovereignty of every individual and promoting the economic and social development of every society. The drawbacks and risks of globalization should be reduced to a minimum and its opportunities and benefits increased to a maximum. The United Nations could play a pivotal role in making globalization work for humankind as a whole. 43. Mr. El-Koni (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) endorsed the statement made by the Group of 77 and China and said that the problems that confronted the developing countries in the context of globalization required more initiatives for reducing its negative impact on their economies and ensuring progress towards attaining the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 44. According to the Secretary-General's report on globalization and interdependence (A/59/312), "managing the interaction among economic, social and environmental goals" was "at the heart of efforts to promote coherent policy and an institutional approach to the management of globalization". In that vein, Libya had adopted a series of important economic-development measures designed to contribute to reforming the structure of the national economy by diversifying its sources of income, which currently stemmed largely from oil. 45. In the last decade, migration had come to play a key role in development. That called for balancing the aspirations of the countries of origin and destination and to identify the consequences of international migration on the development of the countries of transit. As shown by its adherence to the International Convention on the Protection of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, and by its membership in the International Organization for Migration (IOM), Libya supported all international initiatives for regulating international migration and reducing the adverse effects of irregular flows. It also considered that implementing the United Nations Convention against Corruption - recently signed by Libya and currently before Congress for ratification - was indispensable for enabling the developing countries to reap the full benefits of globalization. 46. Ms. Aleman (Peru) endorsed the statements made by the Group of 77 and China and by Brazil and said that currently migration was a tangible component of globalization, but not a new phenomenon: deeply rooted in human history, it had contributed to the formation of contemporary societies and cultures. The current migratory flows were prompted inter alia by the ever greater globalization of information, capital, goods and services; economic disparities between developing and developed countries; intercultural contacts; relations among societies; issues related to labour-market differentiation; situations involving violence and conflict; natural disasters and environmental degradation; accelerated population growth and the quest for better opportunities in life. 47. Migration-related issues were a peculiar feature of the globalization process: the fact that labour was the only factor of production that was protected and that migrants were confronted with protectionist and restrictive policies constituted a blatant contradiction. Globalization entailed the elimination of tariffs and obstacles to trade and the liberalization of investment and services in a bid to open up the world's economies. Currently, one out of every 35 persons was a migrant. Migration brought benefits to the countries of origin and destination and also entailed costs. It alleviated poverty and unemployment in the countries of origin but the slowdown of economic activity in the developed countries increased unemployment there and gave rise to social pressures against accepting migrants. Yet it could contribute significantly to mitigating the problem of population ageing in much of the developed world. Migrants' remittances represented a substantial inflow into the economy of the countries of origin. 48. Migration was an unstoppable phenomenon. The international community should establish regional and global systems of dialogue, coordination and cooperation aimed at channelling migratory flows in an orderly manner and managing the phenomenon adequately with a view to reducing its negative impact and increasing its positive effects as much as possible. In recent years, various countries in all regions of the world had taken far-reaching initiatives with regard to migration and contributed to a better understanding and management of the phenomenon. 49. Peru, with valuable support from the Group of 77 and China, had taken the initiative to organize a special international ministerial-level conference of developing countries with substantial international migratory flows, to be held in Lima in the first half of 2005. Four major issues would be especially debated at the conference: legal regularization and integration of migrant workers in productive activities in the countries of destination; respect for the human rights of migrant workers and their families; their contribution to the economic development of the countries of destination and, through their remittances, the countries of origin; and the illegal traffic of migrant workers, especially women and children. Peru was committed to pursuing the common objective of maximizing the benefits derived from international migration by the migrants and the countries of origin, transit and destination. 50. Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso) endorsed the statement made by the Group of 77 and China and said that international migration constituted an increasingly complex phenomenon, whose management required the involvement of the international community and the United Nations. Migratory flows had their origin, inter alia, in economic expectations associated with the region of destination. Although a great number of migrants came from underprivileged population groups, many others were intellectuals and professionals, trained in the countries of origin, who moved abroad in search of better working conditions and remuneration. Ironically, many countries of origin took advantage of that exodus of human capital in the form of migrants' remittances from abroad. Accordingly, States should integrate the social and economic dimensions of migratory flows in their development strategies. In Burkina Faso, migrants' remittances had since the early 1990s accounted for 10 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and amounted to an annual inflow of CFAF 25-35 billion that the Government endeavoured to channel towards priority sectors. Although the organization of a high level meeting in 2006 was a positive step, the international community should hold a political conference on international migration, given the importance of the issue. 51. Corruption seriously affected development and penalized the poor, who had to bribe their way to increasingly inaccessible public services. Combating corruption required a political will to introduce reforms, and unfortunately authorities often lacked that resolve. Moreover, legal loopholes prevented the repatriation of misappropriated funds. Burkina Faso had adopted far-reaching measures to combat corruption, and in particular had in 2002 and 2003 amended the provisions on public procurement. The fact that corruption was the subject of the national human development report for 2003 showed the importance that the country's authorities ascribed to that issue. The targets and work methods of the various oversight bodies had been strengthened, while the programme of action of the high authority for the coordination of the fight against corruption aimed at promoting joint initiatives with civil society organizations (CSOs) and the private sector. The situation was expected to improve when the United Nations Convention against Corruption, signed in December 2003, would enter into force. 52. Ms. Laohaphan (Thailand), having endorsed the statement made by the Group of 77 and China, said that his delegation was concerned at the fact that globalization had produced benefits unevenly distributed among countries and posed challenges, such as migration, a phenomenon not exclusively North-South but also South-South, since many countries, including Thailand, had become countries of origin or destination of migrant labour. 53. Thailand welcomed the report of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization and the Secretary-General's report on Globalization and Interdependence and supported their recommendations. Thailand, however, underscored the need for institution- and capacity-building, because the world economy required a more consistent system conducive to the effective assimilation of globalization and to growth and sustainable development. Cooperation and coordination among the United Nations, the Bretton Woods Institutions (BWIs) and other multilateral organizations should be strengthened. The high-level dialogue of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) with BWIs and the World Trade Organization (WTO) under the Monterrey Consensus was a significant step in that direction, and that constructive approach should be further pursued. 54. At the national level, Thailand had taken restructuring and reform measures and supported partner countries in the developing world to enable them to benefit from globalization. In the area of information and communication technologies (ICTs), international initiatives aimed at extending ICT benefits to all countries should be fully supported. The results of the World Summit on the Information Society would hopefully provide a fertile basis for international cooperation in that area. All stakeholders had an individual and collective responsibility to take specific measures for implementing the agreed development plans, pursuing the major development goals and fulfilling the world leaders' commitment to ensuring that globalization was a positive force. 55. Mr. Smaili (Algeria) said that, together with globalization, the increasingly extensive phenomenon of migration posed complex problems, related to the interdependence in the world economy and the movement and settlement of persons, which had economic, social, political, legal and security-related repercussions. Humanized globalization, to which the world aspired, required that the international community should take measures to address migration, which affected both the developing countries and the developed countries. Migratory flows to the North often deprived the developing countries of their best trained professionals, needed for development, reduced their capacities, aggravated their marginalization and seriously undermined their chances of integration into the global economy. 56. The High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development scheduled to be held in 2006 reflected the United Nations' interest in the issue and provided an opportunity to thoroughly discuss the phenomenon and examine all appropriate measures. The incidence of international migration on the dynamics of economic globalization and interdependence heightened the urgency of convening an international conference to examine the issue in depth in order to establish an international legal framework in that area. 57. Ms. Al-Harthy (Oman) said that the Secretary-General's report contained valuable conclusions and recommendations and was of great importance. The new world order, globalization and the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO) had aroused hopes for a new era of international cooperation based on partnerships for development but, instead, prosperity and poverty had reached excessive levels and North-South disparities gave cause for concern. All countries should benefit from globalization in a world characterized by justice and free trade. To attain a world order of equity and balance, all States should pursue the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and implement other internationally agreed measures creatively and seriously. To that effect, the international community should set up mechanisms facilitating cooperation with regard to investment and trade and reducing obstacles to facilitate the access of developing countries' exports to the markets of the developed countries. 58. Integration in the WTO was a top priority for Oman, which fulfilled the relevant commitments. Among the effects of various measures taken in the financial and trade sectors, the foreign investment indicator had increased, domestic services had been liberalized and foreign firms had opened local subsidiaries that could benefit fully from the advantages offered by the country's commercial and financial sectors. At the regional level, Oman operated in the framework of the Customs Union of the Arab States of the Gulf, which had been established in 2003. Moreover, it had codified laws, standards, regulations and decisions related to trade and investment with a view to aligning them with international principles, instruments and practices and was collaborating with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) for setting up a common market by 2007. 59. The role of international economic bodies was crucial to strengthening economic and trade cooperation at the international level, and they should focus their efforts on establishing an economic order characterized by freedom and reflecting the interests of all. 60. Mr. Richardson (Saint Kitts and Nevis), speaking on behalf of the member States of CARICOM that were Member States of the United Nations, said that globalization and interdependence had become integral features of national, regional, and international interaction and the global community could ill afford to simply sit by and observe. There was an urgent need to adjust to the structural changes occurring in the global economy. 61. CARICOM member States believed firmly that the only way to adjust to globalization and interdependence was to forge greater coherence and mitigate the impact of globalization on the most vulnerable developing countries. With the rise of globalization, CARICOM had experienced economic, social, environmental and cultural problems and its members had become far more vulnerable to global shocks and occurrences. Their agricultural sector, especially the banana and sugar industries, and their export and financial activities, had suffered significant setbacks. Being small and open economies, unprepared for globalization, they had a limited capacity to compete with more developed countries and entities. 62. Globalization had forced many workers faced with reduced wages and poverty to migrate to developed countries. The brain drain and the cycle of underdevelopment continued, while developed countries thrived. CARICOM member States supported wholeheartedly the suggestions contained in the Secretary General's report for "greater policy space and autonomy for developing countries" so that they could integrate with the world economy. They also supported the idea of greater consistency in the aid, trade, investment, debt and development cooperation policies of developed countries. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) provided the platform for a take-off to sustainable development. Social development was crucial to economic development and social cohesion helped economic policies. However, the lack of economic development would have an adverse impact on the CARICOM countries' social sectors, particularly education, health, environmental sustainability and security. 63. Despite the problems encountered, CARICOM member States had embarked on the implementation of the Secretary-General's recommendations for forging greater cohesion at the national and regional levels. The CARICOM single market and economy, to be established soon, would further strengthen regional cooperation. The national coordination efforts of CARICOM countries in preparation for the Barbados Programme of Action (BPOA) review process and the linking of economic, social, and environmental objectives within the framework of national sustainable development strategies with a view to overcoming existing limitations were a major part of CARICOM's approach to development. 64. In dealing with the problems of globalization, CARICOM member States were still limited by inadequate financial resources, institutional capacity and human-resources development. In that connection, they expected from their traditional partners stronger partnership commitments, especially with regard to aid, trade and migration management. It was imperative that the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) collaborated more with the CARICOM member States, especially through coordination and cooperation with the Secretariats of CARICOM and the Eastern Caribbean States (OECS). 65. Developing countries needed policy flexibility and space to ensure their integration into the world economy. Accordingly, a vulnerability indicator and special and differential treatment were needed to reflect the trade needs of small island developing States (SIDS). There was also a need for facilities providing more market information, transparency and regulation to reduce international transaction costs. Information- and technology-sharing, along with technical and financial assistance, were imperative. Global social coordination was required in reducing the risk of HlV/AIDS and combating drug trafficking and money laundering. A "globalization preparedness" indicator would be a valuable tool that would help States to lessen globalization's negative impact and improve their chances of benefiting from globalization and interdependence. 66. Mr. Ali Hassan Girali (Pakistan) endorsed the statement made by the Group of 77 and China and said that globalization was irreversible and unavoidable. It offered hope and expectation, rapid economic growth and development. Unfortunately, however, it had also aggravated the marginalization of poor countries. The ever greater income inequalities between rich and poor was a clear manifestation of that fact, which had been due to a number of underlying reasons, including the fact that the increased trade and investment flows, witnessed in recent years, had bypassed the majority of developing countries, because liberalization had been manifestly asymmetrical in favour of the developed countries; that the volatility of financial resource flows to the developing countries had been accentuated; that income disparities amongst and within countries had widened with obvious negative implications for the welfare of large segments of populations and a consequent adverse impact on the stability of developing economies and their ability to contribute to global peace and development; that the rising cost of integration into the global economy made it impossible for the developing countries to manage the process of globalization on their own; and that trade, investment and financial flows were mostly concentrated within the developed blocs. There was no transfer of resources from developed to the developing countries. The reverse was in fact the case. It was therefore important that ways and means were devised to manage globalization, in order to minimize its hazards for the marginalized segments of society. Measures must be taken to ensure that the forces unleashed by globalization served social ends and promoted the equitable development of all peoples. 67. That aspiration had been captured in the Millennium Declaration and the Monterrey Consensus and echoed in the Ministerial Meeting of Doha and by the Bretton Woods Institutions (BWIs). In its report, the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization had also underscored the need for globalization to be inclusive, equitable and focused on the well-being of people and launched an appeal for global solidarity and cooperation aimed at ensuring that markets were productive, equitable, based on fair rules and geared to enabling the underprivileged to actually benefit from globalization and deal with its challenges. The Commission's recommendations deserved serious consideration. It was necessary to strengthen the political will to attain the goals set and fulfil the commitments made in major conferences through genuine partnerships aimed at overcoming the problems posed by globalization. 68. The high-level meeting scheduled to be held in 2005 in order to review the implementation of the Millennium Declaration would offer an opportunity to forge a new global consensus for development and to guarantee good governance in view of globalization. To that end, it was indispensable to strengthen the capacity of multilateral institutions to address issues related to trade, financing and development in an integrated manner. The institutions responsible for defining the rules governing the globalization process, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the World Bank should be more democratic, transparent and inclusive. It was necessary to try to deal seriously with the persisting problems of the external debt, access to technology and financing for development. The principle of non-reciprocity should apply to developing countries, in view of their limitations, when new commitments were made in relation to the norms of global trade. 69. The uneven distribution of the benefits of globalization and liberalization had prompted large migratory flows among countries and intensified the complex phenomenon of international migration. Migration should be a central element of any fair global trading system. If capital could move and markets were free, the other factor of production, labour, should enjoy similar freedom. Restrictive policies imposed for nationalistic or security reasons affected negatively both exporters and importers of labour. Pakistan welcomed the General Assembly's decision to hold a High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development in 2006; and supported the intensification of global cooperation on migration issues with a view to optimizing its development impact and contributing to the promotion of intercultural cooperation and understanding. In that regard, it also supported the commissioning of a comprehensive study to examine the contributions made by migrants to the economic and social development of receiving and sending States. 70. Pakistan was concerned over the illegal flight of capital from the developing countries through "dirty money" transactions, which seriously undermined their economic growth and development, in addition to deepening poverty, fostering crime and facilitating terrorism. It therefore favoured conducting a study to ascertain the extent and scale of the net flow of resources from the developing countries on account of such illicit transactions, examine their impact on the economic growth and development of the developing countries and make recommendations on how such outflows could be halted. 71. Mr. Al-Kayed (Jordan) said that, although globalization offered opportunities for economic growth, such growth had been unequally distributed among developed and developing countries. The main challenge therefore consisted in creating conditions that would enable all countries, and in particular the developing economies, to attain their national goals, including the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In that context, Jordan called upon the developed countries to fulfil their commitments to supporting the efforts of developing economies, bearing in mind the requirements and conditions of each country, in order to enable them to integrate into the world economy. 72. Jordan was committed to achieving the MDGs. His Majesty King Abdullah II had been working hard to further develop and strengthen the economy, making the business environment attractive to foreign investors. Economic growth and social welfare were top national priorities, based on the belief that the quest for economic and social development could only be sustained through solid public-private partnerships. Moreover, Jordan was rapidly emerging as a hub for technology investment in the region. The Government had undertaken major reforms of financial and economic legislation in order to improve the competitiveness of the national economy and integrate it into the global economy. 73. In its efforts to build up its economy, Jordan had been working closely with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), aggressively pursued trade liberalization and taken serious steps towards integration into the global economy: between 1997 and 2004, Jordan had signed Free Trade Agreements with the European Union, the United States and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) States. Together with sixteen other Arab countries, it had signed the Arab Free Trade Agreement. Moreover, a Free Trade Agreement had been concluded by Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia. Furthermore, Jordan had joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1999. Those agreements provided Jordan with access to the major regional and international markets. 74. Currently, Jordan represented an ideal gateway to the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) countries. The Qualifying Industrial Zones (QIZ), which represented an unprecedented opportunity to duty-free, no-quota access to United States markets for goods produced within them, attracted foreign investment. The Aqaba Special Economic Zone (ASEZ) offered an excellent opportunity to do business in a competitive location. Furthermore, in May 2004, Jordan had hosted for the second time the World Economic Forum, which had considered the need to forge partnerships for change, peace and development. 75. Mr. Ghafari (United States of America) said that some people saw globalization as a process to be managed and others as an opportunity. Still others feared that it created inequality. According to the World Bank, globalization was a process of growing integration of economies and societies of all the world, although that very interconnectedness could prompt uneasiness, because it allowed to see the differences between countries: extreme poverty in one place and abundant wealth in another; freedom of expression in one place and repression in another. Such comparisons engendered a sense of frustration and dissatisfaction. Some expressed that frustration by criticizing the phenomenon - globalization - but globalization was not the problem. It only created the context in which people could see clearly the miseries that they suffered and the possibility of a better life. 76. Research had shown again and again that it was necessary to combine global action to facilitate the exchange of products and ideas with specific measures that countries could take at the national level. The World Bank had shown that a country could, by improving its governance indicators by one standard deviation, achieve a 400 per cent increase in per capita incomes. In that vein, the United States applauded the efforts of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) to improve governance through a peer review process. 77. Another study by the World Bank, published in a report entitled "Doing Business in 2005", had examined business environments in 145 countries and found that as a result of making it easier for companies to start up, more businesses entered the formal sector. That benefited the government and society because businesses in the formal sector could be taxed. It also benefited the workers because they had contracts in the formal sector. Similarly, making it easier for companies to hire and fire workers made businesses more willing to hire youth and women, who often were the most marginalized members of a society. 78. The United Nations Commission on the Private Sector and Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the International Conference on Financing for Development had all recognized the important role of the private sector in promoting economic growth and the role of partnerships in alleviating poverty and promoting sustainable development. Freer trade not only between developed and developing countries, but also among developing countries, could significantly increase economic growth. The Doha Development Agenda (DDA) aimed to substantially reduce barriers to market access for agricultural goods, manufactured products and services. Globalization allowed learning from each other's experience and sharing lessons learned. It was necessary to act upon that knowledge, so that all members of the global community could reap the enormous benefits that increased economic and societal integration presented. 79. The United States Government appreciated the importance of cultural diversity to humankind and was actively participating in relevant discussions at the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in the context of drafting a convention on cultural diversity. The convention should focus on the active promotion of cultural diversity at all levels rather than on protecting culture through trade restrictions. It was necessary to recognize the importance of creating and maintaining a climate that encouraged and fostered freedom of thought, imagination and inquiry and promoted full expression and access to cultural activities. In that regard, the United States appreciated the observation by the Director-General that UNESCO's efforts would best be achieved by pursuing the free circulation of ideas. 80. Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia) endorsed the statement made by the Group of 77 and China and said that, on the issue of globalization and interdependence, it was necessary to reconcile theory and practice. Globalization could not be based on mere economic profit but must also include respect for social and cultural differences. Hundreds of millions of people in developing economies, especially in the least developed countries (LDCs), depended on a just and fair globalization process. To that end, it was necessary to support efforts to strengthen multilateral institutions in promoting international cooperation for development and policy coherence on global development issues, establish effective policy coordination at the national level and promote and strengthen policy coherence at the regional level. Moreover, South-South cooperation could play an important role as a complement to existing international cooperation in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In that context, the Governments of Indonesia and South Africa hoped that there would be a broad participation in the Asian African Summit, scheduled to be held in Jakarta, Indonesia on 21-23 April 2005 to adopt the new strategic alliance between Asia and Africa as a political instrument to strengthen cooperation between the two continents. 81. The issue of international migration and development had received renewed attention in recent years. Because of its scale and complexity, it was becoming a subject of international debate, including in the United Nations. The movement of people across international borders was a long-standing and inevitable phenomenon prompted by population increase worldwide and was becoming even more evident in the current era of globalization and interdependence. It was therefore important to defend the basic principles of the United Nations Charter and the relevant international conventions. 82. No State had the right to interfere in the internal affairs of the countries in which a problem originated, and even less to intervene there or insist on imposing its views about eradicating its causes. International migration required the adoption of concerted measures by governments and other stakeholders at the national, regional and international levels, such as those adopted by Indonesia, a country of transit, origin and destination of migrants, in cooperation with other countries in the region and the competent international organizations. Indonesia had co-chaired the Ministerial Regional Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime held in Bali in February 2002 and April 2003. Given that the Asia and Pacific region had one of the highest illegal-migration rates, the conference had focused on strengthening regional cooperation. Indonesia's all-out combat against human trafficking was evident in its legislation for the protection of the child and the mother. Indonesia had signed the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its optional protocols and also, in September 2004, the International Convention on the Protection of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, which was in the process of ratification on a priority basis. 83. Combating corruption had a high priority for Indonesia. The Indonesian Government had set up a Public Servants' Wealth Audit Agency, a National Ombudsman Commission and an Anti-Corruption Commission. It had amended the legislation on money laundering to curb the scourge of corruption, and established the Indonesian Financial Transaction Report and Analysis Centre. Indonesia had signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption and cooperated with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, providing technical assistance and support to governments, particularly in developing countries, for promoting the ratification and subsequent implementation of the convention. Cooperation and support were also necessary for building human-resources and institutional capacities in order to ensure that corruption was eradicated in all its forms. 84. Ms. Zubevic (Croatia) said that Croatia's economy is one of the strongest and most developed market economies in south-east Europe. The priority of Croatian economic policy was to continue building a stable and strong market economy, competitive on a global scale. Steps were being taken to boost business, reduce government expenditures and strengthen the role of science and new technologies in the economy. However, a substantial foreign debt, a significant balance of payment deficit and high unemployment continued to hamper economic growth and stability. To improve that situation, measures were taken to revitalize the labour market and increase production and exports through changes in taxation and economic policies, and in particular by stimulating export activities, restructuring large state-owned companies and improving the international competitiveness of Croatian products. Croatia was constantly endeavouring to improve its creditworthiness, trade balance and investment climate. Foreign investment in Croatia was constitutionally protected and regulated under the law on trading companies and other provisions. 85. Regional integration was crucial. In that regard, Croatia had made significant progress towards political stabilization and the establishment of economic ties with neighbouring countries. In line with World Trade Organization (WTO) provisions, Croatia had signed a series of free trade agreements with other countries in south-east Europe. It had launched a number of structural reforms. The European Union had so far provided assistance to Croatia mainly through the Community Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilisation (CARDS) programme, primarily in the areas of capacity building and regional cooperation. To pursue those positive trends, further structural changes were necessary at the national level, especially in the areas of education, health and justice. Fiscal consolidation remained a priority 86. Croatia, a country with an economy in transition, offered a practical example of the type of partnership necessary at the international and national levels in order to bring about further development, sustainable economic growth and integration in the world economy. The consensus forged in Monterrey should be maintained and further strengthened as a means of achieving development goals and ensuring sustainable development. The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 