%%%INTERNATIONAL TRADE|DEVELOPMENT FINANCE|POVERTY MITIGATION|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|DEVELOPING ISLAND COUNTRIES|ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|

Second Committee Summary record of the 7th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 5 October 2005, at 3 p.m. Chairman: Mr. Wali (Nigeria) later: Mr. Koudelka (Vice-Chairman) (Czech Republic) Contents General debate (continued) The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m. 1. Mr. Bossna (Congo) said that the forceful reaffirmation at the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly of the outcomes of all the major conferences and summit meetings in the economic and social areas, including the Millennium Summit, constituted the platform for work at the current session. It was now the Committee's task to translate the United Nations development agenda into action. 2. The international community now had a real awareness of the devastating effect of poverty throughout the world. Commendable initiatives had been taken to direct more development funds towards its eradication, such as the European Union's timetable for achieving the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product (GNP) for official development assistance (ODA), or the various proposals by heads of State to strengthen traditional sources of financing for development, or the Group of Eight's decision on the cancellation of the debt of 18 of the poorest countries, just ratified by the multilateral financing institutions. Thanks were due to those wealthy countries which had undertaken to compensate the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund for the resulting shortfalls. On the other hand, the lengthy procedures required for a country to qualify under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative were standing in the way of urgently needed solutions to problems in such areas as health, education and food. 3. Priority must be given to resolving various issues connected with trade, new technologies, commodities, structural deficits and global economic decision-making. If world trade was to become the engine of development, the commitments made under the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Round of negotiations had to be implemented. The developing countries, which, generally speaking, relied too heavily on commodity exports, must be helped to restructure and diversify their economies to become competitive in international markets. Welcome recommendations had been made at the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, calling for structural and macroeconomic reforms, the settlement of the external debt problem and the opening of markets to the products of developing countries. The heads of State or Government had rightly underscored the importance of complementary South-South cooperation. 4. Recent natural catastrophes throughout the world had shown how indispensable concerted global action was. The full realization of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation was essential. 5. All indications were that the African continent was still lagging the most in development. Consequently, the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) should be supported, the debt question should be resolved, and efforts being made in the fields of trade, education and health should be assisted. 6. Mr. Song Se Il (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that under the current unjust international economic order the right of the developing countries to development was largely being ignored and their opinions were not being honoured in the course of decision-making. Moreover, high-handed actions such as military aggression or economic embargoes, justified under the cloak of humanitarianism or anti-terrorism, threatened the sovereignty and rights of the developing countries. 7. The developed countries should, without preconditions, increase ODA and foreign direct investment and should act decisively to solve the external debt problem. The commodities market needed to be stabilized and the preferential system strengthened so that the developing countries could raise development funds from international trade. Those countries' full and equal participation in multilateral trade and international financial institutions should be guaranteed, and international development strategies should be geared to support national strategies and policies in such a way as to make the developing countries more self-reliant. There was no universal economic model applicable to all countries. Unilateral economic actions contrary to United Nations principles by foreign Governments should never be permitted. 8. His Government had been undertaking structural reforms to revitalize the economy through such projects as large-scale land and waterway rehabilitation for sustainable development and the building of hydroelectric power plants to solve the energy problem. It would continue its cooperative relationship with the international community to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. 9. Mr. Shin Kak-soo (Republic of Korea) welcomed the renewed commitment of the world's leaders to a comprehensive, action-oriented development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals. The 2005 World Summit Outcome might not be satisfactory to all, but it was the agreed guideline for action, and it should be followed faithfully. 10. The means were available to lift the whole world out of poverty and underdevelopment. What was needed was concrete action on the development of nationally owned strategies, global partnerships, financing for development, domestic resource mobilization, trade, and sustainable development; and the Committee should adopt resolutions on those issues. 11. The developing countries had reaffirmed responsibility for their own governance and their own development, and experience had confirmed the importance of national development strategies and the reform of broad sectors -- such as the banking sector, the tax administration, the public sector and the regulatory framework for business -- in increasing the resources available for development and ensuring their effective use. 12. His Government was encouraged by the timetables set by many developed countries for reaching the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income (GNI) as ODA by 2015 and the other commitments made to a substantial increase in ODA by 2010. In keeping with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, donor States should give aid more effectively and developing countries should improve their financial management and their capacity to absorb aid. As an emerging donor, the Republic of Korea had continued, despite the East Asian financial crisis, to increase its ODA, doubling it between 2000 and 2004 and hoping to double it again by 2009. It was building partnerships with developing countries in other ways as well, using its expertise to help build and host an Asian-Pacific training centre for information and communication technology as a contribution to reducing the digital divide. 13. The role of trade as an engine of growth should be enhanced. It was essential to complete the Doha Development Agenda negotiations and to help the developing countries to build their trade-related competitiveness and capacities by diversifying their commodity sectors and developing their productive capacities. 14. His Government was dedicated to good governance and the fight against corruption as essential ingredients in development. It intended soon to ratify the United Nations Convention against Corruption and urged other States to do so; and it was working with the Secretariat to establish a United Nations Governance Centre in the Republic of Korea, where experience could be shared among nations. 15. Health was another area requiring collective action. His Government was contributing to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis and helping the International Vaccine Institute to bring vaccines to the world's poorest regions, and it had helped launch the International Partnership on Avian and Pandemic Influenza. 16. The slow progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals in parts of Africa, Asia and the Pacific could be accelerated only by paying increased attention to the special needs of Africa, the least developed countries, the landlocked developing countries and the small island developing States. The Asia-Pacific region was home to two thirds of the world's poorest people and nearly 40 per cent of the total population of the least developed countries and badly needed assistance. 17. Environmental sustainability was inextricably linked to the other Millennium Development Goals, and the three pillars of sustainable development -- economic development, social development and environmental protection -- should be recognized as integrated, interdependent and mutually reinforcing. The forthcoming session of the Commission on Sustainable Development should pave the way for a consolidated policy on energy, climate, air pollution and industry, and the upcoming international negotiations on climate change should lead to prompt and effective action. 18. Mr. Amin-Mansour (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that, according to the report on the world economic situation and prospects as of mid-2005, growth in the world economy had slowed since the beginning of 2005, following considerable growth in 2004. Commodity prices had risen, suggesting a gap between supply and demand in certain sectors. The appropriate response was to focus short-term economic policies on the achievement of higher real output and employment. However, as the poor countries still had limited access to international trade and financial markets, even favourable market conditions could not provide sufficient stimulus to ensure achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and the report had rightly urged the implementation of commitments in the areas of ODA, debt relief and trade. The report had noted the slow growth of employment and the persistence of high rates of unemployment and underemployment in most developing countries as a universal weakness of the world economy. In order to reduce poverty, growth must be reflected in increased employment. 19. International cooperation and financing for development were undeniably vital to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. The Millennium Development Goals report for 2005 recorded progress, but stated that certain indicators were not promising. Thus, although fewer women overall were dying in childbirth, the countries most affected had not shown an improvement. HIV had increased in all regions and tuberculosis had re-emerged. Forests, species and habitats continued to disappear, and more cooperation was required in improving energy efficiency. In brief, the indicators in the progress report were not promising. National capacities for monitoring progress towards the Millennium Development Goals must be strengthened, and implementation of national plans and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) projects expedited. 20. He noted with regret that the World Summit Outcome did not adequately address the special needs of developing countries in the areas of development and trade or provide the expected stimulus to accelerate implementation of the Goals. The United Nations should take into account and support national policies and priorities in order to achieve the Goals. A major constraint was lack of adequate and predictable funding. He commended the step taken by the Group of Eight (G-8) in cancelling the debt of 18 HIPC countries, but stressed that more substantial debt relief measures were needed. Unilateral coercive measures continued to threaten the emergence of an international environment favourable to sustained economic growth, sustainable development and achievement of the Goals by 2015. 21. It was generally accepted that oil prices had risen for a range of reasons, including growing demand, natural disasters, reduced oil refinery capacity, geopolitical developments, and taxes on oil products in industrialized countries. It should be noted that many oil-producing countries imported oil by-products, were therefore themselves adversely affected by oil price fluctuations, and would benefit from a stable and rational energy market. The oil-producing countries were further affected by the high cost of imported exploration and extraction equipment and, as oil prices were denominated in dollars, by depreciation of the dollar. There had been long periods over the past decades when oil prices had been low, causing the producing countries to increase production steadily until many were now producing at full capacity. To achieve sustainability of supply it was essential for the international community to support the oil-exporting developing countries with advanced oil-exploration technologies and investment in their exploration and production sectors, as well as to assist those countries to protect their petroleum facilities against natural disasters. The oil-producing countries were exposed to the price pressures of the world economy and were not in sole control of the price of oil. 22. The demand for oil could be reduced by striving for energy efficiency and using advanced, environmentally friendly and economically viable technologies. The fund established in 1976 by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to provide relief to the oil-importing developing countries within the framework of South-South cooperation had by the end of July 2005 extended cumulative development assistance in the amount of US$ 7.6 billion, a contribution which had been acknowledged in the World Summit Outcome. A sound and lasting partnership between energy-importing and energy-exporting countries was the basis of a stable energy market. 23. Cultivation and trafficking in narcotics had an adverse impact on the development process, as did natural disasters, whose effects could be mitigated by timely implementation of the Framework for Action adopted by the World Conference on Disaster Reduction in 2005 in Kobe, Japan. 24. There should be discussion at international level of the humanitarian assistance needed by refugees and their host countries. The high-level dialogue on international migration and development due to take place in 2006 could be influential in maximizing the benefits of migration and minimizing its negative impacts. In 2005 the Commission on Sustainable Development had concluded the first implementation cycle of the programme of work set in 2003 on water, sanitation and human settlements. For many countries the policies and actions were not perfect, yet such implementation constituted a success on route to the realization of the Millennium Development Goals. 25. He regretted that the fifth session of the United Nations Forum on Forests had concluded without tangible results. Adoption by the Council of the Global Environment Facility of a Resource Allocation Framework was disturbing, in view of the relatively weak national capacities of the smaller and medium-sized developing countries. In 2006, which would be the International Year of Deserts and Desertification, the international community should address the causes of desertification and its impact in relation to poverty, deforestation, health, environmental sustainability, agriculture, migration and even climate change. 26. Ms. Bauzán de Senes (Uruguay) observed that sustainable development was a long-term goal whose fulfilment required the conjunction of a number of different factors, both internal and external. Internally, respect for the rule of law, democratic governance and human rights, the fight against corruption, and good public and financial management were essential. Internationally, development aid should be increased and effectively targeted, alternative sources of financing identified, the digital divide eliminated and trade liberalized. 27. The United Nations should be at the forefront of democratizing the benefits of globalization. Hence the importance of the restructuring and revitalization of the Organization's economic and social system. At the same time, the developed countries should contribute more funds to ensure the implementation of the decisions adopted at all United Nations conferences, including the Millennium Summit. In providing support to Member countries, the United Nations must work on the basis of universality and include countries which had, through strenuous efforts, managed to achieve intermediate levels of development but needed international support to sustain them. Currently middle-income countries were virtually excluded from ODA on the basis of partial criteria that did not take per capita debt into account. 28. To mitigate the economic and social impact of the recent crisis, Uruguay was implementing a national social emergency plan to integrate thousands living in extreme poverty, in close conjunction with medium- and long-term policies to ensure coverage of basic needs in the areas of food, housing, employment and education. At the same time, it was moving towards greater regional integration through the Common Market of the Southern Cone (MERCOSUR). Its sustainable development required the expansion, modernization and diversification of trade based on non-discriminatory and non-protectionist norms so that it could place on the global marketplace products which it could produce better and more cheaply. Every effort must be made to advance the progress of the Doha Round negotiations. 29. Uruguay was pleased to note that five developed countries had already honoured their pledge to earmark 0.7 per cent of GDP for ODA. It welcomed the proposals on innovative sources of financing for development and expressed the hope that the United Nations and the multilateral financing organizations would work together to mobilize the core resources needed for the financing of development. 30. On the question of external debt, it was important to strike a balance between the fulfilment of debt commitments and the allocation of the resources needed to satisfy national requirements and social demands. Recently, the Rio Group had developed innovative financing mechanisms that earmarked resources for social investment and infrastructure projects. The United Nations must also deal with the challenge of ensuring global food sufficiency, safeguarding the environment and conserving natural resources, by continuing to advance the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. Uruguay saw sustainable development as a harmonious process, in which economic growth, the exploitation of natural resources, the targeting of investment, social justice and controlled technological and institutional changes respected the needs of present and future generations. 31. Mr. Koudelka (Czech Republic), Vice-Chairman, took the Chair. 32. Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic), speaking as Chairman of the Group of Landlocked Developing Countries, noted the gratifying momentum that the world economy had gained since the beginning of 2005. Growth in the developing countries had been the fastest for more than two decades, while output in the economies in transition continued to increase more rapidly than in the other major country groups. Nevertheless, prospects for full recovery of the world economy remained uncertain: while growth had been strong in North America, it had been moderate in Japan and weak in Europe. The upsurge in oil prices had already slowed growth in international trade, particularly impacting the many developing countries -- notably the least developed and the landlocked -- that were largely reliant on imported oil. 33. In order to ensure sustained global growth, national policy actions must be complemented by enhanced international cooperation. Development must be placed at the core of international cooperation, and the participation of all developing countries, in global decision-making had to be enhanced. The Group renewed its call for an enabling global environment conducive to development and effective measures to stimulate growth and ensure stability of the world economy. Those measures should address the imbalances and systemic inequities in international economic relations, boost capital flows to developing countries, in particular the least developed and landlocked, and improve exchange-rate policy. The overriding aim should be to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. 34. The recent High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly had been an important milestone, in that it had reaffirmed the commitment of the international community to pursue coordinated efforts towards achieving a world free from want, fear and injustice and a more effective and democratic United Nations. Although the Outcome had fallen short of the expectations of the developing countries, it could be regarded as a working basis for intensifying global action to realize those objectives. The need had been recognized to address the special challenges facing landlocked developing countries through the timely and effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action and the São Paulo Consensus, and the leaders assembled in the Summit had also acknowledged the special difficulties and concerns of those countries in their efforts to integrate their economies into the multilateral trading system. 35. The Group emphasized the importance of increased financing for development. However hard they had tried, their endeavours to mobilize domestic resources for development financing had remained inadequate, primarily owing to an insignificant increase in ODA and failure to attract foreign direct investment because of high transportation costs, a narrow resource base and small domestic markets. If the members of the Group were to overcome their financial and human resource constraints and move forward in their efforts to implement their international commitments, including the Millennium Development Goals, they should be provided with sufficient financial and technical support by the donor community, without harsh conditions or complex procedures. The Group welcomed the establishment of timetables by a number of developed countries to reach the target of 0.7 per cent of GNP for ODA by 2015 and urged other donors to follow suit by 2006, and to attain the target of 0.2 per cent of GNP for ODA to the least developed countries. While appreciating the initiatives of the Group of Eight in seeking to identify innovative sources of financing, the Group also reiterated its call for the full, timely and effective implementation of the commitments contained in the Monterrey Consensus in general and those relating to landlocked developing countries in particular. 36. The landlocked developing countries were increasingly marginalized in the world trading system, suffering as they did from prohibitive trading costs associated with their lack of territorial access to the sea, remoteness from major world markets, poor transport infrastructure and burdensome border crossings. According to recent studies, those countries had to spend about 13 per cent of their total export earnings on transport and insurance services, while the other developing countries and the developed countries, respectively, paid only 8 per cent and 6 per cent. That additional cost not only depleted the scarce national revenue of landlocked developing countries but also eroded their competitiveness in world trade. Since 1993, their participation in global trade had been stagnant, amounting in 2002 to no more that 0.5 per cent for trade in merchandise and 0.6 per cent for trade in services. Furthermore, they remained heavily dependent on trade in limited primary commodities, subject to high price volatility and fluctuating global demand. 37. In consequence, the Group stressed the importance of ensuring the equitable completion of the Doha Development Round as soon as possible. Furthermore, the current World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations on market access for agricultural and non-agricultural goods should give particular attention to products of special interest to landlocked developing countries, as called for in the Almaty Programme of Action, the São Paulo Consensus and relevant United Nations resolutions. In addition, concrete action should be taken to establish efficient transport and trade facilitation systems in both landlocked and transit developing countries, enabling the former to integrate themselves into the regional and global economy and raise their profile in the multilateral trading system. To that end, the Group was resolved to maintain its common position as outlined in the Asunción Platform for the Doha Development Round adopted at the Meeting of Trade Ministers of landlocked developing countries held on 9 and 10 August 2005. 38. The Almaty Programme of Action had to remain an integral part of the overall process of implementing the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, and the Group renewed its appeal to all stakeholders to live up to their commitments as called for in that Programme. The Group also stressed the need for a more effective and empowered Economic and Social Council to serve as a lead body for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of economic and social development. 39. Ms. Davtyan (Armenia) said that, while the 2005 World Summit Outcome might not be as ambitious as many States would have liked, it reflected the current international consensus on the issues on the global agenda, including development, and could therefore serve as a good basis for collective action in the coming years. Her delegation attached particular importance to the agreements reached on financing for development and debt cancellation and welcomed the time-bound commitments to increase ODA with a view to reaching the 0.7 per cent target by 2015. It also commended the G-8 initiative to cancel the debt of the HIPC countries and provide additional resources to sustain the financing capacity of the international financial institutions. Such commitments, together with efforts to increase aid effectiveness, would be a significant impetus to attaining the Millennium Development Goals. 40. Efforts were also needed to ensure a more equitable and open system of trade. While duty- and quota-free access was essential for the least developed countries, strategies were also needed to enhance the competitiveness and diversification of exports in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. Her delegation supported the call for completion of the Doha Round and hoped that the opportunity would be seized at the upcoming WTO Ministerial Conference. It was also pleased that the Outcome addressed the challenges faced by countries with special needs and called for effective implementation of the commitments made in Brussels, Almaty and Mauritius. It strongly condemned unilateral coercive measures and advocated their elimination, and, it also believed that projects envisaging new costly infrastructure in circumvention of existing ones would only add further tension to the already complex situation in the South Caucasus region; both practices hampered the development of individual countries and the entire region. She welcomed the attention given in the outcome document to the special needs of Africa and the renewed commitment to support the efforts of African countries and strengthen cooperation with NEPAD. 41. Recalling that strong national ownership of the development agenda, domestic resource mobilization, promotion of good governance, democracy and respect for human rights were an indispensable part of the global partnership for development, she emphasized the importance of comprehensive national development strategies, to be adopted by developing countries and countries with economies in transition by 2006. The current priorities for economic development in Armenia included job creation, export promotion and development of a knowledge-based economy, and special attention was also given to rural development. Armenia's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) was based on a comprehensive approach to human poverty and addressed linkages with the Millennium Development Goals. Armenia had also adopted an action plan on combating corruption and signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which it was in the process of ratifying. Lastly, Armenia had always advocated the benefits of regional cooperation, particularly for environmental protection and confidence-building in situations of unresolved conflict. 42. Mr. Al-Hadid (Jordan) expressed the hope that the Doha Round in Hong Kong in December would produce agreement on trade issues, including agricultural support, access to markets and preferential treatment, and would produce a fair multilateral global trade system. 43. The decision by many developed countries to set a timetable to allocate 0.7 per cent of GNP to aid by 2015 was most commendable. Innovative methods to finance development should be explored, and his Government welcomed the Emir of Qatar's invitation to host the follow-up conference to the Conference on Development Finance in 2007. The high-level dialogue of the General Assembly devoted to international migration and development in 2006 should provide an opportunity to debate migration and create appropriate ways to widen its benefits and limit its negative effects. A solution should be found to the problem of foreign debt, which continued to present many States with an insurmountable obstacle to sustainable development. 44. Jordan hoped to implement the Millennium Development Goals and concrete progress had been made. Significant reductions had been made in the levels of infant and child mortality and in the numbers of mothers who died during childbirth, and 97 per cent of all births currently took place under specialist medical supervision. The number of people living on less than one dollar per day had fallen and illiteracy, especially among 15-24-year-olds, had also decreased. The numbers of children enrolling in elementary school had risen markedly and more of them were reaching fifth grade. In addition, the gender gap in education had almost disappeared. Despite the scarcity of sources of water, drinking water had been provided to more than 95 per cent of inhabitants and over 60 per cent of people had access to sewage systems. The amount of land set aside for forests and natural reserves had doubled. 45. Economic policy in Jordan concentrated on continuing the process of economic reform with the aim of achieving sustainable development. Economic liberalization supported strengthening the private sector, increasing the competitiveness of the Jordanian economy, attracting more foreign investors, and converting from a resource-based economy to an information economy. In recent times, the Jordanian economy had maintained its pattern of growth. Taking into consideration the feasibility study undertaken by the World Bank on the Red Sea-Dead Sea Canal project, Jordan called on the international community to offer support and aid to save the Dead Sea from drying up. 46. Mr. Najib (Iraq) said that AIDS, mass poverty, and child mortality were all problems calling for collective action by the international community. Developed countries should honour their obligations by increasing development aid to 0.7 per cent of their GNP and by finding a solution to the problem of foreign indebtedness. His Government welcomed the G-8 initiative to cancel debt for some of the poor countries in Africa and hoped that other creditor countries would follow suit by cancelling the debts of other States in order to help their development, especially those countries that had recently emerged from war and internal conflicts. In that regard, Iraq greatly appreciated the help it had received to promote its development and reconstruction. 47. The achievements of the Monterrey, Johannesburg, and Doha Conferences required common efforts to create a fair, international system in which globalization and technology could be shared. World leaders had met recently to debate the implementation of the Millennium Declaration. It was hoped that that meeting would prove to be beneficial, particularly for developing countries, and that the second phase of the World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis in November would yield positive results. 48. Iraq had endured successive wars and international sanctions for more than a decade and as a result had suffered a serious decline in infrastructure and essential services. Development programmes had ceased while foreign debts had accumulated. His Government praised the initiatives taken by creditor States which had cancelled Iraq's debt obligations and called upon all donor States to deliver the assistance they had promised for the reconstruction of Iraq. 49. Mr. Ani (Nigeria) said that the World Summit Outcome contained decisions which should advance the development agenda, provided that they were not selectively applied. The Millennium Development Goals contained measurable targets by which all nations could judge themselves. Support for regional mechanisms, such as NEPAD, would complement the need for national ownership of the development process highlighted in the Summit Outcome. Concrete measures, including direct support for regional programmes and integration, would enable Africa to enter the mainstream of the world economy. 50. Commending the countries that had increased ODA to 0.7 per cent of GDP, he suggested that other developed countries should reach at least 0.5 per cent of GDP by 2010. It was generally recognized that innovative financing was vital for development, and the international community had the opportunity to make use of the International Financial Facility to target key areas such as health. 51. Debt relief should be extended to non-HIPC countries, thereby enhancing their capacity to attain the Millennium Development Goals. That move would be consistent with the appeal for 100 per cent debt cancellation, especially for low-income countries in the region, by the Assembly of the African Union at the fifth ordinary session in Sirte, Libya. 52. If the changes in aid policy envisioned in the World Summit Outcome were to be effective, they had to be complemented by a fundamental restructuring of world trade that would allow trade to play a full part in promoting economic growth, employment and development. Effective participation of the developing countries, including the least developed, in a fair, rules-based international trading system was dependent on the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Round and the Sixth WTO Ministerial Conference in December 2005. For countries in his region an important outcome of the negotiations would be abolition of trade-distorting subsidies to agriculture, without a corresponding demand for reciprocal concessions. 53. The positive contribution of international migration to global development and the important nexus between development and international migration had been recognized. However, for many developing countries migration was synonymous with the loss of highly skilled labour and other problems. Measures designed to address those problems could serve as an input to the high-level dialogue on international migration and development scheduled for the sixty-first session. 54. In order to play the role carved out for it in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, the Economic and Social Council would have to be strengthened. In addition, an urgent effort must be made to enable the developing countries to broaden and strengthen their participation in the economic decision-making and norm-setting of the international financial institutions. A raft of measures was required to correct their underrepresentation in the Bretton Woods institutions, including the changing of quotas, capital shares and voting rights. A reformed global economic and financial architecture, if shaped by common consent, would enjoy legitimacy, relevance and effectiveness. 55. As recognized at the end of G-8 Gleneagles Summit, African leaders had a new vision for Africa's future. African economies were reaping the fruits of improved governance, greater transparency, accountability, anti-corruption strategies, and a commitment to African development. In Nigeria, steady growth of the agricultural, manufacturing and service sectors had been complemented by the newly launched National Economic Empowerment Development Strategy for tackling macroeconomic and structural problems, as well as promoting growth and poverty eradication. The strong political will in Africa to translate vision into reality required equally strong support from Africa's development partners. 56. Mrs. Núñez de Odremán (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) said that her Government's reservations concerning the treatment by the 2005 World Summit Outcome of development, poverty and financial and monetary inequities were well known. Two principles guided her Government's action: first, there was no single development model and, second, States had a sovereign right to determine their own development priorities and strategies. Those principles should always be reflected in the work of multilateral organizations and of the United Nations, in particular. 57. The convening of the International Conference on Financing for Development in 2002 had been a triumph for the South. However, three years later, the Monterrey Consensus had been exposed as a subtle trap, for it reflected an ideology undermine by weak commitments on ODA, reform of the international economic, monetary and trade system, and structural reforms as part of so-called national capacity-building. In Monterrey, compromises had also been made concerning the trade liberalization agenda, while economic and development-related issues had been closely tied to the political conduct of States. Developing countries were currently in a worse situation than they had been in 2002. While her Government understood that developing countries had accepted primary responsibility for their own development, that surely did not mean that the international community had renounced the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities reaffirmed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development also in 2002. Her Government respected the political and economic choices of other nations and hoped that its choices would be given the same respect. Moreover, her delegation would not shy away from expressing views which many other States shared but for various reasons could not express. 58. Turning to issues of particular interest to her delegation, she said that if States were really to be responsible for their own development, they must be given the latitude to determine their own strategies and plans and to implement a development model not in accord with the prevailing philosophy. In that context, the imposition of conditionalities threatened national sovereignty, independence and self-determination and would be categorically rejected by her delegation. The use of unilateral coercive measures against developing countries must also be rejected, as it was an infringement of the Charter and of international law. In that regard, her delegation would work to stop unilateral certification processes by which aid to developing countries would be tied to the attention they gave to matters of interest to the international community. The principle of common but differentiated responsibilities must be accorded the same status as other principles agreed at international summits and conferences and applied not only to sustainable development but also to economic development, climate change and monetary, financial and trade-related matters. Lastly, the Economic and Social Council must be strengthened to enable it to meet current challenges, and the existing power structure of the Bretton Woods institutions must be reformed to ensure that the problems of developing countries were addressed. 59. Regarding the impact of high oil prices on developing countries, she said that the world should not simply echo the views of developed countries, which sought to blame oil-producing countries for price increases. Her Government believed that a fair price must be paid for oil, as for any other strategic resource, and therefore called on States to take into account the adjustment for international inflation before expressing biased judgements. Other factors, such as reduced oil-refining capacity, market speculation and geopolitical turbulence, should also be added to the equation. 60. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was also responsible for a number of energy cooperation initiatives, the most recent being the Petrocaribe agreement and energy alliances in South America. The country would contribute approximately 1.7 per cent of GDP to such initiatives over the next 10 years. Such a humble contribution stood in contrast to the ODA and development financing provided by the much wealthier developed countries, which, moreover, attached conditions to such assistance. Lastly, she called for particular consideration to be given to the transfer of energy technology and knowledge to developing countries, as that was an area with huge potential for North-South cooperation. 61. Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) said that the main task for the sixtieth session of the General Assembly was to follow up the decisions made at the 2005 World Summit. While the Summit Outcome provided a blueprint, in many aspects it fell short of expectations and a broader development agenda therefore needed to be pursued. It was particularly important to look at financing for development and recognize the critical role of ODA. Brazil expected those developed countries that had not yet done so to increase their efforts regarding ODA targets and do more to enhance the quality of aid. His Government was also convinced of the need to explore innovative sources of financing for development, provided they supplemented ODA. In that regard, the Technical Group on Innovative Financing Mechanisms would continue to explore ways of generating additional resources. 62. Two ideas considered by the Technical Group were on the verge of fruition: first, the solidarity contribution on airline tickets would be adopted by France, Chile and possibly other Governments from January 2006, with his Government intending to implement the levy as soon as possible; second, the Technical Group intended to propose a resolution on facilitating and reducing the costs of migrant workers' remittances. Brazil was fully aware of the private nature of remittances. The purpose, therefore, was to facilitate the increase of net resources made available and stimulate the exchange of experiences regarding development projects anchored in remittances. 63. Brazil reiterated its commitment to South-South cooperation. During the current month, a Brazilian delegation would visit the Caribbean to discuss possibilities in areas such as health, transport, agriculture and biological fuels. Brazil welcomed efforts towards economic cooperation, particularly in the area of energy, such as those mentioned by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. The Outcome's call on the international financial institutions to support South-South cooperation should be given further attention, as their involvement should provide a new paradigm for such cooperation, by improving predictability and enabling both its scope and impact to be expanded. Science and technology were the fastest and most direct route to development, and in order to promote them on the required scale international financial support would be needed. More flexibility in international norms and regulations would reduce the technological gap and bridge the digital divide, both among and within countries. Brazil believed that South-South cooperation and science and technology deserved increased attention at the current session and emphasized that advances in that area would be instrumental in promoting timely achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 64. Brazil welcomed the G-8 decision to cancel the debt of 18 HIPC countries, but believed that more support should also be given to middle- and low-income countries, including through debt reduction and debt cancellation. Brazil was particularly concerned about the volatility of capital and its negative impact on developing countries and the need for developing countries to have a stronger voice in international financial institutions. It was, however, encouraged by the recent statement in which the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had acknowledged the need to increase the voting power for some emerging market economies and ensure adequate representation for Africa and had identified fair quotas and voice as a priority. 65. Recalling the assessment made by the WTO representative to the General Assembly's separate meeting on Financing for Development that the positive statements made by world leaders seemed not to reach their trade negotiators in Geneva, he said that Brazil regretted that the opportunity to send a strong message to the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference had been largely missed. The Summit Outcome's section on trade had been a deep disappointment for many delegations. Brazil would have preferred stronger language on the complete elimination of domestic and export subsidies, especially for agricultural products, and looked forward to a reaffirmation of the commitment effectively to address trade-distorting practices and measures, which had hindered development for decades. In areas such as education, employment, gender and the fight against HIV/AIDS and other pandemics, it would be of paramount importance to work closely with the United Nations agencies, programmes and funds. The special needs of the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing countries must be addressed through the timely and effective implementation of the respective programmes of action. The special needs of Africa must also be given particular attention. 66. Noting that rural and agricultural development were essential to achieving the Millennium Development Goals, he said that Brazil was pleased to be hosting the International Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development in March 2006. Sustainable development in its three pillars must be considered as an overriding concept in the discussions on every aspect of development. All nations stood to gain if that concept was enshrined in Committee deliberations. Lastly, Brazil reiterated its commitment to further developing international regimes on environmental issues. 67. Mr. Husain (Observer for the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)) said that the assessment by the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs -- namely, that, despite the decline in the global economy during 2005 and the uncertainty and risk surrounding future projections for growth, there had been some positive developments such as continued growth of international trade, relative calm in financial markets worldwide and considerable improvement in the terms of trade of several developing countries -- triggered some cautionary thoughts, particularly if viewed from the standpoint of developing countries and countries with economies in transition. Many States members of OIC, and others, regretted the World Summit's failure to send a clear message on the importance of pursuing the development dimension of the Doha work programme to the upcoming WTO Ministerial Conference. He endorsed the call made by the Group of 77 for the suppression of export subsidies in developed countries, drew attention to the need to facilitate transfers of technology and know-how under more liberal intellectual property regimes, and reiterated the calls of successive OIC Summits and Ministerial Conferences for unilateral coercive measures against developing countries to be lifted. Lastly, recalling that after the tragic events of 11 September 2001 Governments had united to combat terrorism at the national, regional and global levels, he said that a concerted effort was currently needed in order to identify and remedy some of the root causes of the world's social and economic ills. The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m. 