%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|NARCOTIC DRUGS|DRUG TRAFFIC|ORGANIZED CRIME|OPIUM POPPY|AFGHANISTAN|CORRUPTION|TERRORISM|AIDS PREVENTION|TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS|

Third Committee Summary record of the 8th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 11 October 2004, at 3 p.m. Chairman : Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) later : Ms. Abdulaziz (Malaysia) Contents Agenda item 96 : Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) Agenda item 97 : International drug control (continued) The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m. Agenda item 96: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) (A/59/77, A/59/123-E/2004/90, A/59/175, A/59/187, A/59/203, A/59/204, A/59/205, A/59/383-S/2004/758, A/C.3/59/L.3, A/C.3/59/L.4, A/C.3/59/L.5, A/C.3/59/L.6, A/C.3/59/L.7, A/C.3/59/L.8, A/C.3/59/L.9) Agenda item 97: International drug control (continued) (A/59/188 and A/59/124-S/2004/532) 1. Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus), speaking on behalf of seven member States of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) - Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation and Tajikistan - , said that the fight against crime was a priority for the Commonwealth. The legal foundation of the Commonwealth was one that encouraged cooperation. The Commonwealth had adopted joint practical measures to combat transnational organized crime, international terrorism and other crimes. Its specialized agencies had created databases on crime and criminal groups in the region. 2. In the view of the Commonwealth of Independent States, it was important to promote widespread implementation of United Nations crime-prevention standards; to strengthen the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, especially its technical cooperation capacity; and increase cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in combating international terrorism, organized crime, trafficking in persons and corruption. The Commonwealth planned, in cooperation with the United Nations, to promote the ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto. Indeed, most of the member States had already ratified those instruments. The Commonwealth also attached great importance to cooperation in the fight against corruption and would continue working to promote the signature and ratification of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. The Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in Bangkok in 2005, would address issues of great interest, and would make a very useful contribution in that regard. 3. The groundwork for improving cooperation in the fight against crime within the Commonwealth had been laid in 2004. In September, an intergovernmental programme to combat crime during the period 2005-2007 had been adopted at a meeting of Commonwealth Heads of State and Government. The Commonwealth had also taken steps to increase regional cooperation, end illegal immigration and improve border controls. Another priority was the fight against terrorism at both the regional and the global levels. The Commonwealth was making every effort to strengthen regional cooperation mechanisms and was participating in the United Nations' global campaign against terrorism. The Beslan tragedy had led the Commonwealth to take strong measures to stop international terrorism and other forms of extremism. The members of the Commonwealth had signed a new anti-terrorism agreement and had expanded the framework for cooperation by signing an agreement to prevent crime and kidnapping of certain types of vehicles. 4. Ms. Holguín (Colombia) said she endorsed the statements made by the representative of Brazil on behalf of the Rio Group and by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Andean Community. Colombia was all too familiar with the evil workings of illicit drugs and the devastating impact of the drug traffic on society and its institutions. President Uribe's democratic security policy had been the most successful one applied in recent years to strengthen the rule of law and fight against the production and trafficking of drugs, which promoted violence, terrorism, arms trafficking and money laundering. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, since the beginning of the Uribe Administration, illicit crops had been reduced by 30 per cent and had been eradicated from 137,000 hectares. Colombia was grateful to the United States for its recognition in the Third Committee of the efforts and accomplishments of its Government in that regard. 5. Coordinated regional policies were needed; international cooperation played a key role in efforts to eradicate illicit crops, improve aerial and maritime interception, strengthen institutions and improve the administration of justice. Colombia appealed to the international community and the United Nations system, in keeping with the principle of shared responsibility, to cooperate with the programmes being carried out by the Government, particularly in regard to alternative development. 6. A large share of the land on which illicit crops had been eradicated was being planted with licit crops under the Programa de Familias Guardabosques and other agroforestry and farming projects carried out by sustainable community cooperatives in which women played a fundamental role. Under the Programa de Familias Guardabosques, 22,000 families were receiving annual subsidies of $ 2,000 dollars for not growing illicit crops and instead turning to reforestation. The goal was to reach 50,000 families by 2006. In addition to combating the production of illicit drugs and contributing to reforestation, the programme was aimed at creating sustainable environments for the population and promoting social and economic development. Accordingly, it also included initiatives designed to enhance the economic sustainability of participants and provide educational and training activities. The programme was comprehensive and benefited families, communities and the environment. 7. Colombia was confident that the success of the programme would encourage the international community and the United Nations system to support it, particularly in the area of technical training, so as to overcome the drug problem, as well as the problems of violence and terrorism. 8. Mr. Al-Enezi (Kuwait), referring to the reports of the Secretary-General on international cooperation against the world drug problem, eradication of illicit crops and alternative development, said that his delegation noted with concern that cultivation of opium poppies had increased. Reviews should be conducted on a yearly basis, and a follow-up system should be put in place by countries that were producers of coca bush and opium poppies. Such measures would help reduce production. 9. Kuwait shared responsibility with the international community for fighting organized crime and the scourge of drugs, which was especially harmful to young people. It had enacted several laws aimed at promoting international cooperation and putting an end to those problems. In Kuwait, drug addicts were seen as sick people who needed help, and under the national anti-drug programme, a serious effort was being made to help them. 10. Demand reduction was a priority for the Gulf Cooperation Council, which had conducted a campaign to reduce demand and sensitize youth at universities, prisons and other places. Being persuaded of the need to combat organized crime, the Gulf countries had united their efforts in public information campaigns and training activities for police and judicial personnel. 11. With regard to terrorism, he said that several resolutions had been adopted at the meeting of Ministers of the Interior of the Gulf Cooperation Council, held recently in Kuwait, to strengthen coordination of security measures and cooperation in the fight against organized crime, the fight against drugs, illicit transboundary trafficking and money laundering. Those resolutions were in line with the decisions of the Gulf Cooperation Council summit held in Kuwait in December 2003 and the anti-terrorism accord signed in Kuwait in May 2004. Kuwait welcomed the Saudi Arabian proposal to organize an international anti-terrorism conference in February 2005. Kuwait categorically condemned all acts of terrorism, and was deeply concerned at the fact that terrorist acts were being committed in the name of religion. He stressed that terrorism was not linked to any particular religion, culture, race or civilization. 12. In the context of the fight against corruption and the strengthening of international cooperation in that area, the Council of Ministers of Kuwait had decided to ratify the United Nations Convention against Corruption. In the sphere of criminal justice, Kuwait welcomed the establishment of a special tribunal to judge the members of the former Iraqi regime for their crimes against the Kuwaiti and Iraqi peoples, including the invasion of Kuwait and the murder of many people, including prisoners of war. 13. Mr. Sallam (Saudi Arabia) said that he welcomed the measures taken to implement the Secretary-General's recommendations concerning international cooperation on crime prevention and criminal justice, the recommendations of the Economic and Social Council and the work plan for the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice. He noted with concern, however, that drug trafficking had increased and that the main victims of drugs were young people, who represented the future of society. 14. Saudi Arabia was in favour of strengthening international cooperation in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice, particularly in connection with the struggle against organized crime, illicit trafficking of migrants, trafficking in persons, especially women and children, drug-related crimes, illicit trafficking of firearms, money laundering, trafficking of human organs, terrorism and poverty. 15. The fight against terrorism was one of the most serious challenges faced by Saudi Arabia; in that connection, on 5 February 2005, an international conference would be held in Riad to promote cooperation and exchange know-how and experiences. It was important to stress that the provisions of Islamic law were tolerant and protected respect for dignity and human life. 16. Saudi Arabia attached great importance to the strengthening of cooperation through bilateral and multilateral treaties and collaboration with international agencies. Accordingly, his Government was implementing the Forty Recommendations on money laundering and participating in specialized committees. Saudi Arabia had signed the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. 17. Ms. Tincopa (Peru) said that her country appreciated the important role played by the United Nations in developing international instruments on crime, corruption and impunity and strengthening the administration of justice and law enforcement. After a decade of authoritarianism, impunity and corruption at the highest levels of government, Peru was firmly committed to addressing such crimes head-on, in accordance with international law and with full respect for human rights. Peru had adhered to the International Criminal Court, resumed participation in the inter-American human rights system, established a system of anti-corruption institutions and ratified the United Nations Convention against Corruption. It had also prepared and disseminated the report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 18. The fight against corruption strongly influenced the efforts being carried out by Peru at the national, regional and international levels to strengthen democratic governance. Given the complexity of that crime, a multidisciplinary and intersectoral approach was needed. Corruption affected a broad sector of society, and eradication programmes must include prevention, education, improved public administration, protection of civic values and international cooperation. Peru had set up anti-corruption courts and prosecutors and had appointed a special attorney to represent the State in court cases. The Government had established effective cooperation procedures and had revamped its asset-recovery mechanisms. Her delegation wished to thank the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for the assistance it had provided, in the context of Peru's criminal justice reform, with the organization in 2003 of the first legal advisors programme on capacity building in the areas of research, prosecution and decision making in cases of organized crime and corruption, and asset recovery. 19. Illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and terrorism were also dysfunctions associated with globalization that hindered democratic governance and social and economic development. Peru, which had suffered from barbaric terrorist attacks for nearly 20 years, at a cost of over 60,000 lives lost and incalculable material damage, categorically rejected terrorism regardless of what the motivations might be or who the perpetrators were. Terrorism sought to attack and weaken the values on which the doctrine of human rights was based and undermine the institutional bases of democracy and the rule of law. Success in the fight against terrorism was contingent upon the building of a broad alliance involving the participation not only of States but also of financial institutions, the private sector, the academic sector and civil society. In view of its own experience, Peru was unequivocally committed to the struggle against terrorism and was a party to the 12 United Nations anti-terrorism conventions. It had shared its experience with the Counter-Terrorism Committee through the participation of a Peruvian expert and would continue to contribute to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) so as to ensure that the scourge of terrorism would soon be completely eliminated. 20. Ms. Listyowati (Indonesia) said that her delegation wished to associate itself with the statement made by the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Indonesia joined the international community in enhancing and maintaining law and order in the world and looked forward to the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in Bangkok in 2005. Indonesia was ready to contribute actively to the discussion of substantive items and workshops indicated in the agenda of the Congress with a view to ensuring its successful outcome. The final document of the Congress should reflect the regional perspectives and recommendations resulting from the regional preparatory meetings. The document should also take into account the outcomes relating to crime prevention and criminal justice, the Millennium Summit and other conferences at the international and regional levels. 21. With the adoption in 2000 of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, a new mechanism had been created that would assist in harmonizing the actions of different legal systems and would further strengthen international cooperation and assistance. In 2003, taking another step in the right direction, the General Assembly had adopted the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Repatriating the assets derived from corruption called for enhancement of international cooperation and the political will of countries. Indonesia hoped that those instruments would make it possible to address crime prevention in a more holistic manner and put in place a series of transnational measures that would create a firm foundation for a truly global response. The Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice would afford an opportunity to assess the positive impact of the conventions. 22. Indonesia had signed the Convention against Corruption in December 2003 and was currently working on the establishment of a national action plan for its implementation and ratification. It supported the work of the ad hoc committee on preparations for the convening of the first session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Corruption. To guide it towards reform, Indonesia had also set up an anti-corruption commission and was cooperating with its neighbours in preventing and combating corruption. 23. Recalling that there was a close connection between international terrorism and transnational organized crime, including illicit drug trafficking and money laundering, she stressed that Indonesia believed that there was a need to continue to enhance coordination of efforts at the national, subregional, regional and international levels to strengthen the global response to that serious threat to international security. Indonesia had undertaken extensive measures to combat money laundering and improve and strengthen its institutional capacity and legal infrastructure, for example, by enacting Anti-Money Laundering Act No. 15/2002. The Government had established the Indonesian Financial Transaction Report and Analysis Center, an independent financial intelligence unit, and the ministerial-level National Coordination Committee on anti-money laundering. In addition, her country encouraged the active involvement of the private sector in counteracting money laundering and in denying terrorist organizations access to funding. 24. The rising trend of illicit drug abuse, production and trafficking remained one of Indonesia's most serious problems. What was becoming more challenging was the fact that Indonesia was no longer targeted as a mere transit country but was considered a destination for the sale of illicit drugs and production of synthetic drugs. During the past decade, drug abuse had been on a sharp upward trend. Given the serious destructive consequences of drugs to the younger generation and the fact that the problem hindered sustainable development, the Government continued to apply severe punishment to drug dealers and traffickers. In 2002, the National Narcotic Board of Indonesia had been established to provide strong intersectoral linkages between all relevant drug prevention and control sectors. A concrete plan of action at the national level to implement political decisions and declarations of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to countering the world drug problem together, had been formulated by various task forces in the areas of prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal reform. In the same vein, a National Drug and Food Control Agency had been established in 2002 to regulate chemical precursors, among other things. 25. It should also be realized that given the scarcity of resources to fight the problem, the impact of drugs in developing countries was great. In order to respond more effectively to the serious common concern regarding the scope of the crime and its rapid growth, Indonesia appealed to all Member States to give the highest priority to drug control issues. 26. Indonesia attached great importance to regional processes in combating trafficking in persons and people smuggling. In that respect, Indonesia was committed to the implementation of the outcomes of the Bali Process and was in the final stage of ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols on Trafficking in Persons and on Smuggling of Migrants. Indonesia had also participated in the work of the Conference of Parties to the Convention, held in Vienna in June 2003, and would continue to support the work of the Conference in future. 27. As a realization of its commitments to enhance international law enforcement cooperation, Indonesia recognized mutual legal assistance and extradition arrangements to fight transnational organized crime and terrorism. At the bilateral level, Indonesia had established joint cooperative legal frameworks, such as the extradition and mutual legal assistance treaties it had signed with a number of countries. It was now working on the establishment of a national legislation on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters, while supporting the ongoing process of establishing a regional or subregional mutual legal assistance treaty. Indonesia fully supported any effort to increase cooperation that would strengthen its national capacity to combat transnational crime. Indonesia also wished to emphasize the need to strengthen the role of and partnership with the business community in the joint campaign against terrorism within the framework of shared responsibility. Her delegation wished to underline the commitment of donor countries to assist partner governments in fulfilling their international obligations relating to money laundering, financing of terrorism and other crimes, including through the provision of technical assistance. She would also like to note the contribution that had been made to that effort by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which had played an important role in supporting the elaboration and ratification of international legal instruments. She wished to reaffirm Indonesia's consistent support of United Nations programmes and strategies to prevent and combat international crime. 28. Ms. Al Haj Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the threats posed by drugs and crime were not limited to certain sectors of society, but rather they affected the entire population. In keeping with its commitment to combat those scourges, her Government had drafted and was implementing legislation to protect citizens and harshly punish offenders. 29. The Government had set up rehabilitation and treatment centres for drug addicts. It was a well-known fact that drugs were not produced or trafficked in the Syrian Arab Republic, which was waging an active and constant battle against those who wanted to use it as a transit country. Her country was determined to modernize its legislation to meet the challenges it faced, at both the national and the international levels, and to deal more effectively with the scourge of drugs. Accordingly, it had signed the international conventions against drug trafficking, it had drafted laws providing harsh penalties, and it had adhered to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the two Protocols thereto, as well as to the United Nations Convention against Corruption. At the regional level, it was collaborating effectively and efficiently with other Arab countries and other States in the framework of bilateral agreements aimed at strengthening inspections and measures for dealing with the problem. The Syrian Arab Republic was also collaborating closely with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and appreciated the efforts of the regional office for the Middle East and Africa in supporting governments of the region. Additional resources should be allocated to the Office so as to enable it to fulfil its duties. 30. The Syrian Arab Republic looked forward to the holding of the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, which would provide a good opportunity for strengthening international cooperation. Her delegation wished the Government of Thailand, which would be hosting the Congress, success in its preparations. 31. Mr. Mahtab (India) said that his delegation appreciated the cooperation provided to governments in connection with capacity building by the specialized agencies and United Nations funds and programmes, especially the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. However, the reports submitted to the Third Committee would have been more useful to Member States and the Committee if they had included more information and analysis on the main issues included in the Office's mandate. 32. In his statement to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, the Prime Minister of India had stressed the global nature of the challenges facing the international community, especially terrorism, which made use of the technologies disseminated by globalization, and for which the price paid by countries was unacceptable. It was estimated that more than 200 international terrorist attacks had occurred in 2003; the number of victims in Asia alone was over 1,400. In the last few years, more than 78,000 people had died as a result of terrorist attacks in different parts of India. It was hard to estimate the losses in terms of jobs, economic opportunities, wasted development efforts and damage to infrastructure. India had adopted a firm intersectoral anti-terrorism strategy in which priority was given to dialogue, democratic political processes and the rule of law. There were legitimate ways to address the economic and political causes of the problem, particularly in democratic societies; terrorism could not be justified for any reason, whether religious, political, ideological or of any other type. It was counterproductive to make distinctions between different types of terrorists, especially when that was done for selfish reasons. An all-out and relentless fight against terrorism must be waged throughout the world. 33. Work on the comprehensive convention on international terrorism must be completed; the provisions for detecting and preventing terrorist activities and prosecuting and sentencing terrorists would strengthen the international legal regime for dealing with the global scourge of terrorism. India strongly supported the Office on Drugs and Crime and, in particular, the Terrorism Prevention Branch, which would be able to play a more important role and work more effectively if it had greater support, particularly in terms of increased budgetary resources. 34. The international community was making a tremendous effort to fight the world drug problem. The World Drug Report 2004 provided encouraging news in some respects; for example, coca bush cultivation and cocaine manufacture had fallen steadily since 1999-2000. In other sectors, however, the situation was discouraging, as in the case of illicit manufacture of opium and amphetamine-type stimulants, which had continued to rise. At the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, held in 1998, a political declaration and plan of action had been adopted setting down goals and objectives to be reached by Member States by 2008. At the ministerial segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, a mid-term assessment had been made of progress in meeting the commitments undertaken at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, and a Joint Ministerial Statement had been adopted. The final report to be submitted in 2005 would be especially important, as it would include an assessment of compliance with the commitments undertaken by Member States. The problem of corruption was not confined to developing countries, and it must be combated wherever it existed. 35. The financial situation of the Office on Drugs and Crime remained a matter of concern. Without adequate financing from the regular budget, the Office had had to mobilize extrabudgetary resources instead of focusing on programme activities. The Office's budget must be increased in order to enable it to carry out the priority tasks assigned to it by the Commission. 36. The challenges and threats arising from the linkage between drug trafficking, terrorism and transnational organized crime continued to compromise international security. India welcomed the adoption of the Joint Ministerial Statement, which reaffirmed the measures needed and provided guiding principles, particularly with respect to demand reduction, judicial cooperation and countering money-laundering. The insidious problem of transnational organized crime could not be solved in the absence of a collective global effort. In that regard, the said that India would participate actively in the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. 37. Mr. Rahman (Malaysia) said that for many years, Malaysia had attached high priority to the interrelated issues of crime prevention and criminal justice. His country had participated actively in national, regional and international efforts to fight crime and had revised its legislation whenever necessary and had taken firm action in response to the changing and increasingly complex nature of crime. Globalization, advances in information technology and the elimination of border controls were some of the factors that had led to an increase in transnational crime. Crime had not only crossed many national boundaries, it had also become more organized and sophisticated, thus enabling criminal groups and syndicates to act beyond their traditional domains. International cooperation, especially in exchanging information, was essential to ensure effective prevention at the national level. Malaysia had increased its regional cooperation, especially with its ASEAN neighbours, to combat transnational crime. In order to be effective, judicial cooperation must include, inter alia, mutual judicial assistance on criminal matters, cooperation in freezing illicit proceeds and extradition agreements. 38. Appropriate international measures must be taken to address the rise of international terrorism, one of the most complex problems affecting global security. The war against terrorism could not be won, however, unless the international community was willing to identify and deal with the underlying causes of the phenomenon. Initiatives against terrorism would be in vain if the conditions that caused it and fed it persisted; those included foreign occupation, oppression, patent injustice, exclusion, poverty and economic disparities. A universally accepted definition of terrorism was needed so that the international community could take concrete and well-defined measures against those who were identified as terrorists. Counter-terrorism activities and measures should be carried out impartially and objectively, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, fully respecting the universally recognized principles governing international relations and international law and avoiding any infringement on the sovereignty or territorial integrity of States. In that regard, Malaysia had proposed the convening of a global conference of leaders to deal in depth with the question of international terrorism within the sphere of action of the United Nations. 39. Malaysia was keenly aware that corruption was a fundamental cause of poor economic performance and an obstacle to poverty reduction; it fed crime and terrorism, weakened socio-economic structures and could cause serious harm to a nation. The Government of Malaysia attached high priority to the fight against corruption and had adopted a two-pronged strategy which provided for punitive action, including harsh penalties for persons convicted of crimes of corruption, and preventive measures designed to encourage the moral and ethical values of society to counter corrupt practices. To that end, Malaysia had put underway its national integrity plan and had established the Malaysian Integrity Institute, as a means of promoting zero tolerance for corruption and reducing opportunities for corruption by improving systems and procedures. As in the case of other crime prevention and criminal justice activities, Malaysia needed international cooperation to fight corrupt practices. Thus, it had signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption in the expectation that it would promote international cooperation in suppressing crimes of corruption in all sectors. 40. At both the national and the international levels, Malaysia was actively involved in combating the illicit trafficking of drugs and was cooperating with international organizations such as the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and ASEAN. Malaysia had repeatedly stressed the need for harsh measures to suppress illicit trafficking of narcotic substances and felt that priority should also be given to programmes aimed at preventing drug use. Believing that illicit drugs should be intercepted at the source, his Government supported sustainable development programmes in countries where there was a proliferation of illicit drug-related crops. Malaysia urged the competent United Nations agencies, particularly the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to continue supporting the affected countries, especially in connection with poverty reduction and assistance to enable farmers who had given up growing illicit crops to find other ways to make a living. 41. Mr. Hyassat (Jordan) said that international action was urgently needed in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice. His delegation welcomed the entry into force of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, as well as the signing of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Both instruments would make it possible to expand international cooperation in combating those problems, which threatened international security and stability and the economic and social development of peoples. 42. In the area of drug control, Jordan had adopted a national plan of action against narcotic drugs with the aim of eliminating drug use, reducing supply and facilitating treatment of addicts. In the area of prevention, sensitization campaigns had been conducted, especially on the occasion of the International Day against Drugs; educational programmes had been set up at schools and universities, and special programmes had been designed for border communities. Drug addicts were considered victims in need of treatment and rehabilitation to enable them to become productive members of society. The programmes included in the plan of action were carried out in cooperation with the ministries of health and of social development and the drug control services. Jordan was eager to cooperate at the regional and international levels in the fight against drugs and crime. 43. Mr. Strømmen (Norway) said that he endorsed the statement made by the European Union on agenda items 96 and 97, particularly regarding the importance of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, adopted by the General Assembly at the fifty-eighth session. Corruption was a global problem that represented a threat to democracy, human rights and social justice and was particularly harmful to the developing countries, whose economies and population were more vulnerable. To achieve the United Nations objective of halving poverty by 2015, special priority must be given to the fight against corruption at the national, regional and international levels. The Convention against Corruption was essential to that effort, inasmuch as it provided a framework for improved international coordination and cooperation. 44. It should be borne in mind, however, that as noted in one of the chapters of the Convention, in addition to suppressing acts of corruption, it was also necessary to take preventive measures, such as promoting the proper management of public affairs. The Convention must be implemented and enforced in order to ensure the credibility of States and of the Convention itself. The universal condemnation of corruption was an encouraging sign, as was the designation of 9 December as International Anti-Corruption Day, which would help increase awareness of the problem and of the different ways in which it could be combated. 45. The importance of the Convention was evident in the fact that a large number of States, including Norway, had already signed it, and nine States had already ratified it. Norway planned to ratify it during the first half of 2005. Norway supported the work of the informal group of "Friends of the United Nations Convention against Corruption", which provided a useful mechanism for promoting the ratification and implementation of the Convention. His delegation encouraged all States to ratify and implement the Convention as soon as possible. 46. Mr. Emmanuel (Haiti) said that organized crime was rightly considered a threat to peace, security and stability and an obstacle to economic and social development and poverty eradication. Crime weakened the capacity of States to protect public order and justice, inasmuch as it infiltrated the political, economic and financial sectors and affected almost every aspect of daily life. 47. Haiti's geographic location, its difficult economic and social situation, the political changes of the last twenty years and the weakness of its judiciary and its police force made it extremely vulnerable to organized crime. The Provisional Government of Haiti had spared no effort to respond appropriately to the challenge. It had taken political and administrative measures to strengthen the National Police, reform the administration of justice and fight corruption, drug trafficking, money laundering and trafficking in persons. 48. With the support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and in the context of its Interim Cooperation Framework, the Provisional Government was implementing a transition strategy aimed at consolidating the police force by strengthening its structures and its administrative capacity and providing it with a larger and more professional staff. In the area of judicial reform, the objectives were to combat impunity, promote the independence of the judiciary, rehabilitate its infrastructure, promote training and disseminate information. The Government was encouraging women to play a more active role in both the police and the judiciary. With regard to trafficking in persons, especially children, a National Intersectoral Commission had been created to draw up a plan of action to strengthen the legal framework, sensitize the public, take necessary administrative measures and train agents to combat those crimes. 49. In the area of drug control, the National Anti-Drug Commission had established a Committee against Drugs and Crime which served as a mechanism for collaboration between the different national agencies and would make it possible to bring together the human, material and strategic resources needed to combat criminal networks. The Committee, which had been established pursuant to a recommendation made at the twenty-second meeting of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Region, would also have a regional dimension. 50. The Haitian authorities were cooperating with their counterparts in the region in a number of activities, being persuaded of the need to present a common front against transnational organized crime, illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in persons and terrorism; realizing the meagreness of their resources for addressing those problems, and taking into account the measures for promoting judicial cooperation adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session. Unfortunately, despite its determination to fight those scourges, the Government of Haiti was limited by the lack of resources, a problem that could only be solved through bilateral, regional and international cooperation. His delegation hoped that MINUSTAH would continue providing strong support to the National Police in their efforts to maintain public order and security in the present trying times. 51. His delegation noted with concern that in 2004, which had been declared the International Year for the Commemoration of the Struggle Against Slavery and its Abolition, millions of persons were still victims of some type of exploitation, including prostitution and child pornography, at the hands of criminal groups. His delegation therefore welcomed the entry into force of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, as well as the signing of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 52. Mr. Gansukh (Mongolia) said that he agreed with the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that in recent years crime had become globalized. Crime represented a serious threat to international security, justice, democracy and development and must be countered with coordinated action on the part of the international community. Mongolia joined those delegations that had highlighted the importance of tackling the underlying causes of crimes such as poverty, marginalization and inequality. 53. Mongolia attached particular importance to the Eleventh Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in Bangkok in 2005, and looked forward to actively participating in its work. Member States could use the event as a platform for effective and increased cooperation in combating transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking, corruption and terrorism. His delegation welcomed the entry into force of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and reiterated Mongolia's support of the goals and principles of the Convention. His Government was taking steps to harmonize the country's legislation with the provisions of the Convention and expected to be in a position to accede to the Convention soon. His Government wished to thank the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for its cooperation and support in the field of drug control and crime prevention. It would make every effort to expand its cooperation with the Office in order to effectively implement the memorandum of understanding that had been signed during the visit of the President of Mongolia to the United Nations Office at Vienna in 2003. 54. His Government welcomed the signing of the United Nations Convention against Corruption and had started work on preparations for Mongolia to accede to the Convention. His Government attached particular importance to the fight against corruption. A series of anti-corruption measures had been undertaken in recent years, including the establishment of the National Council to Combat Corruption and the National Programme to Combat Corruption. In March 2003, the National Anti-Corruption Conference had been organized in cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme. One of the first working groups established by the new Parliament had been the drafting group on a new law against corruption. The new coalition Government had named corruption as its enemy and intended to undertake step-by-step measures to identify and eliminate the problem. 55. Corruption was a social, political and economic phenomenon. Exchange of experiences and cooperation at the national and international levels were required in order to eliminate it. At the Fifth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies held in 2003 in Ulaanbaatar, it had been recognized that in addition to working together to promote democratic ideals around the world and implement the Ulaanbaatar Declaration and Plan of Action, countries must reinforce efforts to root out corruption, which constituted a major threat to democracy. 56. Mr. Tekin (Turkey) said that the spread of organized crime and corruption had become a serious threat to international peace and security, as well as to the democratic, social and economic development of many countries. Clearly, those scourges could not be eliminated without broad, well-planned and coordinated international cooperation. The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the three Protocols thereto, as well as the United Nations Convention against Corruption, provided a sound basis for such efforts. Turkey was a party to the Conventions and was implementing them, having incorporated the relevant provisions into its national legislation. Turkey was also taking part in a number of regional cooperation initiatives to fight organized crime and corruption and had entered into bilateral agreements with 62 countries so as to supplement and strengthen multilateral action. 57. Drug abuse was a phenomenon that affected nearly every society in the world. According to recent United Nations figures, 185 million people were using illicit drugs. That was equivalent to five per cent of the world population under age 15. The problem had been aggravated by the increase in trafficking and use of synthetic drugs. The fact that those drugs were readily available and easy to manufacture and hide was another problem that must be addressed. Turkey's strategy in combating illicit drug trafficking was based on the principle of broad and effective international cooperation. Turkey had signed and ratified all the relevant United Nations treaties on drug control and had entered into bilateral cooperation agreements with 48 countries. It was actively involved in the work of major international agencies such as the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Paris Pact and the Pompidou Group. It also participated in the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and was one of its main donors. 58. The International Turkish Academy against Drugs and Organized Crime, established four years ago with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the assistance of certain donor countries, was an example of the efforts being made by Turkey to promote regional cooperation. The Academy operated as a regional centre to provide resources, training and advisory services on drugs and organized crime. To date, it had trained more than 600 law enforcement officers from more than 40 countries. 59. Owing to its geographic location, Turkey had been affected by the trafficking of heroin from south-western Asia to Europe and of chemical precursors and synthetic drugs from Europe to the Middle East. His Government was making every effort to combat illicit drug trafficking by strengthening law enforcement and collaborating with other countries affected by the problem. Turkey was keenly aware of the fact that the fight against illicit trafficking was only part of the world drug problem, which must be addressed from the standpoint of both supply and demand. To that end, Turkey had organized public campaigns and, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and in the context of the Global Assessment Programme on Drug Abuse, had conducted an assessment of the nature and extent of drug abuse in the country. 60. Noting the close links between illicit drugs, organized crime and terrorism, he stressed that terrorism was a serious threat to international peace and security and to the wellbeing of societies. Firm, effective and continuing international cooperation was needed. Turkey had often pointed out that drug trafficking and organized crime were significant sources of financing for terrorist groups, and his delegation was pleased that the international community was finally beginning to recognize that connection. Turkey was determined to support all measures for strengthening international cooperation in the fight against organized crime, illicit drug trafficking and terrorism, and firmly believed that without an effective global alliance, the entire world would suffer. 61. Ms. Abdulaziz (Malaysia) took the Chair. 62. Ms. Khalil (Egypt) said there was worldwide consensus that organized crime, drug trafficking, corruption and terrorism were undermining sustainable development, security and social stability, and that society must act to contain those threats. On the issue of crime prevention, she stressed the importance of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto. Egypt was actively combating corruption and money laundering and was working to recover the proceeds of crime and return them to the rightful owners. The Convention against Corruption was especially important. As one of the first countries to sign it, Egypt would like to encourage other countries to ratify both the Convention and the Protocols thereto. The conference of ministers of justice of French-speaking countries, held from 2 to 4 September 2003 in Egypt with the participation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Intergovernmental Agency of la Francophonie and several delegations from African countries, had expressed support for the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto and had issued a communiqué and a report in that regard. 63. On the issue of international drug control, she said that Egypt reaffirmed the importance of the outcome of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, at which ten objectives had been identified that all States should achieve by 2008. She noted with satisfaction the efforts that had been made to promote the guiding principles on demand reduction, but expressed concern at the tolerance shown by some countries towards certain illicit substances, an attitude that undermined international efforts to eliminate the problem. Demand for illicit drugs must be reduced, and all relevant laws must be enforced, particularly those limiting the use of drugs for medical purposes and research in producing areas. More information was needed on the matter. Given the direct relationship between illicit crop cultivation and poverty, it would be impossible to reduce drug trafficking without tackling problems such as unemployment, hunger and violence. Stressing the urgent need to help developing countries that had to deal with the problem of drug trafficking and its serious socio-economic consequences even beyond their borders, she appealed for increased international cooperation. 64. Mr. Jiménez (Venezuela) said that his country had ratified the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children; the International Conventions for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the United Nations Convention against Corruption, all of which were considered part of its national legislation. The Government had convened several meetings of the competent national agencies to discuss the implementation of Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/20, of 22 July 2003, on strengthening international cooperation in preventing and combating trafficking in persons and protecting victims of such trafficking, and had created a task force to revise a bill against organized crime. Venezuela had participated in the Regional Conference on Trafficking in Persons, held in Bogotá in November 2003, and had held discussions on the issue with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Latin American Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (ILANUD) and the International Organization for Migration. 65. Venezuela strongly and categorically condemned terrorism in all its forms and repudiated all types of terrorist activity. At all the international forums, it had reiterated its commitment to combat the problem, which constituted a threat to international peace and security. Venezuela had met the deadline established in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) for submission to the Counter-Terrorism Committee of reports on the implementation of the resolution. 66. Corruption affected every structure of society, hindered economic development and constituted a threat to society, public order, morality and justice. Venezuela had participated actively in the drafting of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, particularly on the issues of asset recovery and the capture and prosecution of criminals. However, the Convention did not fully cover such critical matters as bank secrecy, money laundering, incorporation of companies in so-called tax havens and extradition of offenders, nor did it require countries to set up mechanisms improve cooperation and mutual assistance. National oversight bodies should play an active role in ensuring good governance and transparency in public administration. 67. The fight against drugs was crucial to the security and defence of the nation. With the cooperation of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission, the National Commission against Illicit Drug Use had developed a national anti-drug plan for 2002-2007 that was aimed at balancing supply-reduction and demand-reduction efforts. The problem should be approached in a balanced, multilateral, non-selective manner, on the basis of shared and joint responsibility of States. The Andean Cooperation Plan for the Control of Illegal Drugs and Related Offences outlined measures for strengthening and regulating the fight against drugs and included a list of controlled chemical substances. An innovative and effective approach was needed that would include preventive measures as well as sustainable licit action, in keeping with the legal, social, ecological and cultural circumstances of each country. Educational and public information plans must be implemented, technical personnel must be trained, and alternative development and environmental conservation must be encouraged. 68. Mr. Melenevskyi (Ukraine) said that the globalization of organized crime was a growing threat to all governments. International cooperation must be improved so as to counter the trend towards international consolidation of crime, drug trafficking, terrorism, trafficking of firearms, money laundering and corruption. Ukraine was bringing its national legislation in line with the provisions of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto. To facilitate cooperation, a unit of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should be set up in Kyiv. 69. Ukraine welcomed the adoption of the Convention against Corruption and had begun the process of ratification. The measures the Government had implemented over the last few years had reduced corruption and kept it from spreading. His delegation also looked forward to the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in 2005, which would develop guidelines for joint efforts to combat crime. 70. Ukraine noted with satisfaction the new orientation of the United Nations Crime Programme and its expanded activities in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice, as well as the help it was offering States, in coordination with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in combating international terrorism. As noted at the workshop on implementation of universal anti-terrorism instruments held in Kyiv on 19 March 2004, the Government of Ukraine had taken steps to implement the Security Council resolutions aimed at preventing the use of its territory by international terrorist organizations and the provisions of the 12 anti-terrorism treaties. It had proposed a number of initiatives to strengthen international cooperation and would continue cooperating in the area of justice and migration controls. 71. Over the last ten years, thousands of young Ukrainians had been victims of the traffic in persons. The Parliament had enacted legislative reforms to suppress that crime, including by establishing harsher penalties in the Penal Code. The punishment of offenders must be balanced, however, with action aimed at improving the economic and social situation of victims and reducing demand in destination countries. States and international organizations should supplement the efforts carried out by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to combat the illicit trafficking of migrants and trafficking in persons, placing special emphasis on implementation of the action plan to combat trafficking in human beings and on provision of technical assistance and cooperation in support of the Global Programme against Trafficking in Human Beings. 72. Illicit drug trafficking remained a threat to public health and national security. Ukraine had become a transit point for the international drug trafficking mafia, and it needed international cooperation in order to solve the problem. His Government strongly supported the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and was participating in initiatives undertaken by the GUUAM group to combat drug trafficking and trafficking in persons, organized crime, money laundering and trafficking in firearms. 73. Ms. Gebre-Egziabher (United Nations Human Settlements Programme, UN-HABITAT) said that the pillars of the UN-HABITAT agenda were to provide adequate shelter for all and promote sustainable human settlements. Crime was one of the main problems faced by cities. While a stable and secure environment was essential to the sustainable development of cities, the increase in crime was associated with an increase in social exclusion. The effects of crime on the development of cities included loss of economic opportunities and increased costs to individuals and to the private sector, reduced access to services, increased burdens on the poor, loss of social capital in poor neighbourhoods and loss of public and private investment. Since local authorities played a key role in promoting innovative community-oriented local governance, UN-HABITAT promoted crime prevention at the local level. Prevention programmes supplemented control and law enforcement, focusing on the underlying causes and long-term repercussions of crime. The Safer Cities Programme spearheaded that approach by helping municipalities and local stakeholders implement crime-prevention initiatives; analyze trends, causes and manifestations of crime; and promote exchange of experiences between cities. In cooperation with Transparency International, materials had been developed to promote transparency in local government, thus contributing to the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 74. UN-HABITAT was cooperating with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among other organizations, in efforts to promote local intervention and prevent crime. In 2003, the two organizations had signed a memorandum of understanding on urban crime with the aim of promoting local implementation of the international conventions on corruption and transnational crime, improving understanding of the relationship between local government and organized crime (in sectors such as urban planning, economic development and investments and services) and addressing local corruption by improving transparency and accountability. 75. Criminal justice systems should improve local crime-prevention efforts by promoting decentralization, improving the enjoyment of rights and access to justice and offering new options in the administration of justice and law enforcement. She appealed to the various specialized agencies to collaborate with efforts aimed at enabling cities and communities to fight crime and develop more effective responses to the problems that crime and corruption created for society. The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m. 