%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|DRUG CONTROL|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

Third Committee Summary record of the 8th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday 10 October 2005, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Butagira (Uganda) Contents Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)* * Items which the Committee has decided to consider together. Agenda item 107: International drug control (continued)* The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m. Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) (A/60/123, 131, 157, 164, 172, A/60/403-S/2005/621 and A/60/405-S/2005/623) Agenda item 107: International drug control (continued) (A/60/129, 130, 336, A/60/403-S/2005/621 and A/60/405-S/2005/623) 1. Mr. Navoti (Fiji) said that Fiji supported the recommendations of the Bangkok Declaration adopted at the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, including the call for technical assistance to be made available to developing countries to fight economic and financial crimes. His delegation also welcomed the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, in particular its technical cooperation capacity (A/60/131). 2. His delegation commended the efforts by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other agencies to assist States in strengthening law enforcement and to foster international and cross-border cooperation. As a follow-up to the Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime held in Bali in 2004, Fiji had hosted a workshop, co-organized by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, on reconciling the legitimate State interest to control immigration with refugee protection. 3. His Government supported the United Nations Convention against Corruption and had endorsed the anti-corruption action plan for Asia and the Pacific. Parliament was currently considering a host of issues relevant to the fight against corruption, including extending the scope of international cooperation and mutual assistance in criminal matters beyond New Zealand and Australia, the development of codes of ethics and "whistleblower" legislation. His Government would also establish an independent anti-corruption commission. 4. Terrorism, one of the major challenges facing the international community, required a coordinated and comprehensive international response. To eliminate its root causes, the international community must address legitimate grievances caused by despair, resentment, ignorance and poverty and foster international relations based on sovereign equality, multilateralism, justice and sustainable development. As part of the global effort, Fiji would be hosting the eighth meeting of the Asia/Pacific Group on Money-Laundering later in October. 5. His delegation commended the Secretary-General's report on international cooperation against the world drug problem (A/60/130) and supported the call by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs for the international community to be innovative in its follow-up on the twentieth special session. Fiji continued to be vigilant in combating the criminal use of its islands as a transit haven for international drug trafficking. For example, the Fiji police, working with counterparts from Australia, Malaysia and New Zealand, had recently suppressed a crystal methamphetamine drug operation worth over $500 million. Lastly, his Government reaffirmed its commitment to cooperating with the international community to formulate comprehensive measures to prevent crime and to promote international justice. 6. Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein) said that transnational organized crime, as a major threat to international peace and security, must be tackled at all levels. The role of the United Nations was to enhance the effectiveness of countermeasures taken worldwide against such crime, which could be achieved through enhanced coordination and increased technical assistance to Member States which lack the necessary capacity. 7. Liechtenstein had been supporting the capacity-building activities of UNODC through financial contributions and training seminars. His Government had decided in 2005 to allocate $1.4 million to UNODC activities for the coming four years. An essential part of those funds would be used for alternative livelihood projects in Afghanistan as well as for the Global Programme against Money-Laundering. The programme had recognized the importance of financial intelligence capacity-building and had made technical assistance and training for financial-intelligence units a priority. His delegation welcomed such an approach as those units served as a link between law enforcement and financial and regulatory authorities, providing authorities around the world with an important new avenue for the gathering and exchange of information related to money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. 8. Adequate involvement of the private sector in the design of preventive countermeasures was of crucial importance in the fight against money-laundering and corruption. In order to curb corruption, there was a need to promote a culture of integrity and accountability in both the public and the private sector. Public authorities were called upon to lead those efforts by ensuring good governance and upholding the rule of law. 9. The High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change had recognized that the response of the international community to organized crime during and after conflict had been decentralized and fragmented. In post-war periods, former belligerents often sought to exploit criminal connections and know-how developed during the war, thus undermining international peacebuilding efforts. It would therefore be of great importance for the Peacebuilding Commission established by the 2005 World Summit to pay particular attention to the development and implementation of measures to suppress existing ties between criminal enterprises and political elites. The peacebuilding commission would be called upon to assist countries emerging from conflict in ensuring that re-established State institutions were corruption-free and justice was delivered fairly. 10. Ms. Feller (Mexico) said that organized crime and drug trafficking constituted a rising threat to social stability, the maintenance of the rule of law and economic and political development requiring not only national efforts but a multilateral international strategy as well. Her delegation therefore welcomed the forthcoming entry into force of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which was the first international instrument to address corruption comprehensively and globally. 11. Punitive measures against organized criminals and drug traffickers were not sufficient to prevent and deter organized crime. Alternative, preventive development and capacity-building programmes and awareness-raising campaigns encompassing both security forces and society in general were also indispensable, particularly within the framework of the international fight against drugs. Such strategies would not only help to reduce the supply of narcotics but also promote sustainable development. Unfortunately, however, efforts to reduce supply were not always matched by corresponding measures to curb demand. In addition, there was a need to develop policies geared to transit countries, whose populations were suffering increasingly from the kind of violence and social fragmentation that had traditionally affected only drug-producing and consuming countries. 12. Her delegation welcomed the renewed commitment of Member States, as set out in the outcome document of the 2005 World Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1), to continue their efforts against drug trafficking and organized crime and to strengthen UNODC. To meet that commitment required the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as well as the 2008 goals put forward in the Political Declaration adopted by the Assembly at the twentieth special session (resolution S-20/2, annex). Her Government also urged States that had not done so to ratify the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 13. Mexico would continue to be fully engaged in the fight against organized crime and drug trafficking and would introduce an omnibus draft resolution regarding international cooperation against the world drug problem. Her delegation would be looking forward to proposals from all delegations to strengthen the text and to put its provisions into practice. 14. Mr. Popkov (Belarus) said that his Government continued to support increasing international cooperation in the fight against various forms of criminal activities within the United Nations framework and appreciated the efforts of the UNODC Executive Director to strengthen the work of the Office. The elimination of trafficking in human beings and suppression of illegal migration and the illicit drug trade were priorities for his Government, as Belarus was particularly affected by such problems as a transit country. 15. The statement made by the President of Belarus on the need for the international community to increase its efforts to combat the trafficking in human beings was an extension of his Government's efforts at the national and international levels to counter that modern form of slavery. Millions of persons, most of whom were women and children, fell prey to such trafficking every day. 16. Belarus had made great strides in introducing legislation in accordance with international laws and regulations governing the trafficking in human beings, including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. It had also developed a comprehensive national action plan to combat the trafficking in persons and the spread of prostitution for the period 2002-2007 and was carrying out international projects to suppress such trafficking and rehabilitate its victims. 17. His Government had encountered difficulties, however, in its cooperation with other States, including late responses to requests for legal assistance, which enabled criminals to avoid prosecution. His delegation therefore called on the United Nations to establish a global partnership against slavery and the trafficking in persons in the twenty-first century. 18. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs should give greater attention to the drug problem faced by transit countries. The transit nature of Belarus had brought about an 80 per cent increase in domestic drug use during the previous five years and a shift from trade in drugs containing natural derivatives to "harder", synthetic drugs. Belarus was at the crossroads of the opium-poppy trade from Afghanistan and South-East and Central Asia to Europe and of the synthetic-drugs traffic from Europe. Lastly, given its unique position, his Government recommended that the Resident Coordinator of the UNODC Regional Office for the Russian Federation and Belarus should be stationed directly in Belarus. 19. Ms. Serazzi (Chile) said that, while globalization had unquestionably been beneficial, it had also brought terrorism and organized crime, illicit trafficking in persons, drugs and arms, and related money-laundering. The international community was therefore called upon to exercise constant vigilance over the dynamic evolution of criminal activities so as to take joint action to address them in a timely manner. Her country reiterated its commitment to help strengthen international cooperation in the fight against national and international organized crime, corruption and terrorism on all fronts in accordance with international law. It had ratified the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols on Trafficking in Persons and on Smuggling of Migrants and was preparing to ratify the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 20. The growing sophistication of economic and financial crimes imparted an alarming dimension to organized crime, which posed grave threats to national economies, the global financial system and the political stability of States; it was therefore necessary to adopt an integral and systemic approach to such phenomena as corruption and money-laundering. The time had come to focus global and national efforts on the enforcement of instruments designed to strengthen international criminal cooperation and on improving national systems that could facilitate mutual, rapid and efficient penal assistance. The Bangkok Crime Congress and the recent session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice had both proved important forums for exchanging points of view and defining goals and policies. 21. Convinced that multilateral cooperation was the only road to success in fighting terrorism, which needed to be confronted with a global strategy in keeping with the United Nations Charter and international law and with full respect for human rights, Chile had reaffirmed the need, expressed in the outcome document of the 2005 World Summit, to develop such a strategy and to conclude negotiations on a general convention on terrorism. Its counter-terrorism efforts included ratification of 12 of the United Nations conventions and the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism and its recent signing of the Nuclear Terrorism Convention. It had also participated actively in the negotiations in the Sixth Committee and, more recently, as chair of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee and as a member of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the international community's key instruments in that fight. 22. In recent decades, crime in Chile had come up against a priority policy involving integrated action by the State, civil society and the private sector for the prevention, control and punishment of crimes and the social rehabilitation and reintegration of those sentenced. The country's public-security policy was based on a broad spectrum of public and private inputs. One notable success had been the criminal-procedure reform, which had established an accusatorial criminal system based on the principles of oral intervention, immediacy, publicity and transparency, taking into account special factors relating to young offenders and bringing legislation strictly into line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 23. All States -- whether producing, transit or consumer countries -- were at risk from drug trafficking and its concomitant evils. There could be no effective drugs control without harmonized and coordinated efforts, which meant reducing supply as well as demand and developing capacities for combating a crime that profited from globalization, technological development, scientific progress and the opening-up of regional markets. The solution to the global drug problem therefore lay in international cooperation in all its forms and would depend in large measure on States' political will and capacity for cooperation. She welcomed the progress made on attainment of the 2008 goals. 24. Chile's commitment to combating the drug problem through strict respect for the Charter, especially for sovereignty and all fundamental freedoms, remained firm. It had endeavoured to streamline its legislation and had recently promulgated a new law as part of a strategy embracing the entire cycle of drug trafficking and including rehabilitation and consumption-prevention strategies. The new legislation also established the basic framework for controlling production, regulation and import and export of precursor chemicals. International cooperation for the eradication of illicit crops must be concentrated on training and education in alternative production so as to facilitate the sustainable development of affected countries. One such action had been the Twenty-third International Drug Enforcement Conference hosted by Chile in April 2005. 25. Given the enormous adverse consequences of the global crime and drugs problems for human safety, it was important to protect individuals -- especially children and youth -- and guarantee their security, which meant not only the absence of real or potential threats to them, but also a climate of support in which they could develop their potential. 26. Mr. Melo (Albania), associating his delegation with the statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union, said that international crime posed a growing threat to global security, development and human rights. The outcome document of the 2005 World Summit rightly emphasized "the negative effects on development, peace and security and human rights posed by transnational crime" and the need for a collective response. 27. Albania was committed to combating all forms of trafficking in human beings at all levels. His Government was addressing the problem through its national legislation and efforts at the community level, including strategies against trafficking in human beings and child trafficking, as well as through bilateral and multilateral agreements. 28. Albania fully endorsed the World Summit call for enhancing international cooperation on migration issues and had developed a national strategy and action plan for that purpose. His Government was acutely aware of the need to address problems related to drugs and drug-trafficking effectively, as Albania had been used as a transit area, and had adopted a national strategy to combat drugs for the period 2004-2010. 29. Albania fully shared the view of the European Union that corruption was an obstacle to sustainable development and good governance. His Government had therefore declared the fight against corruption a top priority. Vigorous anti-corruption policies would be complemented by comprehensive preventive policies based on transparency, broader participation in decision-making and oversight by civil society. His Government also planned to review the level of State involvement in the economy to minimize the bureaucracy and administrative barriers and strengthen the role of the private sector and civil society. 30. Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan), speaking on behalf of seven States members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) -- Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan -- said that the world drug problem threatened the well-being of peoples, economic and political stability and efforts by the international community to strengthen peace and security. The growing trafficking in illicit drugs was closely related to illegal migration, organized crime and international terrorism. 31. His delegation attached great significance to enhancing the United Nations drug-control activities and welcomed the determination of Member States to overcome the world drug problem through international cooperation and national strategies to eliminate both the supply of and demand for illicit drugs. His Government also commended the decision taken at the 2005 World Summit to strengthen the capacity of UNODC, and would be closely considering the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-eighth session (E/2005/28/Rev.1). 32. His Government was coordinating and conducting joint activities with CIS drug-control agencies and enhancing legal cooperation and bilateral and multilateral agreements between CIS countries. Kazakhstan was also strengthening subregional cooperation, inter alia through the establishment of a Central Asian drug-control data-gathering centre, and exchanging information and providing mutual assistance on combating illicit drugs. 33. His delegation shared the Secretary-General's view that the security situation in Afghanistan remained a matter of great concern, as the "northern route" extending through the territories of Central Asia and the Russian Federation was one of the main routes for drugs from Afghanistan to the CIS and Europe. Most heroin entering the CIS had originated in Afghanistan. His Government would therefore continue efforts to strengthen its drug-control security belt around Afghanistan and supported further development of the Paris Pact initiative (S/2003/641) to suppress the trafficking in illicit drugs originating in Afghanistan. Kazakhstan backed the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to strengthen peace and security in the country and called on the United Nations to provide it with the necessary assistance to settle the conflict there. For its part, his Government stood ready to work with the United Nations and all Member States to increase cooperation and establish a united front against illicit drugs. 34. Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh) said that the universal threat of transnational crime, which embraced a plethora of criminal activities, posed a serious threat to development, peace and security. In its unflinching commitment to fighting such crime, his country not only supported international and regional efforts, but had also taken legislative and other measures to clamp down on such activities. Its Independent Anti-Corruption Commission investigated offences under the Anti-Corruption Act 2004 and offences punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947 and could initiate an investigation into any report of malpractice. It also created public awareness of its role through seminars, symposiums and workshops. 35. Bangladesh had ratified 12 United Nations conventions on terrorism and was a party to the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism. It had also enacted the Money-Laundering Prevention Act in 2002, in line with the Political Declaration adopted at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly. The Government had ratified the SAARC Convention on Preventing and Combating Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution in 2002, as well as the three major United Nations drug conventions and the SAARC Convention on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. It had also concluded a number of bilateral agreements and memoranda of understanding with a view to banning drug trafficking and the diversion of precursor chemicals, and stood ready to further its cooperation with Member States and international organizations. 36. Bangladeshi law imposed strict penalties on drug offenders, and a number of laws had been enacted to counter drug trafficking, including the Narcotics Control (Amendment) Act 2000, which incorporated the relevant provisions of the 1988 United Nations Drug Convention and limiting the period of drug-case investigations, and the Narcotics Control (Amendment) Act 2004 redefining alcohol. Imports of raw opium had been banned since 1984 and cannabis cultivation had been prohibited in 1987, followed by a complete ban on the storage, distribution, sale and consumption of cannabis in 1989. Those sanctions were reinforced by the Narcotics Control Act 1990, as amended, which now deemed psychotropic substances a controlled drug. 37. Stressing the need for coordinated measures for implementing the decisions and recommendations contained in the Bangkok Declaration of April 2005, he urged the United Nations to deepen its regional partnership and to provide funding and technical cooperation to developing countries in order to combat the global threats to peace and prosperity. 38. Mr. Pekarchuk (Ukraine) said his country shared the concern of the international community at the escalation of world crime and supported concerted actions for its prevention and elimination. According priority to the fight against crime and corruption, the Ukrainian authorities would continue to do their utmost to improve the national capacity to fight those evils and had developed active bilateral and multilateral cooperation in that regard. His country had ratified the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and was in the process of ratifying the United Nations Convention against Corruption, both of which would give new impetus to the world community's potential to fight corruption. 39. The current session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, devoted to the development of mechanisms for implementing the Convention, should become a milestone in the strengthening of international cooperation in the fight against crime at the multilateral level, under the aegis of the United Nations. He also welcomed the outcome of the Bangkok Crime Congress and was confident that the Bangkok Declaration would provide ways of strengthening the criminal justice system and international cooperation in crime prevention so as to ensure the supremacy of law. 40. In its belief that terrorism threatened all that the United Nations stood for, as the Secretary-General had declared, Ukraine had become a party to 12 international conventions in its determination to eradicate the threat it posed to humanity. As one of the first signatories to the Nuclear Terrorism Convention, Ukraine had again demonstrated its readiness to join in efforts to avert such threats to humanity. 41. His country welcomed the establishment of the post of European Union Counter-Terrorism Coordinator and the adoption of the European Union programme to strengthen cooperation with partners in order to stimulate the efforts of its members and neighbouring States. It would cooperate actively with partners within the framework of that and other projects. 42. Ukraine also assigned priority to the activities of Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova in their regional cooperation in the fight against terrorism, confident that the Group could make a significant contribution to security and stability on the continent. 43. Mr. Alaie (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that the threats posed by drugs and crime were interlinked with other emerging factors in a global web of menaces -- terrorism, poverty, HIV/AIDS and underdevelopment -- that plagued many societies and needed to be addressed individually through forceful and comprehensive efforts by relevant institutions. Not all regions faced the same threats: while the major issues were ubiquitous, others such as poverty, underdevelopment, poor law enforcement and a weak judiciary might be the main reasons for the spread of drugs and crime in some societies. Countries were therefore constrained to develop approaches, and initiatives that directed collective efforts tailored to the dynamics of their region. 44. For instance, given his country's particular circumstances as a main drug-transit route to the West, the authorities were compelled to focus on border control, strengthening law enforcement and increasing police capacities, coupled with other initiatives relating to development in all its dimensions. International and regional cooperation was clearly crucial in that domain. 45. His country had drastically increased the number of military and police operations at its borders and had spent over $80 million on fortifying its borders with Afghanistan, a move that had resulted in massive destruction of trafficking networks and the seizure of 290 tons of drugs. Dismantling of those networks was the most effective way to combat that evil, but required closer cooperation within the region, while success also depended on coordination and cooperation regarding swift and full exchange of information. To that end, his country had begun training Afghan narcotics police and building border roads and outposts at the two countries' shared borders. With Germany as the coordinator, one project would train 400 Afghan border police officers to be stationed at those outposts. 46. Determined to cooperate on the implementation of the 1961, 1971 and 1988 drug conventions, it had developed a specific framework through memoranda of understanding on cooperation with 35 countries. It had also received drug liaison officers from the United Kingdom and Italy in an attempt to enhance its international cooperation, while Iranian drug liaison officers had visited other countries. Iran had expanded its cooperation with the International Narcotics Control Board through supervision of the licit use of drugs for medical and scientific purposes. 47. In the area of harm reduction, the authorities had taken measures to protect victims, prioritizing addicts according to type, addiction period and degree of potential harm to themselves and society. The main concern was currently the treatment of intravenous drug users with high-risk activities. Efforts included the establishment of hundreds of outpatient centres treating many thousands of addicts; the nationwide distribution of methadone tablets, support for non-governmental organizations and the operation of clinics in prisons, with syringe distribution, and after-care services catering to 128,000 prisoners. 48. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his Government's commitment to enhance its cooperation with the relevant countries and international organizations and stood ready to contribute to all undertakings to counter the drug menace. 49. Ms. Al-Shamisi (United Arab Emirates) said that, despite the efforts of the international community, the drug problem continued to pose a serious challenge to global health and the implementation of development programmes. Albeit welcome, the relative progress achieved in countering the problem should be furthered through more systematic and coordinated attempts to strengthen bilateral, regional and international cooperation with a view to exchanging information, improving monitoring procedures and developing the legal and judicial systems in order to achieve the objectives set for 2008. Responsibility for the success of alternative-development programmes extended beyond those countries in which drugs commonly provided a basic source of income. In that context, she urged the developed countries to fulfil their commitments to strengthen their financial, technical and economic assistance in support of the anti-drug efforts of developing countries. The United Nations and its specialized agencies in particular should also play a greater role in strengthening and enforcing anti-drug laws, training law-enforcement officers and implementing prevention programmes, designed, for instance, to eliminate illicit drug cultivation, rehabilitate drug addicts or address other drug-related ills. 50. The United Arab Emirates had devoted great attention in its own national development plans to combating the problem of drugs and organized crime, evolving a firm strategy based specifically on such matters as the enactment of criminal legislation against illicit drug activities, the establishment of a criminal database, the organization of training courses for anti-drug personnel and the implementation of public awareness-raising, therapy and rehabilitation programmes, as well as the strengthening of its involvement in international efforts to fight such crime. 51. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) said that he welcomed the outcome of the Bangkok Crime Congress and stressed that international efforts in that field should respect the principles of the Charter, the rule of law and the sovereignty of States. The Sudan was working hard to enforce regional and international instruments on cooperation in the field of crime. In that context, it commended the valuable efforts of the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, the capacities of which should be further strengthened through provision of the necessary funding. It appreciated the progress achieved in the various aspects of international drug control and called for more regional and international cooperation with a view to promoting national efforts and plans in that sphere, in particular through the provision of technical assistance, judicial cooperation and capacity-building. 52. Although the Sudan had no serious drug problem, the transit of illicit drugs through its territory was always a possibility. Countermeasures in the field of legislation, awareness-raising and coordination with civil society organizations were therefore constantly being taken in order to limit that possibility. In conclusion, he called for renewal of the pledge for close cooperation, information exchange and coordinated efforts to combat crime, all of which were more vital than ever to the achievement of peace, security and stability in a world where crime knew no boundaries. 53. Ms. Chenoweth (Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)) said that FAO had focused primarily on support of alternative development and alternative livelihoods, working closely with a number of partners, including UNODC, mainly in Afghanistan, other parts of Asia, and Latin America. Alternative-development experts had recognized the need for a strategic and coordinated approach in order to develop a strategy for better integration of drug analysis and objectives into the work of multilateral, national and non-governmental development organizations. In recent years, FAO and other international organizations had begun or increased their involvement in alternative development. 54. Two international workshops, to be hosted jointly by FAO and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation and funded by the European Union, would afford stakeholder networking, development of coordination, and counter-narcotics mainstreaming. They were expected to involve representatives of drug-control ministries or organizations, development ministries, drug-crop-producing countries and international development organizations. 55. The first workshop, scheduled for March 2006 in Munich, would invite participants with wide experience in alternative development and concentrate on the overlap between conventional and alternative-development agendas and identification of areas of partnership between development and drug-control actors. 56. The second, scheduled for 2007, would emphasize counter-narcotics mainstreaming and would be attended by representatives of ministries in drug-crop-producing countries and international development organizations that were not yet involved in alternative development but were indispensable to the integration and implementation of counter-narcotics objectives. 57. Both workshops would enhance countries' capacity to prepare inputs for technical discussions on alternative development in both the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the General Assembly, as they sought to attain by 2008 the goals established at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly. The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m. 