%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|APPROPRIATIONS|

Fifty-ninth session Fifth Committee Agenda item 123 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Approved budgetary levels for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 Note by the Secretary-General 1. Pursuant to section I, paragraph 8, of General Assembly resolution 49/233 A, information on the proposed budgetary requirements for all current peacekeeping operations, inclusive of requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and the support account for peacekeeping operations, for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 was provided in my note of 5 May 2004 (A/C.5/58/36). 2. In accordance with established practice, the present note has been prepared to reflect further financing actions by the General Assembly following the conclusion of the first part of its resumed fifty-ninth session in respect of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and thus revises the budgetary information contained in my note of 16 March 2005 (A/C.5/59/18). 3. The Committee is requested to take note of the amounts set out in the annex to the present note. Approved budgets for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (United States dollars) Abbreviations: MINURSO: United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara MINUSTAH: United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti MONUC: United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ONUB: United Nations Operation in Burundi UNAMSIL: United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone UNDOF: United Nations Disengagement Observer Force UNFICYP: United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus UNIFIL: United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon UNLB: United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi UNMEE: United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea UNMIK: United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo UNMIL: United Nations Mission in Liberia UNMIS: United Nations Mission in the Sudan UNMISET: United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor UNOCI: United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire UNOMIG: United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia a Relates to the revised appropriation, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/285. b Includes the amount of $2,176,900 for strengthening the security and safety of the staff and premises of the Force. c Includes the amount of $7 million for security and safety approved in General Assembly resolution 58/295. d Relates to the commitment authority approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/292. 