%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|OFFICE BUILDINGS|

Fifth Committee Summary record of the 57th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 8 June 2005, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Ms. Samayoa-Recari (Vice-Chairman) (Guatemala) Later: Ms. Lock (Vice-Chairman) (South Africa) Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: Mr. Kuznetsov Contents Agenda item 108: Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (continued) Agenda item 123: Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations (continued) Agenda item 124: Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (continued) Agenda item 126: Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (continued) Agenda item 127: Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (continued) Agenda item 129: Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (continued) Agenda item 130: Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (continued) Agenda item 131: Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (continued) Agenda item 133: Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (continued) Agenda item 134: Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (continued) Agenda item 135: Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East (continued) (a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (continued) (b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (continued) Agenda item 136: Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (continued) Agenda item 137: Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (continued) Agenda item 153: Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi (continued) Agenda item 154: Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (continued) Agenda item 155: Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (continued) Agenda item 107: Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations (continued) Completion of the work of the Fifth Committee at the second part of the resumed fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly In the absence of Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Ms. Samayoa-Recari (Guatemala), Vice-Chairman, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m. Agenda item 108: Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.71 and L.74) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.71 1. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.71 was adopted. 2. Mr. Simancas (Mexico) said that his delegation had been pleasantly surprised to note the position of several delegations and groups of delegations on the granting of subventions from the general budget to entities that did not belong to the United Nations. Mexico would work constructively with those delegations during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly when the Committee considered United Nations support for entities that were part of the Organization. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.74 3. Mr. van den Bossche (Belgium), speaking on behalf of the European Union, enquired whether the draft resolution under consideration was the version that had been reissued for technical reasons. 4. The Chairman said that the draft resolution was indeed the version that had been reissued for technical reasons. 5. Mr. Berti Oliva (Cuba) noted that the word "including" in paragraph 3 of the original English version had been rendered in the Spanish version as "y en particular", and requested that the Spanish version be corrected. 6. The Chairman said that the Spanish version of the draft resolution would be corrected accordingly. 7. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.74, as orally corrected, was adopted. Agenda item 123: Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations (continued) (A/C.5/59/32 and A/C.5/59/L.53, L.69, L.70, L.72, L.73 and L.75-L.77) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.53 8. Mr. Mirmohammad (Islamic Republic of Iran), introducing draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.53, said that the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) should generally clarify whether its various comments to the Committee were to be regarded as recommendations, observations or conclusions. 9. Mr. Sach (Controller) recalled that, during its informal consultations on the draft resolution, the Committee had requested clarification on the finalization of the comprehensive training strategy referred to in section VIII, paragraph 2. Various components of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had already developed strategies for the training of three distinct categories of personnel: military, civilian police and civilian personnel. Work on a Department-wide comprehensive training strategy was under way and should be completed by the end of 2005. The strategy would be based on the policy principles set out in the report of the Secretary-General contained in document A/58/735, as well as on a needs assessment. 10. With respect to the suspension of the four-year limit on appointments of limited duration under the 300 series of the Staff Rules, by its resolution 59/266, the General Assembly had authorized the reappointment of staff who had served for four years under the 300 series, provided that their functions had been reviewed and found necessary and that their performance had been confirmed as fully satisfactory. Staff who did not meet those criteria could not continue to serve beyond 30 June 2006. If the General Assembly did not make a decision on the suspension until 30 June 2006, the Secretariat would be required to separate those staff who did not meet the criteria for reappointment. The Secretary-General would provide the Committee with an update on the situation at the second part of the Assembly's resumed sixtieth session. 11. With respect to section VI of the draft resolution, the Secretariat wished to confirm that the definitions set out in the Secretary-General's note (A/C.5/59/31) were the framework in which Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) activities were undertaken and that no funds for reintegration were included in assessed budgets for missions. Reintegration activities would continue to be financed from voluntary contributions. 12. The Secretariat's interpretation of the implications of section VIII, paragraph 6, of the draft resolution was that the 5 per cent limit on General Service staff from Headquarters on assignment to a peacekeeping mission would not apply to missions that were in a start-up or expansion phase, which included the United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS), the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). 13. With respect to section V of the draft resolution, on the shared funding of posts of Deputy Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, a generic job profile had been developed and a draft memorandum of understanding was being prepared. Both were currently being reviewed by senior management in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations prior to their transmittal to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for review and concurrence. That process should be concluded by the end of June 2005. 14. Introducing the Secretary-General's note on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution, contained in document A/C.5/59/32, he said that the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) had reviewed its audit work plan, including a number of outputs proposed under the support account budget for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, and had reprioritized its work plan and related resources in order to perform the comprehensive management audit requested in the draft resolution. The budgetary implications for OIOS were $466,600, including $235,000 for consultants and $231,600 for official travel. Those resources were reflected in the draft resolution on the support account, contained in document A/C.5/59/L.77. 15. Mr. El Naggar (Egypt) said that paragraph 4, section XIV, of the draft resolution, concerning the comprehensive report to be submitted by the Secretary-General, should refer, not only to paragraph 3 but also to paragraph 2, as had been agreed during the Committee's informal consultations. 16. The Chairman said that the draft resolution would be amended accordingly. 17. Mr. Berti Oliva (Cuba) said that in paragraph 13, section VIII, of the Spanish version of the draft resolution, the reference to "resolution 57/226" should be corrected to read "resolution 59/266", as in the original English version. 18. The Chairman said that the requested correction would be made to the Spanish version. 19. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.53, as orally amended, was adopted. 20. Ms. Attwooll (United States of America) said that the draft resolution was broad in scope and represented an important and timely step forward in Member States' thinking on the management and function of peacekeeping. It also offered a tool for providing direction to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and to the peacekeeping operations themselves, without micromanaging them. Although the United States of America supported all elements of the draft resolution, it believed that the Committee's consideration of the financing of disarmament, demobilization and, in particular, reintegration, was necessary for the clarification and continued understanding of which provisions should be included in the assessed budgets of peacekeeping operations and which should not, bearing in mind their respective mandates. Reintegration activities should be financed from voluntary contributions and the Secretary-General should continue his efforts to secure donor contributions for reintegration at the earliest possible opportunity. 21. Mr. Kozaki (Japan) said that the draft resolution represented the first major effort by the Committee to provide policy guidance for a more efficient and effective management of United Nations peacekeeping operations, both at Headquarters and in the field. His delegation would welcome expeditious implementation of the resolution as well as of the relevant recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee, and looked forward to receiving reports on the actions taken. 22. The draft resolution was not intended to be a final and comprehensive policy decision on the future financing of DDR activities and did not prejudice the future budgets of other relevant peacekeeping operations. While Japan could not support the funding of reintegration out of assessed contributions, it supported the concept of integrated and complex peacekeeping missions and attached great importance to the DDR process. However, integrated missions should not be used as an easy mechanism for financing activities that should be undertaken by other United Nations entities. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.72 23. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.72 was adopted. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.73 24. Mr. El Naggar (Egypt) drew attention to subparagraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the draft decision and recalled that the Committee had not agreed to the establishment of Personnel Conduct Units. The agreement had been merely to provide funding for immediate needs. The draft resolution should therefore be corrected accordingly. 25. Mr. Abelian (Secretary of the Committee) said that the document would be reissued without the references to Personnel Conduct Units. 26. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.73, as orally corrected, was adopted. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.75 27. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.75 was adopted. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.69 28. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.69 was adopted. 29. Mr. Pulido León (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) said his delegation regretted that the share of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had not been reimbursed, since it owed nothing for closed peacekeeping missions. It hoped that the situation would improve in the future. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.76 30. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.76 was adopted. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.70 31. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.70 was adopted. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.77 32. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.77 was adopted. Note by the Secretary-General on financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations and financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (A/C.5/59/33) 33. The Chairman drew the Committee's attention to the note by the Secretary-General contained in document A/C.5/59/33, which had been issued in accordance with the prorating procedures approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/221 B, and indicated the amounts to be apportioned for each peacekeeping mission, including the prorated share for the support account and for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi. 34. Mr. Sach (Controller) said that the note by the Secretary-General reflected the final approved resources for peacekeeping operations and their prorated shares in the financing of the support account and the United Nations Logistics Base. The financing of the support account included the $13,790,000 excess balance of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund. His statement, which had been distributed to the members of the Committee, was accompanied by a detailed annex that contained extracts from the relevant draft resolutions for each peacekeeping operation and for the United Nations Logistics Base. 35. The Chairman said she took it that the Committee wished to take note of the information contained in the note by the Secretary-General. 36. It was so decided. 37. Ms. Lock (South Africa), Vice-Chairman, took the Chair. Agenda item 124: Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.68) Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.68 38. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.68 was adopted. Agenda item 126: Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.57) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.57 39. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.57 was adopted. Agenda item 127: Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.54) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.54 40. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.54 was adopted. Agenda item 129: Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.58) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.58 41. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.58 was adopted. Agenda item 130: Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.64) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.64 42. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.64 was adopted. Agenda item 131: Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.61) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.61 43. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.61 was adopted. Agenda item 133: Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.63) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.63 44. Mr. Sach (Controller) confirmed that the purpose of the training programmes for the Mission's national staff was to enhance their ability to perform job-related functions within the Mission and to contribute to national capacity-building. Training of national staff was intended to support and improve the efficient functioning of the Mission. 45. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.63 was adopted. 46. Mr. El Naggar (Egypt) welcomed the Controller's comments. He hoped that in the deployment of the Mission account would be taken of the request for resources for training contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the budget for the Mission, and of the Committee's draft resolution. 47. Mr. Pulido León (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) recalled that during the informal consultations on the item, his delegation had expressed concern that the report of the Secretary-General included plans to give national staff English-language training with a view to transferring them to other missions. The Controller's explanation had satisfied him that training would benefit only that particular Mission and he was therefore willing to join the consensus on the draft resolution. He trusted that the same principle would apply to all peacekeeping missions and that no attempt would be made to convert national staff into international staff. Agenda item 134: Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.59) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.59 48. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.59 was adopted. (a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.65) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.65 49. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.65 was adopted. (b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.52) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.52 50. The Chairman drew the Committee's attention to draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.52, which had been introduced by the representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Group of 77 and China at the Committee's 53rd meeting. 51. Ms. Attwooll (United States of America) said that, although her delegation strongly supported the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the use of a funding resolution to pursue claims against a Member State was procedurally incorrect. The United States objected to the fourth preambular paragraph and to paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of the draft resolution and requested that a single recorded vote be taken on those paragraphs and a recorded vote take on the draft resolution as a whole. 52. Mr. Tejeira (Panama) said that his delegation would abstain in the vote on the fourth preambular paragraph and on paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of the draft resolution because the Committee should consider only budgetary and administrative, not political matters. Including claims targeted at a single country in a resolution on the financing of United Nations operations was inappropriate; there were better ways to set out and deal with such claims. However, his delegation would vote in favour of the draft resolution as a whole, which provided for the continued financing of UNIFIL. 53. At a time when the Member States were seeking to revitalize the General Assembly and to streamline the work of its Committees, the Committee's discussions must be more focused, implementable and consistent with the Organization's ideals. The current meeting was not the first at which wording on political matters had been introduced into a draft resolution on administrative and financial matters. All peacekeeping missions must be treated in a non-discriminatory way and financed according to the principle of collective responsibility. Including the paragraphs in question would run counter to those principles and make no contribution to the effectiveness of the operations which the draft resolution was seeking to finance. 54. At the request of the representative of the United States of America, a single recorded vote was taken on the fourth preambular paragraph and on paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of the draft resolution. In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Guatemala, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Against: Australia, Israel, United States of America. Abstaining: Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay. 55. The fourth preambular paragraph and paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.52 were adopted by 79 votes to 3, with 50 abstentions. 56. At the request of the representative of the United States of America, a recorded vote was taken on the draft resolution as a whole. Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Israel, United States of America. Australia, Honduras, Panama. * The delegations of Costa Rica and Panama subsequently informed the committee that they had intended to vote in favour of the draft resolution as a whole. 57. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.52 as a whole was adopted by 128 votes to 2, with 3 abstentions.* 58. Ms. Taylor (Australia) said that, while Australia strongly supported the continued existence of UNIFIL, it had abstained in the vote on the draft resolution because of unwarranted political considerations which had distracted the Committee's attention from the budgetary issues that should rightly remain its focus. Unfairly singling out Israel for attention did nothing to contribute to the Middle East peace process. 59. Ms. Attwooll (United States of America) reiterated her delegation's support for the important mandate of UNIFIL and its view that it was procedurally incorrect to use a General Assembly resolution on funding to pursue claims against a Member State. The United States opposed the current and previous resolutions, which had not been adopted by consensus and required Israel to meet costs stemming from the 1996 Qana incident. 60. Since shortly after the Organization's inception, the practice had been for the Secretary-General to pursue claims against a State or States. Use of a funding resolution to legislate a settlement was inappropriate, politicized the work of the Fifth Committee and must be avoided in the current and future cases. 61. Mr. van den Bossche (Belgium), speaking on behalf of the Union, said that the Union's position on the issue was well known and he would not repeat it. 62. Mr. Sermoneta (Israel) reiterated Israel's strong support for the personnel of UNIFIL and the important work they were carrying out. Israel had paid its full assessed contribution to UNIFIL on time and without conditions and would continue to do so. By contrast, some of the sponsors of the divisive draft resolution just adopted had been consistently delinquent in paying their full UNIFIL assessments. 63. His delegation regretted the deliberate and inappropriate politicization of the item. Politically motivated, one-sided language had no place in a resolution on financing, compromised its intention and did nothing to enhance its efficiency or effectiveness. Moreover, the paragraphs in question violated the principle of collective responsibility for the Organization's expenses set out in Article 17 of the Charter. There was no precedent for demanding that one Member State should bear sole responsibility for costs incurred when armed groups endangered United Nations peacekeeping forces. In all other like incidents in the past, regardless of the circumstances, expenses had been settled by the application of collective responsibility. The attempt to treat UNIFIL differently was politically motivated, unwarranted and singled out Israel in an unfair and discriminatory manner. The principle of collective responsibility had always prevailed, and must continue to do so. 64. While it had no objection to the technical aspects of the draft resolution, his delegation had voted against the paragraphs in question and the draft resolution as a whole because of the contentious language they contained. The practice of including those four divisive paragraphs ran counter to the established principles and practices of the Committee. He hoped that issues before it would no longer be marred by one-sided political agendas, and that it could return to productive methods of work. 65. Ms. Grant (Canada), speaking also on behalf of New Zealand, regretted that, once again, it had not been possible to achieve a consensus. The paragraphs voted on separately contained political elements that were inappropriate for a funding resolution, continuing the regrettable precedent that had been set some years earlier. The two delegations had therefore abstained in the vote. The paragraphs in question undermined long-standing agreement concerning the financing of peacekeeping operations. 66. Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon) said that his delegation respected the principle of collective responsibility through which Member States bore the cost of financing United Nations peacekeeping operations in accordance with General Assembly resolution 55/235, which established the principles for the scale of assessments for such operations. However, the principle of collective responsibility did not contradict the general principle of State responsibility for wrongful acts, including compensation for material damage resulting from such acts. That principle was enshrined in the Charter and was implied in paragraph 1 (e) of General Assembly resolution 55/235, which stated that, where circumstances warranted, the General Assembly should give special consideration to the situation of any Member States which were victims of, and those which were otherwise involved in, the events or actions leading to a peacekeeping operation. It was on that basis that nine previous General Assembly resolutions had requested the payment of compensation to the United Nations for the damage incurred as a result of the attack on the peacekeeping post in Qana. That request was reiterated in the fourth preambular paragraph and in paragraphs 3, 4 and 13 of the draft resolution just adopted. The compensation was not to be paid to Lebanon, but to the Organization. Agenda item 136: Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.67) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.67 67. The Chairman drew the Committee's attention to draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.67 and made an oral correction in paragraph 18. 68. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.67, as orally corrected, was adopted. Agenda item 137: Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.66) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.66 69. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.66 was adopted. Agenda item 153: Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.55) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.55. 70. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.55 was adopted. Agenda item 154: Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.56) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.56 71. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.56 was adopted. Agenda item 155: Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.60) Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.60 72. Draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.60 was adopted. 73. Mr. Simancas (Mexico), with reference to paragraph 14 of the draft resolution, recalled that MINUSTAH would be contacting the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) for the gender expertise required. Existing capacity within the Organization should be used not only for gender issues but also for issues related to HIV/AIDS and the environment, among others. 74. Mr. Pulido León (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) said that his delegation also understood that the expertise of INSTRAW would be called on by MINUSTAH, as the Institute was located geographically near the Mission. He hoped that budgets for organizations financed from voluntary contributions would be considered in a non-discriminatory and flexible manner in the future. Agenda item 107: Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations (continued) (A/C.5/59/L.78) Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.78. 75. Draft decision A/C.5/59/L.78 was adopted. 76. After an exchange of courtesies, in which Mr. van den Bossche (Belgium), on behalf of the European Union, Ms. Taylor Roberts (Jamaica), on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, Mr. Torres Lepori (Argentina), on behalf of the Rio Group, Mr. Ramlal (Trinidad and Tobago), Mr. Mirmohammad (Islamic Republic of Iran), and Mr. Berti Oliva (Cuba) took part, the Chairman declared that the Fifth Committee had thus completed its work at the second part of the resumed fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly. The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m. 