%%%PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME PRIORITIES|

Fifth Committee Summary record of the 22nd meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 9 November 2005, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) Acting Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: Mr. Saha Contents Agenda item 125: Programme planning (continued) Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (continued) The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m. Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (continued) (A/60/16 and Corr.1; A/C.5/60/11) 1. Mr. Ng'ongolo (United Republic of Tanzania) said that his delegation wished to reaffirm the importance of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (CPC), which was the main subsidiary organ (of the General Assembly) for planning, programming and coordination. The United Republic of Tanzania had previously been represented on CPC, and his delegation was therefore cognizant of the fundamental problems affecting that body. One such problem was the lack of proper working methods. Another was the quality of Member States' representation. Indeed, some representatives lacked a clear understanding of what was actually required of them and the type of inputs needed to further the work of CPC. Member States' representatives on CPC should have experience of economic policy and of planning, programming and coordination, as well as good negotiation skills. 2. He recalled that, at the previous session, the Fifth Committee had engaged in a similar debate concerning the role of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU). On that occasion, recommendations had been adopted with a view to improving the working methods of JIU, and Member States proposing candidates for membership in the Unit had been urged to adhere strictly to the relevant provisions of the statute of JIU. Those recommendations had already yielded positive results, and a similar approach should be taken in the case of CPC. His delegation wished to hear constructive proposals for strengthening that body, not calls for its abolition. 3. Mr. Sena (Brazil) said that Brazil was committed to working constructively within CPC and attached high priority to its activities. His delegation noted with satisfaction that CPC had underscored the importance of effectively coordinating system-wide efforts against hunger and welcomed its recommendations in that regard (A/60/16, para. 203). The United Nations system should also focus on providing coordinated support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development. In that connection, his delegation took note of the recommendation contained in paragraph 237 of the report of CPC. Lastly, he called for the Fifth Committee to consider in informal consultations ways of improving the working methods of CPC. The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m. 