%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|CORRUPTION|ORGANIZED CRIME|

Items 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the provisional agenda* * A/CONF.203/1. Effective measures to combat transnational organized crime International cooperation against terrorism and links between terrorism and other criminal activities in the context of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Corruption: threats and trends in the twenty-first century Economic and financial crimes: challenges to sustainable development Making standards work: fifty years of standard-setting in crime prevention and criminal justice Preliminary text of the draft Bangkok Declaration on Crime and Justice, Synergies and Responses: Strategic Alliances in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice** Note by the Secretariat Addendum Contents Page Comments received from Governments Indonesia II. Comments received from Governments [Original: English] Second preambular paragraph 1. The word "influenced" should be replaced with the words "contributed to". Fifth preambular paragraph 2. Add the word "possible" before the word "links". Operative paragraph 2 3. In the first sentence, delete the words "have shown that they" and add the words "and rule of law" to the end of the sentence. In the second sentence, replace the word "readiness" with the word "commitment". Operative paragraph 3 4. Replace the word "invite" with the word "encourage", insert the word "sustainable" after the word "adequate" and delete the words "on a regular basis" and "and countries with economies in transition". Operative paragraph 5 5. In the first sentence, delete the words "proper management of public affairs and public property" and, in the second sentence, replace the word "committed" with the words "supportive of" and replace the word "are" with the word "is", so that the paragraph reads: "5. We are convinced that upholding the rule of law and good governance is critical to the creation of an environment for successfully tackling crime. We are supportive of the development and maintenance of fair and efficient criminal justice institutions and to the consideration of effective measures to prevent crime, in particular at the local level." Operative paragraph 6 6. Replace the first sentence with "We appreciate the enormous contribution and role of the various elements of society, including non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, in the fight against all the various aspects of crime." Operative paragraph 7 7. In the first sentence, delete the words "and breeding grounds". Operative paragraph 8 8. In the second sentence, delete the words "and the twelve international instruments against terrorism". Operative paragraph 9 9. Delete the words "such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in coordination with the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat,". Operative paragraph 10 10. Replace the paragraph with the following: "10. With regard to the increased involvement of organized criminal groups in crimes stipulated in the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and in theft of and trafficking in cultural property, trafficking in protected species of wild flora and fauna and illegal logging, we recognize the importance of combating these crimes." Operative paragraph 13 11. In the second sentence, replace the word "welcome" with the word "support". In the third sentence, replace the words "Member States" with the words "developing countries". Operative paragraph 14 12. Delete the words "and financial". Operative paragraph 16 13. In the first sentence, delete the words "and implement" and "as soon as possible". Operative paragraph 19 14. In the first sentence, insert the words "good governance, especially", after the word "that", so that the sentence reads: "We are also convinced that good governance, especially the proper management of public affairs and public property, and the rule of law are essential to the prevention and control of corruption." Operative paragraph 21 15. Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: "We urge the General Assembly to initiate, as a matter of priority, the negotiation of a comprehensive international convention against money-laundering." Operative paragraph 22 16. Insert the words "corruption and" after the word "fighting" and delete the word "voluntary". Operative paragraph 26 17. Replace the words "expansion of" with the words "increase in". 