%%%HUMANITARIAN STANDARDS|PRINCIPLES|MATERIAL REMNANTS OF WAR|INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW|

GROUP OF GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS OF CCW/GGE/XII/WG.1/WP.5 THE STATES PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION 7 November 2005 ON PROHIBITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS WHICH MAY BE DEEMED TO BE EXCESSIVELY INJURIOUS OR TO HAVE INDISCRIMINATE EFFECTS Original: ENGLISH Twelfth Session Geneva, 14-22 November 2005 Item 7 of the Agenda Explosive Remnants of War Working Group on Explosive Remnants of War RESPONSES TO DOCUMENT CCW/GGE/X/WG.1/WP.2, ENTITLED IHL AND ERW, DATED 8 MARCH 2005 Response from Estonia Part 1. Applicability of relevant IHL principles Which existing principles of IHL applicable to the use of force during an armed conflict are considered relevant to the use of munitions, including submunitions, that may become ERW? (i.e. military necessity, distinction, discrimination, proportionality, precautions taken before and during an attack, superfluous injury/unnecessary suffering, environmental protection, any others? Estonia considers itself to be bound both by the Hague and Geneva regulations (and the additional Geneva protocols to the conventions) of IHL. All the above-mentioned principles of the IHL are considered when applying them to emerging situations. In the course of such evaluation the protection of civilian component and the humanitarian nature of the law in question will have more weight than the military advantage gained of such practice. The relevant principles are the ones that are outlined by the ICRC in their recent study on customary rules of IHL. In addition Estonia acknowledges the prohibition to use weapons that may cause superfluous injury and unnecessary suffering as well as weapons, which by their nature are indiscriminate. These principles are also applicable to munitions and submunitions that may become ERW. The above-mentioned principles are also encoded in the first additional protocol to the Geneva Conventions. Additionally the principle of distinction, environmental protection and proportionality are encoded in the AP I. There has been deliberation on the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V to the 1980 Convention); however, Estonia has initiated the ratifying procedure this autumn. Part 2. Implementation of relevant IHL principles (i) Are the principles reflected in military doctrine and military manuals? Estonia has an official regulation "Implementation of laws of war in armed forces" with annexed "Principles of laws of war for armed forces". This annexed document, although recently annulled, clarifies laws of war for armed forces and writes out internationally accepted principles and behavioural models in situations of combat, how to distinguish between combatants and civilians, allowed means of combat, etc. The document mentioned could be regarded as a regulation, which reflects how the armed forces are trained, and what they have to take into account, even in dealing with ERW. Even though the document is not legally valid any longer it must be noted that it created a basis for training of future forces and has been implemented in the training procedure of new recruits and armed forces. Referring to the above-mentioned official regulation, the principles are reflected in public documents reflecting military doctrine. In addition, all military personnel in armed forces are trained in utmost respect of IHL and its appliance to concrete situations, including handling the threats arising from ERW. Military manuals are drafted accordingly as to raise the awareness of problems accompanied by ERW and correct behavioural models. As Estonia's military capacity and military ordnance is limited in potential the question of ERW is quite limited. (ii) Are the principles reflected in rules of engagement (ROE)? Estonia takes part in international military missions (such as peacekeeping missions, NATO missions, etc.) where Estonian troops are under foreign command. Because of this fact the troops are abiding according to the ROE-s supplied by the foreign commanders under which they are assigned. For example, if Estonian troops are under British command on a mission then the ROE provided by the British will be applied. (iii) Are the IHL principles taken into account: (a) in the planning of a military operation? (b) in the formal targeting procedures? (c) in order to achieve this, does your State make legal advice available at appropriate levels of command in respect of the application and operation of the relevant existing principles of IHL? In order to guarantee full adherence to IHL all the afore-mentioned principles are taken into consideration in all phases of military planning, operation and during targeting procedures. Legal advice is available through the Ministry of Defence, the General Staff of armed forces or in specific battalions, which have its own legal capacity specialised in dealing with problems arising from the practice of armed forces. (iv) Are the members of the armed forces trained in these principles? All the members of the armed forces are trained according to the IHL principles; the higher the rank of the member of armed forces the more training and knowledge he or she receives. Privates are given only the essential background of the fundamental IHL principles. Furthermore, the members of armed forces are also provided guidance on the matter of ERW. (v) Does your state have a mechanism to review the legality of new weapons, methods of warfare and military doctrines? (If yes, what is the legal basis for those systems?) At the moment Estonia does not possess such mechanism of review. If needed, such analysis will be done on a case-by-case basis to maximize compliance with IHL. (vi) What other measures are taken to ensure the implementation of these principles? Implementation of these principles is also done on the level of public awareness through the courses of IHL in different universities and through different training courses on the subject to popularise and raise public interest in these matters. 