%%%DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|POVERTY MITIGATION|HAITI|HAITI QUESTION|ADVISORY SERVICES|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|

Substantive session of 2005 New York, 29 June-27 July 2005 * E/2005/100. Item 7 (d) of the provisional agenda* Coordination, programme and other questions: long-term programme of support for Haiti Report of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti Overview At its substantive session for 2004, the Economic and Social Council decided to reactivate the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti (resolution 2004/52 of 23 July 2004). A few months later, in its decision 2004/322 of 11 November 2004, it appointed as its members the Permanent Representatives of Benin, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Haiti, Spain and Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations. The President of the Economic and Social Council and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti were also invited to participate. At its first meeting, on 23 November 2004, the Group decided that Ambassador Allan Rock, Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations, would chair the Group. The Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti was tasked by the Council to follow and advise on the long-term development of Haiti. In April 2005, the Group travelled to Haiti in conjunction with the Security Council. The Group recognizes that the new Government to be installed in February 2006 will face immense challenges. However, there are elements on which to build, such as progress in macroeconomic stability and economic governance and the possibility of a Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative. The Interim Cooperation Framework should by that time be producing visible results from the many projects already under way and those announced in Cayenne, French Guiana, in February 2005. The first action of the new Government should be the determination of its short-, medium- and long-term priorities. Work is under way to lay the foundation for a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, which the incoming Government could consider as its medium-term planning document. A broad range of national actors, including women's associations, entrepreneurs, academics, small farmers and other civil society voices, should be engaged so as to build an ongoing national dialogue on the way forward. The new Government will not be able to tackle everything that needs to be done at once: it will need to focus on a few areas to demonstrate to the Haitian people that action is being taken. The careful sequencing of activities will be critical to building stronger government ministries and services, and to ensuring that steps to modernize the economy have a positive effect on the poor. The Group recognizes that the chief responsibility for the building of a stable and democratic Haiti rests in the hands of the Haitian people. However, the international community, including through the Economic and Social Council, must play a supporting role over the long term. With that in mind, the Group makes recommendations for consideration and action by the Council. These recommendations are addressed to the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the United Nations country team, the Haitian authorities and the donor community. I. Introduction 1. The long-term development of Haiti has been on the agenda of the Economic and Social Council since 1999, when, following an invitation made by the Security Council, the Council established an Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti mandated to make recommendations on how to ensure that international assistance to Haiti was adequate, coherent, well coordinated and effective. The Group was active during a short period of three months and submitted recommendations (E/1999/103). Since then, the Council has been informed, through an annual report, of the socio-economic situation in Haiti. Following the elections in 2000, the political situation in the country was considered by some donors as not favourable to international assistance, which led to a partial freeze of the flow of funds towards the country. 2. After the departure of President Aristide in February 2004, the Transitional Government of Haiti began working in close collaboration with international development partners on its task of organizing democratic and transparent elections within two years and improving living conditions of the population. On 14 June 2004, the Interim Prime Minister, Gérard Latortue, met the President of the Economic and Social Council and requested that the Council set up an Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti to help to coordinate the development of a long-term programme of assistance to his country. This initiative was followed by an address by Roland Pierre, Minister of Planning and External Cooperation, to the Council on 15 July 2004 on "Haiti's economic and social challenges, the role of the United Nations and the Economic and Social Council", sharing a vision of the Haitian Government for the next 10 to 15 years. 3. At its substantive session for 2004, the Economic and Social Council decided to reactivate the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti (resolution 2004/52 of 23 July 2004). A few months later, in its decision 2004/322 of 11 November 2004, it appointed as its members the Permanent Representatives of Benin, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Haiti, Spain and Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations. The President of the Economic and Social Council and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti were also invited to participate. At its first meeting, on 23 November 2004, the Group decided that Ambassador Allan Rock, Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations, would chair the Group. 4. The mandate of the Group is to "follow closely and provide advice on Haiti's long-term development strategy to promote socio-economic recovery and stability with particular attention to the need to ensure coherence and sustainability in international support for Haiti, based on the long-term national development priorities, building upon the Interim Cooperation Framework and stressing the need to avoid overlap and duplication with existing mechanisms". The Council requested the Group to submit to it a report on its work, with recommendations, as appropriate, at its substantive session of 2005. II. Highlights of the activities of the Group 5. The Group has held a series of meetings with Haitian leaders and key international development partners of the country. These meetings deepened the understanding of the Group about the very difficult challenges facing any government of Haiti. The Group also participated in a Security Council open debate on Haiti in January 2005. In a Presidential Statement dated 12 January 2005 (S/PRST/2005/1), the Security Council expressed its intention to organize a mission to Haiti in conjunction with the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group. As a result, the Group delayed its first mission to Haiti until 12 to 16 April 2005. 6. A key counterpart within the Transition Government of Haiti has been Roland Pierre, Minister of Planning and External Cooperation of Haiti, whom the Group met twice in New York as well as during its visit to Haiti. Mr. Pierre informed the Group of the status of development efforts, including the implementation of the Interim Cooperation Framework adopted at a donors' meeting held in Washington D.C. in July 2004, and the outcome of the meeting of Haiti's development partners held in Cayenne (French Guiana) in March 2005. He announced that a specific unit would be put in place within his Ministry to focus on long-term development perspectives of the country and provide strategic thinking. 7. In New York, the Group met Adama Guindo, Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti and United Nations Resident Coordinator/ Humanitarian Coordinator, who presented the work of the United Nations country team on the ground and its joint programmes with MINUSTAH in such fields as gender equality, child protection, HIV/AIDS, justice and the rule of law. The Group had a briefing on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme in Haiti by staff members of the United Nations Department for Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Mr. Rock also briefed the Group on his participation at the Canadian Conference of the Haitian Diaspora, held in Montreal on 10-11 December 2004. 8. In addition, the Group had a meeting, at United Nations Headquarters, with representatives of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank, a meeting that Yvon Simeon, then Minister of Foreign Affairs of Haiti, also attended. One of the highlights of the meeting was the fact that the Transitional Government of Haiti had more financial resources than expected, as revenues were higher and disbursements lower than anticipated. While the sound macroeconomic policy pursued by the Transitional Government was praised, it was stressed that the lack of disbursements was caused by capacity constraints in public institutions and that the overall security situation was a constraint on project implementation. Visit to Haiti 9. In Haiti, the Group had a full and interesting programme of meetings and field visits (see annex I). The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, Juan Gabriel Valdes, and the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and United Nations Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator, Adama Guindo, hosted the mission. 10. The Group arrived in Haiti a day in advance of the Security Council mission to allow for substantive meetings with relevant socio-economic stakeholders. The Group subsequently had many common meetings with the Security Council mission, led by Mota Sardenberg, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, a member of both intergovernmental bodies. 11. This interaction between the two bodies on the ground highlighted the importance attached by the United Nations to the linkages between peace and development and the need for a comprehensive approach to the challenges faced by Haiti. In the light of ongoing discussions over the establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission, this mission demonstrated the usefulness of bringing together the Economic and Social Council, the Security Council, troop-contributing countries and international financial institutions to express support for the transition in Haiti and the need to better manage a continuum of support from relief and recovery, to reconstruction and development. 12. The Ad Hoc Advisory Group met over 200 people from various sectors during its visit. On the government and political side, meetings were held with the Interim President and the Interim Prime Minister, members of the "Conseil des Sages", the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Planning and External Cooperation, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Public Works, Transports and Communication, Environment, Women's Affairs and Public Health as well as representatives of these and other technical ministries. A meeting was organized with national and international focal points and coordinators of "sectoral tables" established as a follow-up mechanism to the Washington donor conference. In addition, the Group held working sessions with a range of non-governmental organizations, including in the business, social care and reconstruction sectors. The Group also met with the Core Group, MINUSTAH staff and the United Nations country team. 13. In addition to its stay in Port-au-Prince, the Group undertook site visits of two projects implemented by United Nations entities, namely (a) a joint UNDP/ UNICEF/MINUSTAH project on the prevention of youth violence in the Carrefour Feuilles district of Port-au-Prince (a community-based project focusing on social and educational activities for youth and used as a pilot for larger disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities) and (b) a school feeding programme by the World Food Programme (WFP) in the "Ecole Nationale Fritz Pierre Louis", a primary school in downtown Port-au-Prince, where 793 children are assured one healthy meal per day, the aim being to promote an increase in primary school enrolment and attendance (140,000 children are covered by this WFP programme in Haiti). 14. The Group visited the city of Gonaïves and some of its members went to Cap Haitïen. In both locations, MINUSTAH and other United Nations staff briefed them on the political, security, human rights and socio-economic situation of the area. They also met with the Délégué départemental and other local authorities and make a tour de ville to gain a better perception of the socio-economic situation outside the capital. 15. The Group wishes to express its deep gratitude for the support it received from the Transitional Government of Haiti, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, his Deputy and United Nations Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator, the whole United Nations country team and the men and women of MINUSTAH who ensured the security of the Group during its visit to Haiti, as well as from officials of the Department for Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and UNDP in New York, the World Bank, the IMF and the IDB. The Group also wishes to thank the Department of Economic and Social Affairs for its excellent support in facilitating its work. III. Context for international support to Haiti in 2005 A. Status of the Millennium Development Goals in Haiti 16. Haiti is in a critical socio-economic situation that raises profound concerns about the future of the country. Deep and widespread misery and an acute environmental crisis put the country socially and ecologically at risk. The involvement of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group needs to be understood in that context, as Haiti, beyond meeting the criteria for being both least developed countries and small island developing States, is a country with special needs by itself. 17. Some 76 per cent of an estimated population of 8.5 million live in poverty, with 55 per cent in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1 a day). The most worrying part is that over the last 25 years, the country has not experienced any durable sequence of growth. As a result, in 2002, the GDP per capita represented only 61 per cent of its 1980 value. The report of the Government of Haiti and the United Nations system on the Millennium Development Goals (see annex II) indicates that international assistance and remittances, although important in volume, have played the mere role of "shock absorbers". Growing urbanization has led to people living in inhuman conditions, particularly in the shantytowns of Port-au-Prince. Haiti is one of the three countries in the world with the worst caloric deficit, making continued support by the World Food Programme of utmost importance. 18. The education system does not open prospects for a better future in Haiti: the percentage of children having completed primary school has diminished from 45.5 per cent in 1990 to 35.5 per cent in 2002. An estimated 80 per cent of the Haitian college-educated population lives abroad and plays only an indirect role in the development of the country. A poverty trap is therefore at work in Haiti, one that the country cannot overcome alone. With HIV/AIDS adding to this bleak picture (5 per cent of the population is infected), it is not surprising that Haiti lives in a climate of recurrent social unrest. 19. The "feminization" of poverty in Haiti is a worrying trend that calls for both a good understanding of the status of women and well-targeted measures. While women's unemployment is widespread, most of those who work are involved in precarious activities in the informal sector. That situation is aggravated by the fact that in Haitian society, women are very often the head of their household and carry out many responsibilities by themselves, including the education of children. Violence and abuse are also common, a phenomenon that the Ministry on the Status of Women, assisted by the United Nations and donors, is tackling on various fronts. 20. Another major source of concern, in addition to the level of poverty, is the degradation of the environment in Haiti. According to UNDP, a quarter of the Haitian territory is at risk of grave erosion and deforestation has reached an alarming level: 97 per cent of the country's watersheds are completely deforested. In 2004, heavy flooding caused by hurricanes in two distinct areas of the country (Fonds Verrettes-Mapou; Gonaïves) dramatized the consequences of the impoverishment of soil and the increased vulnerability of the country to natural disasters. Worse though, half of the population does not have access to drinkable water and the degradation of the environment is a cause of serious diseases, including among children. The mortality rate of children under 5 is 119 deaths per thousand children. 21. In 2002, the United Nations country team began working with the previous government on the editing of a National Report on the Millennium Development Goals with a view to undertaking broad national consultations for the production of a PRS. However, the government changed before the publication of the report in June 2004. The table in annex II summarizes the status of the Millennium Development Goals in Haiti, although some of the data relate to most significant targets for the country rather than to the Millennium Development Goals themselves. Little in the data will have changed in the intervening period. The Ministry of Planning and the United Nations country team have continued to build on previous work and studies to ensure that the elected Government that takes power in February 2006 will be able to build on this groundwork in considering a PRS. B. Current international support to Haiti 22. In June 2004, the Secretary-General issued a report on the long-term programme of support for Haiti (E/2004/80) that described the political transition under way in Haiti after the departure of President Aristide in February 2004 and the challenges of Haiti's status as a least developed country with one of the highest levels of income inequality in the world and as the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere. 23. The themes of security, development, political dialogue and human rights are inextricably linked in this difficult transition period. Instability over the past 50 years has meant that donors' support for Haiti has not been consistently maintained owing to the difficulty of establishing effective development partnerships with successive governments. Faced with problems of governance and legitimacy, donors often chose to bypass government mechanisms to work directly with civil society, which further undermined normal political and administrative processes. Repeated crises of political insecurity in turn have deepened the pauperization of the population, particularly in rural areas, the rate of deforestation for the production of charcoal, and the failure to maintain previously existing infrastructure. That situation illustrates the nexus between security and development, which needs to be taken into account in the international support provided to Haiti. 24. Humanitarian and development interventions are regularly impeded by armed violence. The role of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration will be significant in Haiti's transition and the establishment of a National Commission on Disarmament is an encouraging development. In that respect, it is crucial to bridge the current gap in the funding of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. The role of MINUSTAH in stabilizing Haiti and creating the conditions for a successful election in the fall of 2005 is vital but many elements will need to continue once MINUSTAH's mandate comes to an end. 25. The Transitional Government of Haiti prepared a two-year transitional programme from July 2004 to September 2006. The Interim Cooperation Framework included the participation of 26 bilateral and multilateral agencies, United Nations agencies, civil society and the private sector. In July 2004 donors pledged over US$ 1 billion in support of the Interim Cooperation Framework. 26. The Transitional Government has been commended for its progress towards restoring financial and economic stability under an IMF Staff Monitored Programme in 2004 and in settling overdue service payments to the World Bank using its own resources and a grant from Canada. These steps have made additional resources available for the Interim Cooperation Framework and other activities. The IMF is supporting structural measures to enhance public sector governance and transparency. The IDB, in coordination with the IMF and the World Bank, has also been providing policy-based loans and technical assistance for key reforms and for anti-corruption initiatives. There will be a review of Haiti's debt sustainability and, in particular, its eligibility for HIPC relief. However, any HIPC process cannot start until the new government is in place. (Information on Haiti's external debt is included in annex III to the present report.) 27. To facilitate the implementation of the Interim Cooperation Framework, the Transitional Government and the donor community established 19 sectoral tables that bring together senior managers and focal points of ministries with all donors in a sector. Coordination and harmonization of activities bring their own costs but the effort is important. Since this approach was new, it meant that new ways of working were being invented. Experience has been mixed with some tables being very successful while others have not worked as smoothly. The Minister of Public Health and Population noted that in his sector, the sectoral table had proved to be both an enormous investment in partnership and a tool for putting in place a government master plan for the sector but had not led to increased resource mobilization. The sectoral table on gender equality has been effective in strengthening the Ministry of Women's Affairs and has succeeded in influencing the integration of gender dimensions in the work of other tables. 28. The Group welcomes the involvement of countries from the hemisphere as well as traditional development partners in the Interim Cooperation Framework. However, during its mission, various interlocutors stressed that there have not yet been many visible Interim Cooperation Framework results to demonstrate this international support to the ordinary Haitian, especially in the form of job creation. Despite major financial commitments on paper, design of projects, tender calls, disbursement of funds, and implementation of projects have been taking a great deal of time. While donor procedures in general are complex and differ from one to the other, the ability of the Transitional Government to plan and implement is also a source of delay. There have been two meetings -- Washington, D.C., in December 2004, and Cayenne, French Guiana, in March 2005, at which donors agreed to identify and fund projects for quick disbursement. However, in the Group's meetings with the sectoral tables, there was a certain dissatisfaction with the process, as the projects selected for funding were not always those that had been planned and presented by the sectoral tables. All shared concern that if the projects do not begin to deliver, the elections will be at risk. It is therefore important that some flexibility is created in disbursement procedures so as to accelerate implementation of projects, particularly labour-intensive public works that are likely to have a positive impact on the level of employment and the current insecurity. Information on the status of disbursements by donors and fields of interventions and by United Nations agencies is presented in annex IV to the present report. 29. The Haitian Government is highly centralized so that the challenges of Port-au-Prince overshadow the tragedy of the rural areas and other regions. The Group was warned not to base all its finding on the "République de Port-au-Prince". This theme came up repeatedly in different forums and in the Group's visit to Gonaïves. This city has not had a mayor since late 2004. The site of the former police station, razed to the ground during the unrest of 2004, has not been rebuilt. Civil society stressed the lack of government presence in the regions and some entrepreneurs supported the idea of infrastructure, such as ports and airports, that would permit other regions to have direct access to external markers, avoiding the capital. The Minister of Health noted that civil unrest had led to a very fragile health system in the departments. The Ministry of Women's Affairs plans to establish regional service offices that would assist women to learn about their rights, to work to address violence in their communities, and to have access to other government services. C. Priority areas for action 30. In a country where almost every sector needs bold support, the Group heard competing visions of the immediate priorities but also some recurring themes. Economic governance 31. Haiti needs to re-establish its credibility as a development and economic partner. Lack of economic governance was seen as the heart of previous failures in Haiti so that much attention continues to be focused on budget preparation, expenditure control, public bidding processes, and management of public enterprises. As the Government makes progress in this sector, more funding will flow through government mechanisms instead of bypassing them. 32. This underscores the urgency of building a qualified reliable civil service. Almost all interlocutors stressed the need for training and capacity development yet recognized that the retention of staff was a challenge. For example, the Minister of Health noted that his ministry had to compete with the NGO sector for staff. Transport 33. Roads and other transport infrastructure are Cabinet priorities to accelerate rural development, facilitate access to markets, reduce transport costs for citizens and for goods, and enable the Government to react in the case of emergencies. Key roads have been selected and proposed to donors, the IDB being the major provider of long-term financing in the infrastructure/roads sector. Contracts are now being processed. This construction work should lead to important employment creation. Environment 34. Protecting the environment is a fundamental concern. Natural resources should be properly managed through appropriate planning, regulation and enforcement. Reforestation was also recognized as a priority for protecting watersheds, mitigating natural disasters, and protecting investments in agriculture and infrastructure. Alternative sources of energy to charcoal need to be made available. Given the high rate of urbanization, the prevention of disasters in urban areas (floods, landslides) as well as improved housing and access to water will contribute to stability. Energy 35. The Interim President gave priority to electrical energy. According to the representatives of the sectoral table, the issue is not only investment in new equipment, fuel for the generators and repair and maintenance of equipment, but also strengthening the capacity of the State to bill users and to collect regularly. Agriculture 36. The agricultural sector requires major investments, in irrigation, in soil enrichment, in technical assistance, all of which will bear fruit only if there is a way to get produce to the market via feeder roads. The Minister of Agriculture stressed the absorptive capacity of the sector. He also expressed the need for rural credit while others talked of microcredit. Education 37. Education at all levels should be the subject of priority attention in any long-term development strategy. Lack of investment in school infrastructures and human resources (teachers) has been an impediment to the achievement of Millennium Development Goal 2 (universal primary education) as well as providing a venue for other school-based programmes such as school feeding, immunization, and civic education. At the same time, the Prime Minister and others stressed the skills gap at all levels that was handicapping their ability to implement their vision. Justice 38. Reform of the judicial system is a prerequisite for rooting the rule of law in Haiti. The Interim President stressed that it was not enough to rebuild the courts infrastructure destroyed in the past turmoil or to train and install magistrates. There are also the issues of security sector reform, police training, and ensuring that those in prison are brought to trial in a timely manner. It is also essential to review and revise all the civil and criminal codes. This was also raised in the Group's conversations with the Conseil des Sages, with civil society, and with the Ministry of Women's Affairs, which stressed that the legislation was not adapted to the social reality of the country. For example, about 12 per cent of women only are officially married according to the civil code, while other types of "informal" unions prevail. The Haitian law should take these practices into account and, by recognizing them, provide legal security to women and men. This would strengthen the legitimacy and social importance of the judicial system in a country where the demand for justice is so high. Indeed, the Group was told that justice is essential to initiate the political process. Land titles 39. One activity of priority to the private sector is the formalization of land titles. Haiti has a complicated system of land inheritance and titling, complicated by various past programmes in land reform. Insecure title affects decisions to invest and inhibits the use of land as collateral or the issuing of loans or mortgages. Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration 40. The implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme is essential to ensure the pacification of the country while giving people opportunities to improve their living conditions. Training, microgrants and diverse forms of community support should be developed, such as the United Nations-supported project visited by the Group in Carrefour-Feuilles (Port-au-Prince). Diminishing the use of violence by addressing its socio-economic root causes is an important aspect of any long-term exercise. IV. Implications for the long-term development of Haiti 41. In the current context, moving the political agenda forward and organizing the elections are widely considered a priority. The registration of voters is about to begin, a process that, in the absence of a national census or a national identity card, is both costly and essential. Elections are a top priority but not a panacea. Although they are a time of partisan "disagreement" among political parties, there needs to be general agreement among all parties to support the election results. The United Nations country team in Haiti talked of a pacte de gouvernabilité and a pacte de stabilité économique. Both of these are viewed as significant contributions to building a national dialogue that will underpin the long-term development of Haiti. 42. It was stressed to the Group that no medium- or long-term vision of Haiti's development had ever been elaborated. Planning mechanisms have remained on a short-term basis, i.e., two to three years, with no broader framework within which economic and social progress could be measured. This state of fact raises fundamental questions about the identity and self-projection of the Haitian society, a question that only the Haitians themselves can answer in an appropriate and relevant way. However, the international community should support every effort made towards the definition of a long-term perspective, with appropriate goals and benchmarks. 43. The request made by the authorities of Haiti to the Economic and Social Council to engage in a long-term perspective of the country's development represents a turning point in the sense that an international body is requested to assist the country in the path towards its development, on the basis of broad priorities set by the Government. Although these priorities will need to be refined by the next Governments, they can help to focus the debate on long-term prospects and channel ideas on realistic goals that the country could set for itself. The establishment of a strategic unit within the Ministry of Planning, as announced by the Minister, to focus on long-term development perspectives will contribute to this exercise and provide important food for thought. This material will be helpful to the definition of a Poverty Reduction Strategy and to the national dialogue on the future of the country. 44. The United Nations country team is working with the Transitional Government of Haiti to prepare the groundwork for an eventual Poverty Reduction Strategy. The Prime Minister and the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Resident Coordinator are visiting the provinces to discuss the Millennium Development Goals and start consultations on such a Strategy. In this framework, the Millennium Development Goals are practical policy objectives that can be used as a lens for public policy related to the daily lives of Haitians. Other relevant objectives and targets could be set, in an effort to ensure that long-term action is in line with Haitian realities. In this respect, the Minister of Planning has asked for studies and recommendations from the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), a subsidiary body of the Economic and Social Council. 45. Beyond the long-term vision, the objectives and the benchmarks that can be defined, any long-term strategy will need to address capacity-building for Ministries and public administration at all levels. A great deal needs to be done to strengthen the legitimacy of State institutions, including law enforcement authorities, in the eyes of the population. Bringing the administration closer to the citizens and assuring the delivery of useful and concrete services is a prerequisite towards moving forward. Engaging in a decentralized process of decision-making and resources, without diminishing the fragile authority of the central Government, is also necessary to unleash the economic potential of neglected departments. V. Conclusions 46. The Group recognizes that the new government of Haiti to be installed on 7 February 2006 will face immense challenges. But there will be some elements on which to build. There will be progress in macroeconomic stability and economic governance, and the possibility of an HIPC initiative. The Interim Cooperation Framework will draw to a close in September 2006 and there should be visible results from the many projects already under way and those announced at Cayenne. 47. The first action of the new Government should be the determination of its short-, medium- and long-term priorities. Given the work that is under way to lay the foundation for a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, in broad public participation, the incoming Cabinet could consider a Millennium Development Goal-based Poverty Reduction Strategy as the intermediate-term planning document. The process of consultation with a broad range of national actors including women's associations, entrepreneurs, academics, small farmers, and other civil society voices, particularly from the regions outside Port-au-Prince, can help to build an ongoing national dialogue on the future. 48. Haitian authorities and others repeatedly stressed the need for vastly improved national infrastructure (including energy), attention to the quality of education at all levels, and addressing the environmental crisis, in terms of disaster prevention, reforestation, and water. All of these elements can be tightly linked to a Poverty Reduction Strategy. The Government will need to continue to build or strengthen government structures that deliver effective governance, public safety, security, and equitable access to basic social services for its citizens. 49. At the same time, the new Government cannot simultaneously address everything that needs to be done: it will need to focus on a few areas that will demonstrate to the Haitian people that action is being taken. In that respect, consideration could be given to those "Quick Wins" identified by the Secretary-General's Millennium Task Force that are appropriate in the Haitian context while preparing the ground for longer-term investments in key areas. 50. The new government should build on the steps undertaken by the Transitional Government to re-establish government presence in key sectors in the departments. The Inter-American Development Bank is assisting with the building of offices in major centres where various ministries can establish local services, starting with Gonaïves. It will be important to sustain this initiative. 51. Attention will also need to be given to the sequencing of activities in order to build stronger government ministries and services and to ensure that steps to modernize the economy have a positive effect on the poor. The rule of law is a necessary component of rebuilding trust and the new Government will need to revise the legal codes as a key element of reforming the justice sector. It is particularly important for the family law code to be revised before any project about formalizing land titles is undertaken. Another example of the need to sequence carefully is that support to Electricité d'Haiti on the technical side will need to be balanced by assistance in the area of establishing a regular process of bill collection. 52. The Ad Hoc Advisory Group is convinced that the long-term development of Haiti requires a long-term commitment by the international community. In this spirit, the Group has elaborated specific recommendations addressed to the Economic and Social Council, to MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team, to the Haitian authorities and to the donor community for consideration and action by the Council. The role of the Economic and Social Council 1. Explore, in partnership with the interim Haitian Government and future elected Governments, appropriate mechanisms to reinforce the coordination of and long-term prospects for capacity-building support and to advocate for increased bilateral and multilateral cooperation with Haiti. 2. Play a role in promoting socio-economic dimensions of the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration programme and in identifying sustainable resources for its continuation. 3. Develop a strong advocacy role at the intergovernmental level in favour of the alleviation of chronic poverty in Haiti and to monitor steps taken in this field. 4. Call for a robust and sustained participation of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in support of Haiti, including in the elaboration of a Poverty Reduction Strategy. 5. Promote a smooth transition from the stage of the United Nations integrated mission to sustained economic development, once MINUSTAH's mandate has been fulfilled. The role of MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team in addressing Haiti's long-term development 1. Consider establishing a small project development capacity under the authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to develop quick-impact projects to be implemented in conjunction with civil society and MINUSTAH as a contribution to longer-term development. 2. Continue to support the Transitional Government in collecting, analysing or preparing the background studies, including those under way in the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), for use by the Government, which will be inaugurated in February 2006. 3. Invest in capacity development of key ministries so that the civil service will be better able to support and advise the incoming government, and promote administrative reform activities that would include civil service reform and decentralization. 4. Continue to support the sectoral tables in the implementation of the Interim Cooperation Framework. 5. Demonstrate a multidisciplinary approach to sectoral analysis and planning by using social/gender analysis as well as a human rights approach in the development of strategies and advocacy tools. 6. Ensure that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities are complemented by parallel efforts that seek to strengthen political dialogue, reinforce judicial reform, promote reconciliation and strengthen the security sector. 7. Invite the Bretton Woods institutions to consider the issue of debt sustainability and the implications of an HIPC initiative for Haiti. The role of the international donor community in addressing Haiti's long-term development The Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti recommends that donors: 1. Develop more flexible disbursement processes in order to accelerate the rate of disbursement and to enable the Haitian Government to make more rapid progress in the quality of life for Haitians and use a mix of aid instruments, including support for recurrent financing. 2. Align themselves to the maximum extent possible behind government-led strategies and seek continued flexibility in planning and implementing activities in partnership with the Government of Haiti. 3. Ramp up support to Haiti over the long term as there will be an increasing capacity to absorb and use aid to build more sustainable development. 4. Harmonize their activities closely and work together on analysis, joint assessments, joint strategies and the coordination of their political engagement and consider the establishment of joint donor offices. 5. Ensure that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process is sustained past the departure of MINUSTAH and the end of the Interim Cooperation Framework. 6. Continue to support the sectoral tables or similar harmonization mechanisms. 7. Give priority to capacity development requests, including training support for mid-career professionals in key sectors. 8. Support the continuation of the electoral registration system, ensuring capacity development so that the Government will maintain and build on the system. Programme of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Group visit to Haiti 12-16 April 2005 Tuesday, 12 April 2005 12.45 p.m. Arrival at Toussaint Louverture Airport 1.15 p.m. Press Conference at the airport 3-5 p.m. Meeting with the H.E. Mr. Hérard Abraham, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Technical Ministers (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 5.30-7.30 p.m. Meeting with the United Nations country team, presentation of the Interim Cooperation Framework (UNDP Conference Room) Wednesday, 13 April 2005 7.45-9.45 a.m. Visit of the Joint UNDP/UNICEF/MINUSTAH programme on youth violence prevention in Carrefour Feuilles, Port-au-Prince 10.30 a.m.- 12.30 p.m. Meeting with members of sectoral tables (Hotel Montana) 3-4.30 p.m. Meeting with "Le Conseil des Sages" (Hotel Montana) 5 p.m. Departure to the National Palace 6-7 p.m. Meeting with the H.E. Mr. Boniface Alexandre, Interim President of Haiti, at the National Palace (meeting with the Security Council) 7.30-9.30 p.m. Reception offered by MINUSTAH Thursday, 14 April 2005 7.45-8.45 a.m. MINUSTAH overview and briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (with the Security Council) (Hotel Montana) 9.30-10.30 a.m. Meeting with Mrs. Adeline Magloire Chancy, Minister of Women's Affairs, at the Ministry 11 a.m.-noon Field visit to WFP school feeding programme: Ecole nationale Fritz Pierre Louis, Champs de Mars, 2-3:30 p.m. Meeting with civil society representatives and the business sector (Hotel Montana) 4 p.m. Meeting with H.E. Mr. Gérard Latortue, Interim Prime Minister, at the Primature 8 p.m. Reception with the Prime Minister and key Ministers, at the Primature Friday, 15 April 2005 8.30-9.30 a.m. Breakfast meeting with H.E. Mr. Jean-Paul Toussaint, Minister of Public Works, Transports and Communication (Hotel Montana) 9.45-11 a.m. Meeting with Haitian and international non-governmental organizations to discuss reconstruction efforts (Hotel Montana) 11.15 a.m. Departure from Hotel Montana to the helipad (with the Security Council) Noon Departure to Gonaïves or Cap Haïtien 5.30 p.m. Arrival in Port-au-Prince 6.30 p.m. Reception at the Embassy of Canada Saturday, 16 April 2005 8-9 a.m. Meeting with the Core Group (Hotel Montana) (with the Security Council) 9-9.45 a.m. Discussion on human rights with MINUSTAH staff Group (Hotel Montana) (with the Security Council) 10-10.45 a.m. Debriefing with H.E. Mr. Roland Pierre, Minister of Planning and External Cooperation Press Conference (Hotel Montana) Departure to the airport 2 p.m. Flight to New York Table Summary of follow-up to MDGs Values of Indicators Targets Indicators Human Poverty Level Progress towards MDGs Level of priority Challenges Reduce by half the % of people living on less than $1/day Per capita GDP in PPP (in US$) (<3000) Extreme Setback Absolute priority Develop and implement a growth policy creating sustainable employment Reduce by half the % of people who suffer from hunger Persons suffering malnutrition (%) >25 Extreme Slow progress - Reduce interference between national policy and cooperation strategy - Consolidate future initiatives: Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI), National Food Security Coordination (NFSC) Achieve universal primary education Net school enrolment rate (%) <75 Extreme Rapid progress Priority - Resolve disparities in access and quality - Extend Universal School Enrollment Programme (USEP) to the national level Eliminate gender disparity in education % of girls compared to boys in primary and secondary school Low Rapid - Keep children in school - Apply the Convention on the Rights of the Child Reduce by 2/3 the mortality rate among children under 5 Under 5 mortality rate per 1,000 live births Extreme Slow - Promote implementation of IMCI - Apply Convention on the Rights of the Child Reduce by 3/4 the maternal mortality rate Maternal mortality rate per 100,000 live births - Provide access to obstetrical care - Deploy and implement Community Health Units Reduce by half the proportion of people without access to safe drinking water % pop. with access to a safe water point - Clarify the distribution of institutional responsibilities - Protect watersheds from deforestation and drying up to reduce damage - Mobilize necessary funding for projects - Finalize laws on management of the sector Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other diseases by 2015 Rate of prevalence in the population >5% Extreme - Give responsibility to the people - Improve the socio-economic conditions of the population - Expand access to services - Involve the media in raising awareness on a more sustained basis Haiti -- External debt Haiti's external debt represents more than $1 billion with an accumulation of arrears towards multilateral (US$ 1,091.30 million) and bilateral (US$ 209.10 million) creditors (see table below). Under the Staff Monitored Programme, the Government developed a plan to clear its arrears to all external creditors. On 4 January 2005, Haiti cleared arrears of $52.6 million to the World Bank using its own resources and a grant from Canada. This gave Haiti the right to make withdrawals under credit and grant agreements. a Haiti: Bank's Transition Strategy 2005-2006, Inter-American Development Bank, March 2005. Debt sustainability indicators for Haiti are mixed. It is estimated that the debt-export ratio in net present value terms is high (187 per cent), suggesting that Haiti's debt is unsustainable. At the same time, Haiti's debt/GDP ratio in present value terms is relatively low, at 26 per cent, and is expected to decrease to about 21 per cent in 2008.a The critical situation in the country would advocate for an increase of the share of the grant element of external assistance programmes. Although the Transition Government has pursued sound macroeconomic and public finance management, accumulation of arrears may resume, depending on the political situation. Haiti's ability to remain current in its debt service obligations depends on overall macroeconomic performance and sustained economic recovery as well as continued and timely donor disbursements. The table below presents the evolution of total external debt of the public sector, with a breakdown of creditors. In aggregate form (in millions of US dollars) Figure III-3 : TOTAL EXTERNAL DEBT OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR sept-95 sept-96 sept-97 sept-98 sept-99 sept-00 sept-01 sept-02 sept-03 sept-04 feb-05 TOTAL EXTERNAL DEBT LONG TERM DEBT BILATERAL CREDITORS DONOR UNITED STATES FRANCE SPAIN ITALY TAIWAN PROVINCE OF CHINA OTHERS* L/C BRH MULTILATERAL CREDITORS IBRD/IDA IFAD IMF IDB OPEC REFINANCED DEBT ARREARS AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL EXTERNAL DEBT IMB Source : External Debt Service, Office of International Affairs, Bank of the Republic of Haïti * Debt Stock as at 28 February 2005 * Others: Germany, Dominican Rep., Canada Haiti: Stock of arrears and projected debt service, Fiscal year ending 30 September (Millions of United States dollars) estimated projected Total arrears Multilateral creditors IDA-World Bank Other (OPEC and FIDA) Bilateral creditors Projected debt servicea Sources: Bank of the Republic of Haiti and IMF staff projections. a Excluding arrears reduction. Annex IV DISBURSEMENTS BY AREA AND BY LENDER 07/04 - 02/05 (in millions of US dollars) IDB * WB Canada** France EC USA TOTAL 1. Democratic governance 1.1 Security, Police and DDR 1.2 Justice, Prisons and Human Rights 1.3 Electoral Process and National Dialogue 2. Economic Governance and Capacity Building 2.1 Economic Governance 2.2 Institutional capacity building 2.3 Land use planning, local development and decentralization 3. Economic Recovery 3.1 Macro-economic stability 3.2 Electricity 3.3 Rapid job creation and Micro-finance 3.4 Private Sector Development/SME/SMI 3.5 Agriculture 3.6 Road and Transport 3.7 Protection and Restoration of the Environment 4. Access to Basic Services 4.1 Emergency Humanitarian Assistance 4.2 Water and Sanitation 4.3 Health and Nutrition 4.4 Education, Youth and Sports 4.5 Culture, Media and Communication 4.6 Food Security 4.7 Solid Waste Management 4.8 Slum reclamation 4.9 Safety Nets and Social Protection 5. Others 5.1 Technical Assistance 5.2 Unidentified 5.3 Basic Economic Infrastructure Total others OVERALL TOTAL Disbursements predicted 2004/2005 DIFFERENCE / Predictions- Disbursements*** * For IDB, the amounts represent actual costs. The others represent disbursement according to the accepted definition. ** For Canada the figures represent the total of disbursements as at 31 January 2005 *** The figures in parentheses represent a surplus of financing compared to predicted disbursements for the year 2004-2005. Source: Strategic Coordination Unit, Port-au-Prince Disbursements by area and by agency in millions of United States dollars UNFPA UNICEF FAO UNESCO WFP WHO-PAHO UNDP 1. Democratic Governance 2.2 Building Institutional Capacity 2.3 Land use planning, Local Development and Decentralization 3.1 Macro-economic Stability 3.6 Roads and Transport TOTAL Areas 1+2+3+4 5.4.Others 