%%%NON-NUCLEAR-WEAPON STATES|NUCLEAR WEAPONS USE|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/52/598 19 November 1997 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Fifty-second session Agenda item 69 CONCLUSION OF EFFECTIVE INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS TO ASSURE NON-NUCLEAR-WEAPON STATES AGAINST THE USE OR THREAT OF USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS Report of the First Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Miloš KOTEREC (Slovakia) I. INTRODUCTION 1. The item entitled "Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons" was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-second session of the General Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolution 51/43 of 10 December 1996. 2. At its 4th plenary meeting, on 19 September 1997, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the First Committee. 3. At its 2nd meeting, on 9 October 1997, the First Committee decided to hold a general debate on all disarmament and international security items allocated to it, namely, items 62 to 82, which was held at the 3rd to 12th meetings, from 13 to 17 and from 20 to 24 October (see A/C.1/52/PV.3-12). Structured discussions of specific subjects on the adopted thematic approach were held at six informal meetings, from 27 to 31 October. Draft resolutions on the items were considered at the 15th to 17th meetings, from 5 to 7 November (see A/C.1/52/PV.15-17); action was taken on them at the 18th to 24th meetings, from 10 to 14 and on 17 November (see A/C.1/52/PV.18-24). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Conference on Disarmament;Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/52/27). (b) Letter dated 23 September 1997 from the Permanent Representative of the Marshall Islands to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the communiqué of the twenty-eighth South Pacific Forum, held at Rarotonga from 17 to 19 September 1997 (A/52/413); (c) Letter dated 1 October 1997 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the communiqué of the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, held in New York on 25 September 1997 (A/52/447-S/1997/775). II. CONSIDERATION OF DRAFT RESOLUTION A/C.1/52/L.41 5. At the 15th meeting, on 5 November, the representative of Pakistan, on behalf of Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Colombia, Cuba, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Ghana, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia, Myanmar, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, the Sudan and Viet Nam subsequently joined by Ecuador introduced draft resolution entitled "Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons". 6. At its 18th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/52/L.41 by a recorded vote of 107 to none, with 48 abstentions (see para. 7). The voting was as follows: In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. English Page Against: None. Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. III. RECOMMENDATION OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE 7. The First Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons The General Assembly, Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring lasting security for their peoples, Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to mankind and to the survival of civilization, Welcoming the progress achieved in recent years in both nuclear and conventional disarmament, Noting that, despite recent progress in the field of nuclear disarmament, further efforts are necessary towards the achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war, Determined strictly to abide by the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of force or threat of force, Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need to be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of force, including the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international community to develop effective measures and arrangements to ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter, Recognizing that effective measures and arrangements to assure the non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons can contribute positively to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons, Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,Resolution S-10/2. the first special session devoted to disarmament, in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final Document, Recalling the relevant parts of the special report of the Committee on DisarmamentThe Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984. submitted to the General Assembly at its twelfth special session,Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-12/2), sect. III.C. the second special session devoted to disarmament, and of the special report of the Conference on Disarmament submitted to the Assembly at its fifteenth special session,Ibid., Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-15/2), sect. III.F. the third special session devoted to disarmament, as well as the report of the Conference on its 1992 session,Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), sect. III.F. Recalling also paragraph 12 of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, which states, inter alia, that all efforts should be exerted by the Committee on Disarmament urgently to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, Noting the in-depth negotiations undertaken in the Conference on Disarmament and its Ad Hoc Committee on Effective International Arrangements to Assure Non-Nuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use of Nuclear Weapons,Ibid., Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/48/27), para. 39. with a view to reaching agreement on this item, Taking note of the proposals submitted under that item in that Conference on Disarmament, including the drafts of an international convention, Taking note also of the relevant decision of the Eleventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, from 18 to 20 October 1995,See A/50/752-S/1995/1035, annex III; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fiftieth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1995, document S/1995/1035. and also of the decision adopted by the Tenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Jakarta from 1 to 6 September 1992,See A/47/675-S/24816, annex, chap. II, para. 47; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-seventh Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1992, document S/24816. as well as the relevant recommendations of the Organization of the Islamic Conference reiterated in the Final Communiqué of the Twentieth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Istanbul from 4 to 8 August 1991,See A/46/486-S/23055, annex I; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-sixth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1991, document S/23055. calling upon the Conference on Disarmament to reach an urgent agreement on an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, Taking note further of the unilateral declarations made by all nuclear-weapon States on their policies of non-use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States, Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, as well as the difficulties pointed out in evolving a common approach acceptable to all, Noting also the greater willingness to overcome the difficulties encountered in previous years, Taking note of Security Council resolution 984 (1995) of 11 April 1995 and the views expressed on it, Recalling its relevant resolutions adopted in previous years, in particular resolutions 45/54 of 4 December 1990, 46/32 of 6 December 1991, 47/50 of 9 December 1992, 48/73 of 16 December 1993, 49/73 of 15 December 1994, 50/68 of 12 December 1995 and 51/43 of 10 December 1996, 1. Reaffirms the urgent need to reach an early agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons; 2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Conference on Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the idea of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, although the difficulties as regards evolving a common approach acceptable to all have also been pointed out; 3. Appeals to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, to work actively towards an early agreement on a common approach and, in particular, on a common formula that could be included in an international instrument of a legally binding character; 4. Recommends that further intensive efforts should be devoted to the search for such a common approach or common formula and that the various alternative approaches, including, in particular, those considered in the Conference on Disarmament, should be further explored in order to overcome the difficulties; 5. Recommends also that the Conference on Disarmament should actively continue intensive negotiations with a view to reaching early agreement and concluding effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into account the widespread support for the conclusion of an international convention and giving consideration to any other proposals designed to secure the same objective; 6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons". 