%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2006 regular session 19-27 January 2006 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2001-2004 submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page 1. Association culturelle d'aide à la promotion educative et sociale 2. Elizabeth Seton Federation 3. European Law Students' Association 4. Family Care International Special consultative status granted in 2001 Introduction: The Association culturelle d'aide a la promotion educative et sociale (ACAPES) is a non-governmental organization (NGO) established in 1972, officially recognized under receipt No. 3551 Mint-Dagat-Ninea: 0110916 in 1979. The emergence of a majority marginalized underprivileged class created a social dynamic which led to the establishment of the association. One of the key reasons for its success has been the transformation of frustration among young pupils and students who were excluded from the school and university systems into a desire to demonstrate the perverse effects of a stereotyped society that had already accepted an excessively selective system and nurtured alienation instead of freedom and the formation of citizens aware of their future. ACAPES has the status of a social movement, and is associated with the Government of Senegal by virtue of a protocol of agreement signed on 25 June 1985. VISION AND MISSION In accordance with its vision the advent of a world of the future in which social relations are based on solidarity and determination to combat all forms of exclusion, increasing poverty and various forms of cultural aggression, ACAPES has undertaken the mission of contributing to sustainable human development through promotion of comprehensive and holistic education in citizenship, encouragement of renewed solidarity and creation of an autonomous and credible social movement. In fulfilling its mission, ACAPES has set objectives for strategic change and strives to: 1. Promote alternative education focused on the optimal use of resources to meet growing needs; 2. Ensure the right to community life through education, risk prevention and mitigation of harm in the areas of health, hygiene and the environment; 3. Contribute to the emergence of a new cultural dynamic based on the promotion of diversity through convergences; 4. Encourage the emergence of a new form of citizenship based on internalization of the principles of democratization, promotion of rights, and conflict prevention and management; 5. Strengthen the autonomy and credibility of the social movement through confirmation of the options of professionalism and good governance with a view to promoting the emergence of leaders committed to confronting challenges. Within this framework, the strategies developed and the programmes implemented focus on two major challenges: combating poverty in the context of globalization and promoting social change within a sustainable development perspective. Strategic intervention is based on: :: Promotion of comprehensive education with a view to enabling everybody, and in particular children, young people and women, to be integrated, and participate, in social, economic and cultural life; :: Promotion of a culture of citizenship through the development of coordination, resistance and proposal mechanisms, to meet the challenges of democratization and globalization. The projects and programmes developed throughout the national territory (both urban and rural areas) and in some other African countries (Benin, Cameroon, Chad, Guinea, the Niger and Togo) target the fields of alternative education and training; health, the environment, democracy, human rights and the culture of peace, an economy based on trade and solidarity, culture, and information and communication technologies. The strategic approach of ACAPES brings together in a coherent dynamic educational, training, social, cultural and economic activities for people from underprivileged backgrounds, in particular children, young people and women. It encompasses a process of recovery, integration and re-socialization of underprivileged children and young people who are excluded from the formal school system, through mediation and reconciliation with their families and neighbourhoods and rehabilitation through the implementation of a school, neighbourhood village strategy, in which the student/facilitator and trainer/mediator are the main actors who motivate and support the self-promotion initiatives of population groups (children, young people, adults) gathered together in various basic associative structures (BAS) through motivational educational, training, organizational and structuring activities. PARTICIPATION IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL AND THE UNITED NATIONS, 2001-2004 1. Preparatory meetings (PREPCOM) for the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Children with UNICEF in Cairo, Egypt, 24 May to 5 June :: Presentation and proposal of arguments for advocacy on behalf of the right of children to participation :: Involvement in the drafting of action plans at the regional and subregional levels. 2. Annual meeting of the UNESCO/Collective Consultation of NGOs on Education for All (CCONG/EFA) from 12 to 14 July in Bangkok :: Presentation of a subregional mechanism for the organization and mobilization of civil society in the follow-up to Education for All (EFA) accepted by the actors, through the Basic Education Observatory within the Economic Community of West African States (BEO/ECOWAS). :: Presentation of artwork depicting artistic performances as a symbol of reconciliation, diversity and cultural dialogue, signed by celebrities of various nationalities, including Mr. Kofi ANNAN, Secretary-General of the United Nations, during the World Education Forum held in Dakar in April 2000 :: Collection for the aforementioned artwork of the signatures of celebrities from over 10 countries, including the President of Amnesty International, the South African Minister of Culture, Professor Joseph Kizerbo, and children from the legendary Soweto. 1. World Summit for Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August to 4 September :: Participation in the evaluation of Agenda 21 and the drafting of the national plan of action for civil society for the attainment of sustainable development (August 2002). 2. Special session of the United Nations General Assembly on children, New York, 8-12 May :: Advised the delegation of the Government of Senegal on the drafting of proposals and advocacy; Formulation of proposals which were included in paragraphs 6 and 15 of the Declaration and Plan of Action entitled "A World Fit for Children" on the place and role of the family in an integrated approach to child development; :: Delivery of the completed artwork on artistic performances to His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye WADE, for transmission to the United Nations Secretary-General. 1. Fifty-sixth annual meeting of the Department of Public Information/Non-governmental Organization Conference (DPI/NGO) 7 to 9 September :: Participation in the drafting of the United Kingdom part of the 56th annual meeting of the DPI/NGO, Kaolack, Senegal. 2. Annual meeting of the Collective Consultation of NGOs on Education for All (CCONG/EFA) held in Porto Alegre from 19 to 23 January :: Communication on apprenticeship training strategies based on life-skills modules in the education system and advocacy for education in sustainable development. 1. Meeting of the United Nations Economic and Social Council on resources mobilization and enabling environment for poverty eradication in the least developed countries -- Brussels Programme of Action, 17 March, New York :: "Participation in and initiation of advocacy with the other two African NGOs present, centred on the proposal to strengthen the involvement of civil society in the least developed countries in the follow-up to national and international commitments. 2. 57th Annual DPI/NGO Conference: Millennium Development Goals: Civil Society Takes Action, 8-10 September :: Participation in the drafting of the report of the 57th Annual DPI/NGO Conference: Millennium Development Goals: Civil Society Takes Action, Dakar, Senegal. 3. WASH World Forum on the topic: Water, sanitation and hygiene for all -- local and national solutions and action, 29 November to 3 December :: Presentation of results of the pilot project on the collection of rain water, experiment conducted by UNICEF and the Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC); :: Hosting a group of participants in the conference from more than 25 countries: visits to completed projects; organization and mobilization of social actors in advocacy for access to water resources. COOPERATION WITH UNITED NATIONS OFFICES AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES During the period covered by this report ACAPES worked to reinforce the activities of the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Through its projects and programmes, ACAPES has contributed in particular to the attainment of the objectives of education for all by 2015 and some of the Millennium Development Goals, by achieving the following results: EDUCATION 1. To ensure primary education for all by 2015 :: Cooperation between the Government and civil society is strengthened through the launching of a consultative mechanism on the topic by UNESCO in partnership with civil society :: 35,000 children and young people from underprivileged backgrounds, including 19,600 girls (i.e. 56 per cent), who had not attended school or had been excluded from the school system, have been given a second chance and enrolled in alternative education programmes so that they can continue their education :: A model for alternative education and training, having the potential capacity to accommodate 20,000 children and approved by the social actors, has been introduced in at least 7 African countries. 2. To promote gender equality and the empowerment of women :: Contribution to the democratization of access to education through the establishment and development of an early childhood education model in partnership with UNICEF for over 15,000 children between 3 and 6 years of age from underprivileged families, the majority being girls, who are now attending school :: Implementation of the pilot project on education and training for the social and economic integration of adolescents, in partnership with the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) and the Embassy of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Dakar targeting 600 illiterate or out-of-school girls :: A network of over 16,000 African women from 7 countries, organized by an independent movement that arranges self-promotion activities (literacy, health, crafts, agriculture, savings and credit). HEALTH 1. To reduce under-five child mortality by two thirds between 1990 and 2015; :: Information, awareness and mobilization campaigns concerning maternal and child health and vaccination are organized regularly in cooperation with the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF. 2. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases until 2015 :: Strengthening of community response to the HIV/AIDS pandemic, malaria and other endemic diseases through information, awareness, education and mobilization programmes, with the Ministry of Health and Prevention, Hygiene and Sanitation, and national committees combating HIV/AIDS and malaria. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT 1. To reduce extreme poverty and hunger :: A model for coordinated basic development led by community actors and focusing on the principles of accountability, autonomy and solidarity, approved and developed within the context of decentralization and local governance :: Developing the capacities of social actors through a pilot programme to train 300 farmers in Guinea, Senegal and Togo, in cooperation with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2. To ensure environmental sustainability :: Contribution to the formation of an agricultural identity which is affirmed and strengthened through an autonomous farmers' movement organized at the national and continental levels and which is capable of understanding the challenges of the sustainable human development stakes. Introductory Statement The Elizabeth Seton Federation is an international federation of organizations formed in 1947. The Federation aims to strengthen collaboration among congregations of women religious in order to support and promote their work with people caught in the web of poverty. The Federation pursues the alleviation and elimination of all forms of poverty through advocacy, witness, systemic change, direct service and funding. As means toward poverty elimination, the member organizations labor for the establishment of peace, human rights, sustainable development, social and economic development, intercultural and inter-religious understanding. The Federation has members in 27 countries. The Federation affiliation with the Economic and Social Council as a non-governmental organization with Special Consultative Status is a means of collaboration through which we work to bring about the elimination of poverty by systemic and structural change. Since our affiliation was granted, there have been no changes in our sources of funding. One new organization has joined our Federation: The Sisters of St. Martha of Antigonish, Nova Scotia, Canada, with 179 members. Two of our member organizations have merged: the Vincentian Sisters of Bedford, Ohio, have joined the Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, Ohio. Report Summary Statement Since our affiliation with the ECOSOC, the members of the Federation have improved their awareness of and support for the goals and activities of the United Nations. In New York, the Federation maintains a full-time representative and occasional yearly interns who attend and participate, where appropriate, in the ECOSOC, Commissions, and committee meetings. The main representative is responsible to disseminate information and encourage members' participation in United Nations activities and global advocacy. For their part, the individual members are responsible to report on best practices and continuing needs in their area of expertise and work, to advocate, at least monthly, for UN issues affecting the poor and to share information received with the thousands with whom they minister. The Federation has also appointed two part time representatives to the UN office in Geneva. Participation in ECOSOC and subsidiary bodies (2001 - 2004) Commission for Social Development: New York; 2002, 2003, 2004; 40th, 41st, 42nd, 43rd Sessions The Federation representative is an active member of the NGO Committee for Social Development (a committee of the Conference of NGOs, CONGO), serving for three years as vice-chair. The Federation has participated each year in the Commission sessions, submitting such written statements as (2003) "Partnerships for Social Development," "Social Responsibility of the Private Sector", "Role of International Financial Institutions", "Sharing of Experiences and Practices"," Impact of Employment Strategies", (2004) "Public Sector Effectiveness", "Persons with Disabilities", "Water as a Human Right". The Federation also collaborated on oral statements, such as the NGO Declaration to the Commission in 2004. The Federation is involved in extensive work for poverty eradication, health and social services, and funds anti-poverty as well as disaster relief projects. The Federation is a member of the NGO Sub-committee on Poverty and actively participated in the collection and publishing of Best Practices in Poverty Eradication: Case Studies from the Field, submitted to Department of Economic and Social Affairs, (DESA), August, 2003. Commission on the Status of Women: New York; 2002, 2003, 2004; 46th, 47th, 48th, Sessions The Federation has been an active member of the NGO Committee on the Status of Women, (CONGO committee) serving on the NGO planning committee for 2003, participating in a side event on women and violence during the commission and submitting written statements to the CSW, such as "Strategies to Combat Trafficking of Women" (2003) and the "Role of Men and Boys in Achieving Gender Equality" (2004). The Federation conducts staffs and finances numerous projects for the advancement of women in health, education and development and has financed attendance at Commission meetings for Federation members. Commission on Sustainable Development: 2002, 2003, 2004 The Federation has participated in the Commission through membership in the NGO Committee for Sustainable Development (CONGO committee). The Federation has initiated, staffed and financed projects for sustainable and environmental development in Bolivia, Canada, El Salvador, and United States-Mexican border, and conducted numerous educational projects on environmental issues. The Federation members file numerous shareholder resolutions in support of sustainable development practices by transnational corporations. The Federation has participated in preparatory commissions and has financed member attendance at Commission meetings and to the World Summit in Johannesburg: 2002. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues: 2002, 2003, 2004 The NGO representative and indigenous members of the Federation have been supportive observers at the Forum each year, working with other NGOs, and forwarding information to and from our members who work with indigenous populations. Financing for Development Process and International Conference: 2001 2002, 2003, 2004 The Federation Representative has been active in the FFD process every year since its beginning by participation in the preparatory meetings, the NGO caucus on debt, attendance at the Monterrey Conference, membership in the New York NGO Committee on FFD, and by initiation of several international advocacy actions on FFD issues. The Federation has collaborated on NGO written and oral statements on the topic of poverty and FFD, such as "Statement of Poverty Eradication Task Force of the NGO Committee for Social Development to FFD", September, 2001 and "Statement of NGO Debt Caucus to the Third Preparatory Committee for FFD", October, 2001 ECOSOC High Level Segments: 2002, 2003, 2004 Through collaboration in the NGO Committee for Social Development, the organization has contributed to statements on the eradication of poverty and international debt forgiveness and to NGO roundtable speaker selections to the various segments and meetings. The Federation representative has attended as observer. Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights: The organization has submitted two reports (2001, 2004) of Human Rights abuses in the area of religious intolerance to the HCHR. One report was in the form of a mass, written campaign initiated by the organization. UNGASS Special Session of the General Assembly on Children, 2002 The Federation attended the special session and sponsored a young student who was a panelist in an NGO side event for this special session (Girls Speak Out). Cooperation with UN bodies and Specialized Agencies Department of Public Information: 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The organization is affiliated with DPI. Each year the Federation has been represented at the annual conference by a minimum of ten delegates who then report back on the event to their membership. The NGO representative and interns attend the weekly DPI briefings and disseminate material from such briefings. Through quarterly newsletters, frequent e-mail alerts, more than 25 workshops, and other mailings, in English and French, the NGO representative has distributed materials regarding the United Nations, Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Millennium Development Goals, the Beijing Platform of Action, Financing for Development, Human Rights, and numerous meetings and issues of the UN. NGO Millennium Forum, New York, 22-26 May, 2000 The Federation participated in the forum and financed attendance of 3 women from the developing world (Peru, Belize, and Ecuador). Other Relevant Activities: 2001 - 2004 In efforts to eradicate poverty and in support of the Millennium Development Goals, the Federation has initiated the following new projects in developing countries since 2001: 31 Substantial grants ($5,000 to $48,000) to poverty reducing projects in developing countries. 10 emergency/disaster relief grants. (e.g. Iran (Islamic Republic of), Haiti, Peru, Morocco, Dominican Republic, tsunami relief, etc.) The Federation has also: ~ participated in a Best Practices Study sponsored by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, DESA, 2003. ~ sponsors a monthly advocacy project of contacting governments and global institutions regarding timely UN issues, e.g. fair trade, human rights, environmental issues, debt relief, corporate responsibility, etc. This project includes an international mass, letter-writing campaign. ~ Financially subsidized staff members for 15 women and child projects, which are not specifically Federation projects. ~ Developed, financed, and staffed the following new Federation endeavors: 13 health care projects; 9 new educational programs; 5 child care centers; 11 women's multiple service centers; 2 housing projects. Special consultative status granted in 1997 1. INTRODUCTION The European Law Students' Association, ELSA, is an International, independent, non-political and non-profit-making organization comprised and run by and for law students and young lawyers. Founded in 1981, ELSA is today the world's largest independent law students' association. It is present in more than 200 law faculties in 37 European countries with a membership in excess of 25,000 students and young lawyers. ELSA members are internationally minded individuals who have experiences with foreign legal systems and practices. 1.1. Our Philosophy Vision - A just world in which there is respect for human dignity and cultural diversity. Purpose - To contribute to legal education, to foster mutual understanding and to promote social responsibility of law students and young lawyers. Means - Provide opportunities for law students and young lawyers to learn about other cultures and legal systems in a spirit of critical dialogue and scientific co-operation. - Assist law students and young lawyers to be internationally minded and professionally skilled. - Encourage law students and young lawyers to act for the good of society. 1.2 Our Activities Through our activities such as Seminar and Conferences, the Student Trainee Exchange Programme and Academic Activities, such as Legal Research Groups and Moot Court Competitions, our members acquire a broad cultural understanding and legal experience. ELSA has a fundamental commitment to Human Rights, promoting Human Rights and providing Human Rights education. 1.3 Our Special Status ELSA has through its activities and commitment within the international community gained special status with several International Institutions: Consultative Status, now Participatory Status, with the Council of Europe (2000); Special Consultative Status with UN-ECOSOC and Consultative Status with UNCITRAL (1997); Consultative Status in Category C in UNESCO (1994). In addition, ELSA has a cooperation agreement with UNHCR and co-operates with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and all the European Institutions. ELSA appointed permanent representatives to UN-ECOSOC in 2001, 2002, 2003 (2 in Geneva, 2 in New York and 2 in Vienna) and 2004 (1 in Geneva, 1 in New York and 1 in Vienna). The Association has been deeply involved in the process of the establishment of the International Criminal Court, especially as a member of the Steering Committee of the NGO Coalition for an International Criminal Court (CICC). After the Rome Conference, ELSA has attended the Preparatory Commissions for the Establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and Assemblies of State Parties (ASP). 7th and 8th ICC Prep Com (26 of February - 9th of March; 23rd of September - 5th of October), New York; 9th and 10th ICC Prep Com (8 - 19 April; 1- 12 July 2002) UNH, New York; 1st Meeting of the ASP(3 - 10 September 2002) UNH, New York, USA; 1st Session, first and second resumptions of the ASP (21- 24 April) UNH, New York 2nd Annual Meeting of the ASP (8 - 12 September 2003) UNH, New York 3rd Annual meeting of the ASP (6- 10 September) the Hague, The Netherlands. In addition, the following Post-Rome ELSA Publications were published: Judges in the Service of the States (Ten Brinke and Deml - 2002); Nomination and Election of Judges to International Courts (Falzon, Goldmann and Kutsishvili - 2002); Report from the Preparatory Commission of the ICC, Sessions 1-10 (Nakstad - 2003). The Association has been active in various fields of the work of the UN Bodies: World Summit on Sustainable Development (26 August - 4 September) Johannesburg, South Africa; 2nd and 3rd Preparatory Commission, World Summit on Sustainable Development (28 January - 8 February; 25 March - 5 April) UNH, New York; UNCITRAL Working Group on Transport Law, 10thSession (16 - 20 September) Vienna International Centre, Vienna, Austria. UNCITRAL Working Group on Arbitration, 38th Session (12 - 16 May) UNH, New York; UNCITRAL Working Group on Arbitration and Conciliation (10 - 14 November) Vienna International Centre, Vienna, Austria. UNCITRAL Working Group on Security Interests, 3rd Session (3 - 7 March) UNH, New York; ECOSOC Commission on the Status of Women, 48th Session (1 - 12 March) UNH, New York. ECOSOC Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, 3rd Session (10 - 21 May) UNH, New York. Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD-12) (14 - 30 April) UNH, New York; UNCITRAL, United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 37th Session, (14 - 25 June) UNH, New York; UNCITRAL Working Group on Electronic Commerce, 43rd Session (15 - 19 March) UNH, New York; UNCITRAL Working Group on Electronic Commerce, 37th Session (11 - 22 October) Vienna International Centre, Vienna, Austria. UNCITRAL Working Group VI, 5th Session on Security Interests (22 - 25 March) UNH, New York; UNCITRAL Working Group on Security Interests, 6th Session (27 September - 1 October) Vienna International Centre, Vienna, Austria. UNCITRAL Second Joint Session of the Working Groups V (Insolvency Law) and VI (Security Interests) (26 March) with the adoption of the report of the joint session (29 March) UNH, New York; UN HABITAT World Urban Forum, 2nd Session (13 - 17 September) Barcelona, Spain. UNHCHR 56th Session, Sub Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (26 July - 13 August) UN, Geneva, Switzerland. 3. Co-operation with UN Bodies and Specialized Agencies ELSA has had a lively and diverse co-operation with UN bodies and specialized agencies both on the International and the National level in all the key areas of its activities. ELSA Helsinki/Tallinn Seminar on International Criminal Law (2002: On the Way to the Hague. 2003: Men and the Abstract Entities. 2004: the Mosaic) The Annual Seminar focuses on issues related to International criminal law and the International Criminal Court. Speaker at the 2002 seminar: Martti Koskenniemi, member of the UN International Law Commission. Speaker at the 2003 seminar: Dr. Erkki Kourula, Judge at the International Criminal Court; ELSA Sweden - Study Visit to the ICC in Hague (October) ELSA Mainz, Visit to the UN International Centre in Vienna (February) ELSA Marburg & ELSA Munich, Prof. Bruno Simma, Patron of the seminar "Rules of procedure and evidence of the International Criminal Court (May) ELSA Hamburg, Philippe Gautier, speaker at the seminar "The law of international economy (July 2001); ELSA Austria and ELSA Finland to the UN Headquarters in Vienna (2001); ELSA Maastricht, 3 Lectures by Prof. Dr. Theo van Boven. UN Special Rapporteur against Torture. ELSA Maastricht, Conference on the International Criminal Court ELSA Tuebingen, Visit to the UN in Geneva ELSA Hamburg and Halle, Visit to the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea Visit by ELSA Austria, Hamburg, Kiel, and Belgrade to the UN Headquarters in Vienna ELSA Lund, Sweden Study Visit to the UN Office in Copenhagen, Denmark, (October 16); ELSA Tilburg, Visit to UNESCO in Paris (April); Student visits: ELSA Zurich, Switzerland and ELSA Konstanz, Germany Study Visit to the UN office in Geneva (April/May); ELSA Rotterdam, Visit to the ICC in The Hague (18 of November); ELSA Leiden and Tilburg, Visit to the UN Headquarter in Vienna (7 of May); ELSA Jena, Institutional Study Visit to UN in Geneva; ELSA Bremen, Institutional Study Visit to The Hague: International Court of Justice and to the Permanent Court of Arbitration; ELSA Bremen, Hamburg, and Lueneburg, Visit to the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea ELSA Tuebingen, Visit to the UN in Geneva; ELSA Internal Meeting and Training Camp, Visit to the UN Headquarters in Vienna (February 2003 and February 2004) Part I: Introduction Family Care International, Inc. (FCI) seeks to ensure that women and adolescents have access to the high-quality information and services they need to improve their sexual and reproductive health, experience safe pregnancy and childbirth, and avoid unwanted pregnancy and HIV infection. FCI is based in New York and has field offices in five countries in Africa (Burkina Faso, Kenya, Mali, Niger and United Republic of Tanzania), and three countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (Bolivia, the Dominican Republic, and Ecuador). There are also program activities in Haiti, Mexico and Panama. FCI works at the global, regional, and country levels to: strengthen national and international commitment to the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD PoA); build the capacity of local partners to design, implement, and evaluate national strategies and model programs; and develop information and training materials to improve the quality of reproductive and sexual health programs and services. Part II: FCI's Participation in the Economic and Social Council and Other UN Meetings UN General Assembly Special Session on Children (UNGASS on Children), May 2002: During the UNGASS on Children, FCI was involved in a broad array of activities designed to highlight the importance of young people's access to sexual and reproductive health information, education and services. FCI hosted an orientation session for nearly 50 NGO representatives from Asia, Latin America, Africa, Europe, and the United States; co-sponsored a reception for government and NGO delegates; co-organized an audio news briefing to provide journalists with key information on the UNGASS; collaborated with the Netherlands Mission to the UN and UNFPA to organize a panel on youth participation in implementing the ICPD PoA; and advocated with government delegates. Ten-year Anniversary of the ICPD PoA: During 2003 and 2004, FCI participated in a number of regional and international meetings to advocate for the reaffirmation of the ICPD PoA, including a meeting of the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee to review countries' progress in implementing the ICPD PoA (Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, November 2003); the European Population Forum, convened by the UN Economic Commission for Europe in partnership with UNFPA (Geneva, Switzerland, January 2004); a Meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee for Population and Development for the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (Santiago, Chile, March 2004); the Economic Commission for Africa Ministerial Conference on ICPD at 10 (Dakar, Senegal, June 2004); the sessional meeting of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (San Juan, Puerto Rico, June 2004); and the UN General Assembly Day of Commemoration on ICPD (UN Headquarters, October 2004). FCI also participated in developing and launching a "leaders' statement" on ICPD signed by more than 250 government, business, NGO and youth leaders that reaffirmed commitment to ICPD. In addition, FCI was one of three core partners (along with the International Planned Parenthood Federation and Population Action International), who implemented a multi-faceted initiative to increase commitment to the ICPD agenda. The initiative included a Global Roundtable (London, 30 August - 2 September 2004), attended by more than 550 leaders from 106 countries, including representatives of governments and UN agencies; a magazine and report card that assesses country performance on key ICPD indicators; and a communications campaign that sought to refocus attention on the goals of the ICPD PoA. Commission on Population and Development (CPD): FCI regularly takes part in the sessions of the CPD to advocate for implementation of the ICPD PoA. In the 36th Session of the CPD (March, 2003), FCI advocated for the adoption of a strong resolution on education and development, highlighting the importance of sexuality education for adolescents. During the 37th Session of the CPD (March and May, 2004), FCI advocated for the adoption of a resolution reaffirming the ICPD PoA and its Key Actions. High-level Technical Consultation on HIV/AIDS and Reproductive Health: In collaboration with UNFPA and UNAIDS, FCI organized a technical roundtable (May 2004) and a high-level consultation (June 2004) on HIV/AIDS and reproductive health. These events aimed to highlight the linkages between HIV/AIDS and sexual and reproductive health and urge appropriate and balanced investment in HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, and care. Participants at the high-level meeting developed the New York Call to Commitment: Linking HIV/AIDS and Sexual and Reproductive Health, which is being distributed widely at UN meetings and other international forums. Collaboration with UN Agencies: FCI works in close collaboration with a number of UN Agencies at the international, regional, and national levels. From 1987-January 2004, FCI was the secretariat of the Inter-Agency Working Group on Safe Motherhood, which included UNFPA, UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO). FCI collaborated with UNFPA on many projects from 2001-2004, including: the adaptation of our health education manual, You, Your Life, Your Dreams and the development of a peer-education program for youth in the English-speaking Caribbean; the adaptation of You, Your Life, Your Dreams for youth in Latin America; a project with youth-serving groups and public sector partners in the Dominican Republic, Panama, and Haiti to train peer educators and youth groups in communications skills, program planning, monitoring, and management; a project to create teams of youth advocates in the Dominican Republic; training in youth-friendly services for government health care workers in the Dominican Republic; a project to introduce postabortion care services in Niger; an advocacy project focused on preventing the spread of HIV among young people in Kenya, Mali, Niger, and the United Republic of Tanzania (also in collaboration with UNAIDS); research to develop a strategy on meeting the needs of rural girls in Burkina Faso, Mali, and Senegal; and the adaptation of a health education flipchart for use among indigenous populations in Panama. In addition, FCI staff members have held an information session on advocacy presentation tools for UNFPA representatives (New York, April 2001); spoken at the launch of UNFPA's State of the World Population Report (New York, August 2003); attended a UNFPA Global Youth Partners workshop aimed at empowering young people to participate in efforts to address HIV/AIDS (New York, September 2003); participated in a UNFPA technical meeting on maternal mortality (Honduras, April 2004); and participated in UNFPA's first Youth Advisory Panel meeting (New York, April 2004). Between 2001-2004, FCI worked with UNICEF in Bolivia to develop radio segments in indigenous languages on women's right to maternal health services under the national maternal health law, and in Mali to develop a high-school peer education program on sexual and reproductive health. Lastly, FCI staff members have attended numerous technical consultations and meetings held by the WHO on reproductive health issues and presented on partnerships to advance reproductive health at WHO's Meeting of Interested Parties in Geneva in November 2003. 