%%%CRIMINAL JUSTICE|CRIME PREVENTION|ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|

Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fourteenth session Vienna, 23-27 May 2005 Item 9 (a) and (b) of the provisional agenda E/CN.15/2005/1. Strategic management and programme questions: functioning of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and programme questions Intersessional work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, management of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and financial status of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund Report of the Executive Director Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Intersessional work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Background Intersessional work Submission of draft proposals Management of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Reform process of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Repositioning the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Continuing the reform process United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund Origin and evolution of the Fund Management of the Fund Contributions and pledges to and financial statements of the Fund Associate experts 1. The present report has been prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/24 of 22 July 2003, entitled "Work of the Centre for International Crime Prevention, including the management of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund", and resolution 2003/31, also of 22 July 2003, entitled "Functioning of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice". II. Intersessional work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice A. Background 2. In its resolution 2003/31, the Economic and Social Council encouraged States members of the Commission to submit their draft proposals to it, in accordance with Commission resolution 5/3, one month prior to the commencement of the session; endorsed the request of the Commission to its bureau to report on its intersessional work annually, including on its experience with regard to the adherence of Member States to the procedural requirements for the submission of draft proposals; and decided that, with effect from 2004, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice should, at the end of its session, elect its bureau for the subsequent session and encourage it to play an active role in the preparation of the regular as well as the informal intersessional meetings of the Commission, so as to enable the Commission to provide continuous and effective policy guidance to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, and also decided that the Chairman should, whenever appropriate, invite the chairmen of the five regional groups, the chairman of the Group of 77 and China and the Presidency of the European Union to participate in the meetings of the bureau. B. Intersessional work 3. Three intersessional meetings of the Commission and four meetings of its extended bureau were held between the conclusion of the thirteenth session of the Commission and the end of March 2005. The intersessional meetings provided follow-up to the thirteenth session of the Commission, in particular in relation to relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, discussed the status of preparations as well as organizational matters for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and finalized the provisional agenda, documentation and arrangements for the fourteenth session of the Commission. 4. In order to facilitate the preparation of a draft declaration in advance of the Eleventh Congress, the extended bureau accepted the offer of the delegation of Thailand to conduct informal consultations with interested delegations in order to prepare the preliminary text of the draft declaration to be adopted by the Congress. An open-ended informal group, chaired by Thailand, held 12 meetings with participants from 39 countries from all regions and agreed on a preliminary text of the draft declaration for transmission to the Congress. That text was endorsed by the Commission at its third intersessional meeting, held on 1 March 2005, with a view to submission to all Member States as an official document of the Congress, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 59/151 of 20 December 2004 (see A/CONF.203/16). 5. Member States were also informed about the status of organizational arrangements for the Eleventh Congress, such as the signing of the host-country agreement between the United Nations and Thailand. On 9 February 2005, the delegation of Thailand held an informal briefing for permanent missions in Vienna on the arrangements for the Congress. 6. The extended bureau began the process of consultations within and among regional groups to facilitate the election of officers in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure for the Eleventh Congress. 7. In preparation of the fourteenth session of the Commission, the provisional agenda and the list of documents, as approved by the Economic and Social Council in its decision 2004/242 of 21 July 2004, was endorsed at the intersessional meeting held on 26 January 2005. It was also agreed at the intersessional meeting that the fourteenth session would have a duration of five working days on an exceptional and non-precedential basis. At the intersessional meeting of the Commission held on 1 March 2005, a presentation was made by the Secretariat on the crime programme component of the consolidated budget outline for 2006-2007 for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) (E/CN.7/2005/8), providing an opportunity for Member States to obtain information on the projected programme activities of the crime programme of UNODC for 2006-2007. C. Submission of draft proposals 8. At the intersessional meeting held on 26 January 2005, it was decided that the provisional deadline for submission of draft resolutions would be noon on the first day of the fourteenth session, to be held in Vienna from 23 to 27 May 2005. Member States were encouraged to submit draft resolutions to the Secretariat as early as possible, preferably one month prior to the commencement of the fourteenth session, in accordance with Commission resolution 5/3, in order to facilitate discussion and make more effective use of the time and resources available to the Commission at its fourteenth session, in particular given the reduced duration of that session. 9. The experience from earlier sessions of the Commission indicates that the fulfilment of the request contained in resolution 5/3 for the submission of draft proposals one month prior to the commencement of the session had seldom been met, with the majority of draft resolutions being submitted either during the session or, in very few cases, one or two days before the commencement of the session. The Commission may therefore wish to examine at its fourteenth session further measures to encourage the early submission of draft resolutions. III. Management of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 10. Initiatives to maintain and strengthen dialogue with Member States, as well as between Member States, concerning the priorities and management of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, especially in the context of programme management reforms in UNODC, continued. In addition to the informal intersessional meetings and meetings of the extended bureau of the Commission, briefings were held for the permanent missions on programme management reform and budgetary issues. Furthermore, the Executive Director and senior staff met frequently with the chairmen of regional groups and representatives of Member States to keep them abreast of developments. Information on the work and decisions of the Office was routinely made available online. A. Reform process of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 11. At the heart of the reforms of UNODC during the period 2002-2003 was an action plan to improve: (a) governance; (b) funding; (c) operations; (d) staff-management relations; and (e) communication. As part of that plan, initiatives were launched to implement measures addressing the five elements. 12. The reform process was triggered by worldwide changes providing a new momentum for recasting the work of the Office, including: (a) The United Nations Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2), in which the General Assembly established achieving sustainable development as an aim of the Organization, entailing, inter alia, the improvement of conditions for freeing individuals from the burden of "uncivil" behaviour; (b) The international dimension of "uncivil" behaviour; (c) The adoption of new norms and international instruments in the fields of drugs and crime (resolutions of the General Assembly at its twentieth special session; the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Assembly resolution 55/25, annex I) and the Protocols thereto; and the United Nations Convention against Corruption (resolution 58/4, annex)); (d) The mandates entrusted to the Office in preventing and countering terrorism. 1. Operational priorities 13. In 2003, following consultations with staff and Member States, UNODC launched new operational priorities as guidelines for the medium term. Six key themes were identified -- either as operational priorities or programme/operational instruments -- with drugs, crime and terrorism forming part of an integrated approach to overcoming the forces of "uncivil" society. 14. The process of re-engineering the Office in terms of operational directions was accompanied by management reforms to enhance the system of governance, including increased funding for operational activities and human capital of the Office. 2. Structure of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 15. The next stage of the reform focused on adapting the organizational structure of the Office to mirror operational priorities, a process that began in August 2003 and was formalized through the issuance on 15 March 2004 of two Secretary-General's bulletins, entitled "Organization of the United Nations Office at Vienna" (ST/SGB/2004/5) and "Organization of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime" (ST/SGB/2004/6). The new structure of the Office was grounded on a four-pillar approach: (a) The Division for Policy Analysis and Public Affairs, whose aim is to increase knowledge and understanding of drug and crime issues and to expand the evidence base for policymaking and operational decisions; (b) The Division for Treaty Affairs, which provides secretariat and substantive services to the treaty-based and governing bodies and assists States in the ratification and implementation of international legal instruments and the development of domestic legislation on drugs, crime and terrorism; (c) The Division for Operations, whose field-based technical cooperation programmes and projects aim to enhance the capacity of countries to prevent and counter illicit drugs, crime and terrorism; (d) The Division for Management, which acts as the guardian of human and financial rules and regulations and provides management support in the areas of human resources, budgets and accounts, as well as information and communication technology services. 3. Consolidated budget 16. As part of the reform measures, a consolidated budget for 2004-2005 for UNODC was prepared, integrating the drug, crime and terrorism programmes of the Office into a single operational context. The budget was presented at an intersessional meeting of the Commission on 10 November 2003. In a continuing process, mentioned above, the consolidated budget outline for 2006-2007 was presented, for comment and review, at an intersessional meeting of the Commission on 1 March 2005 (E/CN.7/2005/8). At its fourteenth session, the Commission will also have before it the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the consolidated budget outline for 2006-2007 (E/CN.7/2005/9) and a note by the Secretary-General on the proposed programme budget for 2006-2007 (E/CN.15/2005/19). 4. The integrity initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 17. Placing greater emphasis on accountability, both to the Member States as well as internally, in early 2004 UNODC launched an integrity initiative, developed in the context of ongoing Secretariat-wide efforts, aimed at: (a) ensuring that practices conformed to stated policies and guidelines on integrity; (b) reinforcing the ability of staff to act in accordance with integrity guidelines; and (c) supporting transparency in the Office. Related measures included establishing an integrity panel; the implementation of compulsory training and interactive learning programmes; the appointment of a compliance officer; and the review of recruitment procedures to include integrity aspects in connection with the hiring of staff. B. Repositioning the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 18. As part of its operational priorities and bearing in mind its small size, both in budgetary and human resource terms, in the course of 2004 UNODC launched a number of initiatives in order to leverage resources and to exploit the power of partnership with Governments and institutions. Parallel to those outward-looking efforts, the Office is building on its recent reforms to enhance further the effectiveness and management of its work. Integrating activities concerning drugs, crime and corruption into the global agenda for peace, security and development (a) United Nations system-wide response to organized crime and corruption 19. At its meeting held in Vienna in April 2004, the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, which comprises the executive heads of specialized agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations system and is chaired by the Secretary-General, endorsed a series of measures contained in a paper prepared for the meeting of the Board, entitled "Organized crime and corruption are threats to security and development: the role of the United Nations system", with the aim of forging a strategic system-wide response to transnational crime. 20. That process has raised significantly the profile of the work of UNODC and its relevance to development and peacekeeping agencies and has produced some immediate results, such as the inclusion of organized crime in the guidelines for the preparation of common country assessments and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework by United Nations teams at the country level. 21. Working through the Chief Executives Board and its subsidiary bodies, UNODC has taken the lead in collecting information on the impact of organized crime on the work of other organizations, including relevant non-United Nations organizations, as well as on activities undertaken by them, in line with their own mandates, to fight organized crime, corruption, money-laundering, financing of terrorism and trafficking in persons and illicit commodities. 22. Based on that information, the formulation of the planned strategic response is currently under way, determining system-wide priorities, building on synergies between organizations and identifying areas for joint activities. 23. Activities implemented according to this strategic approach will be the subject of regular reporting to the Chief Executives Board. Relevant information will also be provided at regular intervals to the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. (b) Integrating drug and crime concerns into the programmes of other entities 24. Following consultations between UNODC and the World Bank, the two bodies agreed in July 2004 to work together to implement a set of action plans, covering specific geographical regions and countries (Afghanistan, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, the Caribbean and Central Asia) and thematic areas (money-laundering, the financing of terrorism, corruption, drug abuse and HIV/AIDS). The first phase of collaborative arrangements covers a wide range of topics, such as information-sharing, complementarity of work and joint activities. 25. Since July 2004, UNODC has been working with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to identify common areas of work, for example, alternative livelihood programmes -- a review process that led to the signature of a memorandum of understanding between the two bodies on 3 March 2005. 26. Similar forms of partnerships will be developed with regional financial institutions, starting with the Inter-American Development Bank and other organizations such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). UNODC is increasing its cooperation with UNDP in order to promote the United Nations Convention against Corruption, with UNDP relying increasingly on the Office's expertise and experience in that field. (c) Working with the private sector 27. At the Global Compact Leaders Summit, held in New York on 24 June 2004, the chief executive officers of corporations participating in the Global Compact Initiative of the Secretary-General adopted work against corruption as a new (tenth) principle in addition to those on human rights, labour and the environment. UNODC was designated the guardian of this principle and is working with the Global Compact Office and the business community to promote activities to combat corruption. Three broad categories of action are contemplated: (a) Engaging the private sector in promoting ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption; (b) Engaging and assisting the private sector with the support of the International Chamber of Commerce as well as federations of industry and other collective representation mechanisms in developing appropriate policy guidelines and tools for the implementation of the tenth principle; (c) Developing a set of specific actions that the private sector can and should take based on the Convention against Corruption that could help operationalize some of its priorities. C. Continuing the reform process 1. Priorities in human resource management 28. In order to focus its work in 2005 and 2006, the Human Resources Management Service has devised a priority plan around five pillars of human resource support: talent management; recruitment, selection and deployment; performance management (including performance recognition and reward); learning and knowledge management; and staff services. The aim of the plan is to contribute significantly to the operational performance of the Office by: (a) Accelerating staff selection; (b) Enhancing staff competence and motivation; (c) Reducing the administrative processing workload; (d) Reinforcing managers' accountability for their staff. 2. Review of the project cycle 29. As part of the reform process of UNODC, the Independent Evaluation Unit was established in August 2003 in the Division for Policy Analysis and Public Affairs. The Unit plans, initiates, directs, supervises and carries out thematic, programme and project evaluations in the Office and guarantees the independence of evaluation activities by separating them from programme and project line management. The Unit measures what has been achieved both positively and negatively and lays emphasis on the assessment of outcomes and impacts rather than on the delivery of outputs. It assesses the entire project cycle, taking stock of delivery mechanisms, constraints and weaknesses and identifies significant lessons from which UNODC can learn. 30. The Unit advocates the incorporation of evaluation and best practices identified therein into current and future programmes, organizational and strategic planning and policy formulation. As part of the reform process and in order to ensure that all the processes governing the entire project cycle are linked to organizational mandates and priorities, the Unit has been mandated to take responsibility for the redefinition and redesign of project cycle management in UNODC. 31. The current project cycle management review process aims at ensuring a shared understanding of all aspects of the project cycle, as well as creating a link between the organizational mandates, priorities and policies. The review consists of four phases: (a) A diagnostic phase that determines the project cycle currently being followed and assesses the strengths and weaknesses of existing guidelines on programme/project conceptualization and formulation, financing, implementation modalities and the current monitoring and evaluation systems. The review will include a skills gap analysis that will identify existing skills and those needed in view of the demands of the new project cycle management; (b) A normative phase that will produce comprehensive guidelines and procedures governing the entire project cycle and its management under the Programme and Financial Information Management System (ProFi); (c) A training phase that will ensure that all programme, project and field personnel are trained in the entire project cycle (conceptualization, formulation, financing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation). Training will be based on the training needs assessment (skills gap analysis); (d) A fourth phase will develop a computer-based training module adapted from the training needs developed during the third phase. The training module will be available online and accessible to all. A key component in the review and development of the project cycle is to ensure the full participation of all stakeholders (partner countries, donors, partner financial institutions and UNODC staff) from the early stages of strategic planning through design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. 3. Development of a strategy for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 32. With the establishment of the Strategic Planning Unit, work on the introduction of result-based management and the development of a medium- to long-term strategy for UNODC will commence in 2005 and continue into 2006. On 17 November 2004, the Executive Committee of the Office adopted a concept paper and a project proposal for the further development and implementation of result-based management and a related strategy for the Office. The strategy will be developed on the basis of the international legal instruments related to drugs and crime (the conventions), the United Nations strategic framework for the period 2006-2007 and the operational priorities of the Office, as well as other pertinent strategic documents (the resolutions of the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, crime declarations and other relevant resolutions). It was agreed that the process should be carried out in an incremental manner and through a participatory process, involving staff, senior management and Member States. IV. United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund 33. In its resolution 2003/24, the Economic and Social Council requested the Executive Director of UNODC to include in his annual report to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice information on the financial status of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. Whereas the report of the Executive Director on development, security and justice for all (E/CN.7/2004/9-E/CN.15/2004/2) addressed the policy and strategic issues pertaining to the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, more detailed information pertaining to the Fund is provided below. A. Origin and evolution of the Fund 34. The United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund was originally established in 1967, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1086 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, and was initially named the United Nations Trust Fund for Social Defence. It is administered under regulations 4.13, 4.14 and 6.2 of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations and is subject to audit by the Board of Auditors. The Fund has been included in the annual United Nations pledging conference for development activities, in line with General Assembly decision 34/440 of 17 December 1979. 35. In accordance with paragraph 44 of the statement of principles and programme of action of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme (General Assembly resolution 46/152, annex), the Fund was renamed the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund and became an integral part of the Programme. 36. Recognizing that the Fund is an invaluable source for increasing the capacity of the United Nations to respond more effectively to the needs of Member States for technical assistance in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, the General Assembly has over the years repeatedly appealed for increased contributions to the Fund. 37. Most recently, in its resolution 57/173 of 18 December 2002, entitled "Strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, in particular its technical cooperation capacity", the General Assembly reaffirmed the role of the Centre for International Crime Prevention of UNODC in providing to Member States, upon request, technical cooperation, advisory services and other forms of assistance in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, including in the areas of prevention and control of transnational organized crime and terrorism, as well as in the areas of reconstruction of national criminal justice systems; and invited all States to support, through voluntary contributions to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, the operational activities of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, including for the provision of technical assistance for the implementation of the commitments entered into at the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, including the measures outlined in the plans of action for the implementation of the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century (Assembly resolution 56/261, annex). In its resolution 58/140 of 22 December 2003, the Assembly invited all States to support the operational activities of the Programme through voluntary contributions to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. 38. In its resolution 55/25 of 15 November 2000, in which it adopted the Organized Crime Convention and two of the Protocols thereto, the General Assembly decided that, until the Conference of the Parties to the Convention decided otherwise, the account referred to in article 30 of the Convention would be operated within the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. In its resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003, in which it adopted the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the Assembly decided that, until the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention decided otherwise, the account referred to in article 62 of the Convention would also be operated within the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. B. Management of the Fund 39. In order to make the operations of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund as prompt and effective as possible, the United Nations Controller delegated authority to manage the Fund to the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna, effective 1 January 2003, and subsequently to the Director, Division for Management, effective 1 August 2004. The delegation of authority has resulted in procedures becoming progressively streamlined without weakening sound management policies. It has also enabled UNODC to gradually harmonize its policies and procedures concerning the administration of technical cooperation projects managed under the Fund of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and under the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. Currently, activities are carried out to apply the ProFi system to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. Software modules are being developed within the ProFi system to handle recording and reporting of activities funded from the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund similar to those already in use for activities financed from the Fund of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme. The next step in the data integration project is the uploading into the ProFi system of all historical and current financial information concerning projects financed from the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. Once this is completed, a testing phase will follow, with the launch of the portion of the ProFi system dealing with activities funded from the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund anticipated in the second half of 2005. C. Contributions and pledges to and financial statements of the Fund 40. Table 1 contains a consolidated list of contributions and pledges to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund from 1992 to 2004; table 2 contains a list of contributions and pledges to the Fund during 2004-2005 as at 15 March 2005. The figure shows voluntary contributions to the Fund for the period 1992-2005 as at 15 March 2005. Table 1 Consolidated list of contributions and pledges to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, 1992-2004 (United States dollars) Donor Total amount pledged General-purpose Special-purpose Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Bolivia Brazil Cambodia Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland India Israel Italy Japan Liechtenstein Madagascar Malta Mexico Monaco Morocco Mozambique Netherlands Norway Oman Panama Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Singapore Slovenia Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey United Kingdom United States of America Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Zimbabwe European Commission Subtotal Public donations Asia Crime Prevention Foundation France Telecom Mobile Lebanon Others Total Table 2 Contributions and pledges to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, for 2004-2005, as at 15 March 2005 85 211a 409 881a 110 454a 1 076 258a 1 000a 80 000a 1 000c 117 449a 546 701b 586 371a 928 974b 62 422c 6 000c 208 333a 6 574 318a 4 806a 2 000c 25 000a 972 713a 5 000a 20 000a 67 385a 606 469a 1 007 363b 2 452c 100 000a 2 501 454b 3 372 011b 4 084c a Paid. b Paid in part. c Pledged. Contributions and pledges to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, 1992-2005 * As at 15 March 2005. D. Associate experts 41. In addition to voluntary funds, several States have made in-kind contributions in support of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme. Such in-kind contributions have included the provision of junior professional officers (currently designated "associate experts"). Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, the Republic of Korea and Sweden have financed associate experts who are currently serving with the Programme. 