%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3 1 August 2005 Original: English CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES SERVING AS THE MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THE KYOTO PROTOCOL First session Montreal, 28 November to 9 December 2005 Item 3 of the provisional agenda Adoption of decisions forwarded by the Conference of the Parties to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session Compendium of draft decisions forwarded for adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session Note by the secretariat Contents Paragraphs Page Annex Text A. Draft decision -/CMP.1. Arrangements for the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session 9 Introduction Mandate Further to Article 14 of the Kyoto Protocol, and Article 8 of the Convention, this document has been prepared by the secretariat to facilitate the work of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP) at its first session. It consolidates the texts of all draft decisions that have been recommended by the Conference of the Parties (COP) for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session. Scope of the note Nineteen draft decisions have been recommended for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session, and are contained in the reports of COP 7, COP 8, COP 9 and COP 10. Of these draft decisions, four have been amended by subsequent decisions adopted by the COP. In order to provide Parties with clear and consolidated texts of the draft decisions for adoption, the secretariat has prepared this compendium. The draft decisions have been modified, as decided by the COP, and reformatting and editorial changes have been made as discussed in paragraph 9 below. The compendium is issued in several parts, but should be seen as one single, integrated document. It comprises: An overview; The complete texts of draft decisions for adoption; The consolidated versions of those draft decisions that have been modified by subsequent decisions of the COP; References to the reports of the COP where the original texts of the draft decisions, and any COP decisions containing modifications, can be found. This overview contains an outline of the compendium, an explanation of the approach to preparing the compendium and one draft decision. The addenda to this overview contain all other draft decisions. Should the need arise, additional addenda to the compendium containing any draft decision(s) forwarded by the COP at its eleventh session (COP 11) to the COP/MOP at its first session would be issued during the session. Possible action by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol The COP/MOP will be invited to adopt the draft decisions contained in this compendium. Overview Approach In the wake of the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol at COP 3, Parties at COP 4 adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (see decision 1/CP.4) in order to maintain the momentum of work and prepare for COP/MOP 1. On the basis of this decision, the COP, assisted by the subsidiary bodies, prepared a number of draft decisions concerning the Kyoto Protocol. Work on many of these issues was concluded by the COP at its seventh session, and are contained in the Marrakesh Accords; however, additional work on some issues continued at COP 8, COP 9 and COP 10, resulting in the preparation of additional draft decisions for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session, as well as modifications by the COP to previously prepared draft decisions. The draft decisions for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session are attached to decisions of the COP and contained in the reports of the COP at its seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth sessions. Nineteen draft decisions have been forwarded by the COP to the COP/MOP for consideration and adoption. Some of these draft decisions were further modified by subsequent decisions of the COP. These modifications include the development of additional sections or the revision of text in the draft decisions. For those draft decisions that were so modified, the secretariat has prepared consolidated versions with appropriate references (see paragraphs 12 to 20 below). Where work on a specific matter has not been completed, the draft text prepared so far has not been included in the compendium. This is the case for draft decisions on good practice guidance and adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol (attached to decision 21/CP.7), registry systems under Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Kyoto Protocol (see decision 24/CP.8), and the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol (see the annex to decision 24/CP.7). These issues are discussed below in paragraphs 21 to 26. The draft decisions have been reformatted in accordance with documentation and editorial standards of the United Nations and UNFCCC; for example, changes have been made to styles of headings, and to the alignment of subparagraphs and footnotes. Minor proof-reading changes have also been made to correct grammar, spelling and punctuation in the texts. Where consolidated texts have been prepared for the draft decisions that have been modified by the COP, changes have also been made to reflect the correct paragraph and footnote numbers and cross-references. No substantive textural changes have been made to the texts. Explanatory footnotes have been added to the titles of the draft decisions to indicate the original source(s) of the texts; these footnotes will be deleted in the final version of the texts, following their adoption by the COP/MOP. In the final version of the texts, after adoption by the COP/MOP, references in the texts to the various draft decisions will be changed to show the correct decision numbers of the relevant COP/MOP decisions. Contents of the compendium The compendium is published in five parts and contains the following information: Document symbol Text Attached to COP decision A -/CMP.1. Arrangements for the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session 17/CP.9 FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3/Add.1 B -/CMP.1. Land use, land-use change and forestry 11/CP.7 12/CP.7a 22/CP.9a C -/CMP.1. Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol 15/CP.10 D -/CMP.1. Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol 9/CP.7 FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3/Add.2 E -/CMP.1. Guidelines for national systems under Article 5, paragraph 1, of the Kyoto Protocol 20/CP.7 F -/CMP.1. Guidelines for the preparation of the information required under Article 7 of the Kyoto Protocol 22/CP.7 22/CP.8a 13/CP.10a G -/CMP.1. Standard electronic format for reporting Kyoto Protocol units 17/CP.10 H -/CMP.1. Guidance for review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol 23/CP.7 I -/CMP.1. Terms of service for lead reviewers 23/CP.8 J -/CMP.1. Issues relating to the implementation of Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol - 1 21/CP.9 K -/CMP.1. Issues relating to the implementation of Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol - 2 18/CP.10 FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3/Add.3 L -/CMP.1. Principles, nature and scope of the mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17 of the Kyoto Protocol 15/CP.7 M -/CMP.1. Guidelines for the implementation of Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol 16/CP.7 N -/CMP.1. Modalities, rules and guidelines for emissions trading under Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol 18/CP.7 O -/CMP.1. Modalities for the accounting of assigned amounts under Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Kyoto Protocol 19/CP.7 FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3/Add.4 P -/CMP.1. Modalities and procedures for a clean development mechanism, as defined in Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol 17/CP.7 Q -/CMP.1. Modalities and procedures for afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism in the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol 19/CP.9 R -/CMP.1. Simplified modalities and procedures for small-scale afforestation and reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism in the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol and measures to facilitate their implementation 14/CP.10 S -/CMP.1. Guidance relating to the clean development mechanism 21/CP.8, 19/CP.9 and 12/CP.10 These COP decisions modified the original draft decision forwarded to COP/MOP 1 Consolidated draft decisions Consolidated texts of some draft decisions have been prepared to assist Parties to focus their consideration of the latest versions of these draft decisions. The consolidated texts discussed below have been prepared: To include amendments to earlier texts adopted by the COP; To incorporate additional text(s) adopted by the COP; To prepare one text on guidance relating to the clean development mechanism (CDM). Amendments to the draft decision on land use, land-use change and forestry (Text B in FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3/Add.1) This draft decision is attached to decision 11/CP.7. The table in the appendix of the draft decision has been amended by two decisions of the COP: decision 12/CP.7 revised the value assigned to Russia, and decision 22/CP.9 assigns a value to Croatia. An updated version of the table, reflecting these changes, is contained in the compendium. Additional texts to be incorporated into the draft decisions on Articles 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol (Texts F and H in FCCC/CP/CMP/2005/3/Add.2) The draft decisions on Articles 7 and 8 are contained in the Marrakesh Accords. Although work on most of the text was completed during COP 7, some sections were to be completed by the COP and the subsidiary bodies. These were sections of the guidelines on the preparation and review of the information relating to Kyoto Protocol units and national registries, and expedited review for reinstatement of eligibility to use mechanisms. The draft decision on the guidelines for the preparation of the information required under Article 7 of the Kyoto Protocol is attached to decision 22/CP.7. In this decision, the COP requested the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) to elaborate further the sections on information on assigned amounts and information on national registries, which would be incorporated in the draft decision on the guidelines for the preparation of the information required under Article 7 of the Kyoto Protocol. These sections were elaborated by the SBSTA and the COP adopted the additional sections, by its decision 22/CP.8. The draft decision on guidance for review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol is attached to decision 23/CP.7. In this decision, the COP requested the SBSTA to further elaborate sections of the guidelines for review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol, for incorporation into the guidelines. These sections related to review of information on assigned amounts and national registries, and the expedited procedure for review for the reinstatement eligibility to use the mechanisms. Work on these sections was undertaken by the SBSTA, and the COP, by its decision 22/CP.8, adopted these additional sections for incorporation into the guidelines under Articles 7 and 8. In decision 22/CP.8, the COP requested the SBSTA to incorporate into the guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 any additional elements necessary to reflect decisions taken relating to definitions and modalities for afforestation and reforestation project activities. Further work was undertaken by the SBSTA on this matter and the COP adopted decision 13/CP.10 that revises and replaces the sections of the guidelines for reporting and review of information on assigned amounts and national registries adopted by decision 22/CP.8. Consolidated versions of these draft decisions and guidelines, incorporating the additional sections from decision 13/CP.10, are presented in the compendium. Consolidation of the texts on guidance relating to the clean development mechanism (Text S in FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/3/Add.4) Under decision 17/CP.7, Parties agreed to a prompt start of the CDM and the COP assumed the role of the COP/MOP until the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. Subsequently, the COP adopted three decisions containing guidance relating to the CDM - decisions 21/CP.8, 18/CP.9 and 12/CP.10. Attached to each of these decisions is a draft decision for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session, in which the COP/MOP has been invited to "confirm and give full effect" to the decisions of the COP. These draft decisions have been integrated in one text, with the preambular references being consolidated, as appropriate. The annexes that were originally attached to the COP decisions have been attached as annexes I - IV to this draft decision. For ease of reference, annex I has been consolidated. This consolidated draft decision will invite the COP/MOP to "confirm and give full effect" to decisions 21/CP.8, 18/CP.9 and 12/CP.10 and the annexes attached to these decisions. With this approach, the three draft decisions on guidance to the Executive Board of the CDM that were forwarded by the COP would be replaced with one text for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session. Texts not included in the compendium Any draft text(s) prepared on those issues where work is still to be completed have not been included in the compendium. These are the draft decision on good practice guidance and adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol; the COP decision concerning registry systems under Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Kyoto Protocol; and the text on the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol. Good practice guidance and adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol By its decision 21/CP.7, the COP forwarded to COP/MOP 1 a draft decision on good practice guidance and adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol. In this decision, the COP also requested SBSTA to complete work on the methodologies for adjustment to be incorporated into this draft decision for adoption by the COP/MOP. The SBSTA undertook work on this matter, and by its decision 20/CP.9 the COP adopted the technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments and forwarded to the COP/MOP a draft decision on issues relating to adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol. However, the SBSTA continued to work on the methodologies for adjustment for the land use, land-use change and forestry sector, which resulted in a draft decision forwarded for adoption by the COP at its eleventh session (see FCCC/SBSTA/2005/4/Add.1). This draft decision for adoption by the COP revises and replaces decision 21/CP.9, in that it contains the revised technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments and forwards a new draft decision to the COP/MOP on issues relating to adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol. After the COP at its eleventh session has considered and adopted this draft decision, a revised and consolidated version of the full text of the COP/MOP draft decision on good practice guidance under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, incorporating the additional sections recommended by the COP at its eleventh session, will be prepared and forwarded to the COP/MOP for adoption. The separate draft decision on issues relating to adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol will also be forwarded to the COP/MOP. Registry systems under Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Kyoto Protocol By its decision 24/CP.8, the COP recommended that the COP/MOP adopt the general design requirements for the technical standards for data exchange between registry systems under Article 7, paragraph 4, the Kyoto Protocol. In doing so, decision 24/CP.8 did not recommend a draft decision to COP/MOP as it was intended that the annex to that decision be included in a COP/MOP decision covering more comprehensive guidance in relation to registry systems. By its decision 16/CP.10, the COP confirmed this approach through its recommendation that the COP/MOP adopt a decision on the role and functions of the administrator of the international transaction log, in particular with respect to the data exchange standards and cooperation among administrators of registry systems. The SBSTA, at its twenty-third session, is expected to discuss this issue further and forward for adoption by the COP/MOP at its first session a draft decision that will contain the annex originally attached to decision 24/CP.8. Procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol The annex on the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol is attached to decision 24/CP.7. Work on the compliance procedures and mechanisms is expected to be completed at COP/MOP 1, with the adoption of the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance (annexed to decision 24/CP.7) in terms of Article 18 of the Kyoto Protocol. Parties will consider whether to adopt the compliance procedures and mechanisms as a decision of the COP/MOP, or as an amendment to the Protocol. Arrangements for the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session The text of one draft decision i.e., the draft decision on arrangements for the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session, is included as an annex to this document. Unlike the other draft decisions that deal with substantive issues, this draft decision covers procedural issues concerning arrangements for COP/MOP 1. Text A Draft decision -/CMP.1* Arrangements for the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Recalling Articles 13 and 15 of the Kyoto Protocol, Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its next session, to review the arrangements made for convening the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session in conjunction with the session of the Conference of the Parties and to make recommendations to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on arrangements for future sessions; Decides that when applying the draft rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties being applied, pursuant to Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol, it should be understood: That with respect to draft rules 22 - 26 the term of office of any replacement officer elected by and from among Parties to the Kyoto Protocol in accordance with Article 13, paragraph 3, and Article 15, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol would expire at the same time as that of the officer being replaced; That with respect to draft rules 17 - 21: Credentials from Parties to the Kyoto Protocol would apply for the participation of their representatives in sessions of the Conference of the Parties and of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol; A single report on credentials would be submitted for approval, following established procedures, by the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties to the Conference of the Parties and to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol; That with respect to draft rules 6 and 7: Organizations admitted as observers to previous sessions of the Conference of the Parties would be admitted to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its first session; 