%%%INVENTORIES|GREENHOUSE GASES|CLIMATE CHANGE|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|REPORTING PROCEDURES|WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2005/18/Add.2 25 October 2005 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION Twenty-third session Montreal, 28 November to 6 December 2005 Item 4 (b) of the provisional agenda National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Compilation and synthesis of initial national communications Sixth compilation and synthesis of initial national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Note by the secretariat* Addendum Inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction In accordance with Article 4, paragraph 1 (a), and Article 12, paragraph 1 (a), of the Convention, Parties provided information on their national inventory of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removal by sinks of greenhouse gases (GHGs) not controlled by the Montreal Protocol. This section of the sixth compilation and synthesis report covers inventory information and related methodological issues identified by the 122 of 148 Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) (82 per cent) which submitted their initial national communications by 1 April 2005. This represents 83 per cent of the Africa region, 77 per cent of the Asia and the Pacific region, 94 per cent of the Latin America and the Caribbean region, and 70 per cent of the "Other" region. Reporting Most Parties followed the UNFCCC guidelines, as contained into the annex to decision 10/CP.2. They also took into account relevant conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA), which encouraged Parties to apply the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/20, paras. 30 (b) and 31). All Parties estimated, at least for one year, emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), with the exception of Maldives (which did not include N2O emissions), Marshall Islands (which did not provide any data), Singapore (which did not report CH4 emissions), and Solomon Islands (which reported only CO2). Twelve Parties (10 per cent) reported for the year 1990, and 94 Parties (77 per cent) for the year 1994, and the remaining Parties (13 per cent) reported for various years. A total of 107 Parties (88 per cent) provided emission estimates for some or all GHG precursors. Fifteen Parties (12 per cent) did not provide estimates of these gases. Eighteen Parties (15 per cent) provided estimates of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and/or sulphur hexafluoride (SF6). Sixty-four Parties (52 per cent) reported emission estimates of sulphur dioxide (SO2). Estimates of emissions from international aviation and/or marine bunker fuels were reported by 69 Parties (57 per cent). Fifty-six Parties (46 per cent) provided, when appropriate, a breakdown into marine and aviation bunkers. In conformity with the IPCC Guidelines, these emissions were not included in the national total but were reported separately. Methodological issues All Parties followed the IPCC Guidelines in compiling their national GHG inventories. Most Parties (89 per cent) used the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines; some Parties (11 per cent) used the 1995 IPCC Guidelines either as sole guidance or, in very few cases, in combination with the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines. Fifty Parties (41 per cent) identified limitations of the IPCC methodologies for estimating emissions in some sectors. The major concerns were the availability, quality, and lack of disaggregated data required to apply IPCC methodologies. Some country-specific problems were also encountered: the inappropriateness of most default emission factors; the difficulty of obtaining activity data in a suitable format; differences in statistical categories and definitions; an inappropriate forest classification; the need to adjust the methodology for rice cultivation; the need to develop a methodology for estimating methane from reservoirs; the need to identify other potential sinks of CO2; difficulties in calculating emissions from waste combustion; the lack of default values for SO2 emissions from the mining and metallurgy industry; and inappropriate classification of eco-climatic zones. Most Parties applied both reference and sectoral approaches to estimate fuel combustion emissions from the energy sector. Few Parties used only the reference approach for estimating their fuel combustion emissions, and some applied only the sectoral approach. Most Parties performed the comparison between the two approaches, as recommended by the IPCC Guidelines, and some of them reported on observed differences. This comparison is a useful self-verification procedure, which greatly improves the transparency and indicates the level of confidence in the inventories by giving an indication of the level of uncertainty of the results. The usefulness of applying both approaches would be enhanced if the differences found when comparing results were also explained by all Parties. The IPCC Guidelines request Parties to make efforts to report the estimated range of uncertainty in their emission estimates, where appropriate. Almost half of the Parties (55) reported uncertainties, 11 of them providing the information quantitatively, 33 qualitatively, and 11 both qualitatively and quantitatively. The sectors covered in estimating the range of uncertainty were more often energy, agriculture and land-use change and forestry (LUCF), and in some cases the waste and industrial sectors. Activity data About half of the Parties reported that some important activity data were either lacking, or, not accessible due to inadequate data collection and/or management systems. Most Parties reported generally on this issue, but some elaborated on their needs, relating mainly to the energy and forestry sectors. These needs were often identified as a lack of institutional capacity for the collection, archiving and management of data for preparing the inventory and systematization/standardization of activity data. The source of the national activity data used for the emission estimates of the different sectors and source categories was referenced by many Parties with varying levels of detail, even though this information is not explicitly requested by the UNFCCC guidelines. Parties indicated that activity data were obtained from various national sources, such as national statistics provided by the respective ministries, municipalities and agencies, or from industrial facilities. In some instances, expert judgment was also used when data were not available. Emission factors Sixty-eight Parties reported that the default emission factors provided by the IPCC Guidelines often did not reflect national circumstances well, so their use in inventory calculations led to uncertainties in the national GHG inventory estimates. The inappropriateness of the IPCC emission factors was reported more often for the industrial processes and waste sectors, and to a lesser extent for agriculture and LUCF. Parties sometimes mentioned large uncertainties in the emission estimates as a result of the unavailability of emission factors specific to national circumstances, for example, in small island developing States (SIDS). The IPCC Guidelines encourage the development and use of local emission factors that suit national circumstances. However, most Parties used only IPCC default methods. It is only in the recently submitted national communications (over the past two years) that one can notice an increase in the Reporting tables Sixty-three Parties (52 per cent) used the IPCC summary tables and 32 Parties (26 per cent) provided information using tables with a similar format. Three Parties (2 per cent) did not use either format. Nine of the reporting Parties (7 per cent) used strictly table II of the UNFCCC guidelines. Fourteen Parties (11 per cent) adopted a modified format of that table. All but four Parties included sectors or source categories of the IPCC other than those explicitly required by UNFCCC table II. In some cases it was not clear whether certain source categories were not reported because they were not relevant for the country or had not been estimated for other reasons. By comparison, more Parties used the IPCC summary table format than used the UNFCCC table II format. Thirty-three Parties (27 per cent) provided all the necessary IPCC worksheets, which give detailed calculations of the estimation of GHG emissions as well as numerical information on aggregate emission factors and activity data for inventories using the IPCC default methods. The provision of these worksheets contributes substantially to the transparency of the inventories. Six Parties (9 per cent) provided some of the IPCC worksheets and the rest did not provide any worksheet. The degree of completeness of reporting on IPCC sectors and subsectors was high. For example, only 25 Parties (20 per cent) did not report on emissions from agricultural soils. All but eight Parties reported on CO2 emissions from the LUCF sector. Some Parties used the notation keys indicated in the IPCC Guidelines, which help report on completeness such as where a category is not applicable versus data are not available. Although the UNFCCC guidelines request inventory data for either 1990 or 1994, 24 Parties (20 per cent) provided a national GHG inventory for both years. This allowed a preliminary analysis to be made of the trends of GHG emissions in these countries. Two Parties (Azerbaijan, Indonesia) provided detailed annual GHG inventories for the period 1990 to 1994; three (Republic of Moldova, Tajikistan, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) for the period 1990 to 1998; and two (Kyrgyzstan, Malta) for the period 1990 to 2000. Other reporting issues were also noted during the process of compiling the inventory information. For example, different emission estimates for the same sector or source categories were indicated in different places or tables in the communication. Also, some Parties changed the format of the IPCC summary tables, or used erroneous global warming potentials (GWPs). Overview of the greenhouse gas data submitted General overview As 1994 is the year for which national GHG inventory data are most commonly reported on by Parties, table 2 summarizes inventory data in terms of aggregate emissions and removals provided for the year 1994 or the closest year reported. In accordance with these guidelines, the analysis provided in this section is based on 1994 inventory data, whenever possible. When needed, estimates provided by Parties have been converted into CO2 equivalent estimates using 1995 IPCC GWPs in order to facilitate comparison of inventory results (see figure 1). Such a presentation shows the relative contribution of the different GHGs and the different sectors to a Party's total GHG emissions. It should be noted that 87 Parties (71 per cent) used the GWPs to estimate the relative contribution of each individual GHG or sector to their aggregate GHG emissions, although this is not required by the UNFCCC guidelines. Emissions by sources and removals by sinks Most reporting Parties are a net source of GHG emissions (see table 2). However, 29 Parties (24 per cent) report net GHG sinks due to the relatively large CO2 removals in the LUCF sector when compared to emissions from all the other sectors. Thirty-six Parties (30 per cent) showed that removals of CO2 by sinks in LUCF exceeded total CO2 emissions. Aggregate greenhouse gas emissions expressed in terms of CO2 equivalent In terms of aggregate total GHG emissions, expressed as CO2 equivalent, excluding the LUCF sector, CO2 was the primary GHG for more than half of the Parties (55 per cent). For one third of them CH4 was the most important contributor, and for 14 Parties (12 per cent) N2O was the highest contributor. Figure 1. Total greenhouse gas emissions, excluding LUCF, for the year 1994 or the closest year reported CO2 equivalent (see figure 1 above). CO2 is the primary gas emitted, with a total of 7.4 billion tonnes (63 per cent), followed by CH4, with 3 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent (26 per cent), and N2O with 1.3 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent (11 per cent). The level of emissions varied widely among reporting Parties. Aggregate GHG emissions, excluding LUCF, range from 4.7 to 4,057,306 CO2 equivalent, as can be seen from table 2. This represents a scale from 1 to 863,257. Nineteen Parties reported emissions lower than 1 million tonne CO2 equivalent; in contrast, for 22 Parties the emissions were higher than 100 million tonnes CO2 equivalent (see table 1). Table 1. Total aggregate emissions and removals of CO2, CH4 and N2O in CO2 equivalent excluding and including land-use change and forestry (Gg) Party Total (without LUCF) Total (with LUCF) AFRICA Algeria Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Congo Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Eritrea Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Kenya Lesotho Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Namibia Niger Nigeria Senegal Seychelles South Africa Sudan Swaziland Togo Tunisia Uganda United Republic of Tanzania Zambia Zimbabwe Total Africa ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Bangladesh Bhutan Cambodia China Cook Islands Democratic People's Republic of Korea India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Israel Jordan Kazakhstan Kiribati Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Marshall Islands Micronesia (Federated States of) Mongolia Nauru Nepal Niue Pakistan Palau Papua New Guinea Philippines Samoa Singapore Solomon Islands Sri Lanka Tajikistan Thailand Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uzbekistan Vanuatu Viet Nam Yemen Total Asia and the Pacific LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago Uruguay Total Latin America and the Caribbean OTHER Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Georgia Malta Republic of Moldova The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Total Other Total 122 non-Annex I Parties Regional greenhouse gas profiles There are differences in the regional distribution of the aggregate GHG emissions resulting mainly from the national circumstances prevailing within each the region. For the Africa region, the majority of Parties (56 per cent) reported CH4 as being the highest contributor; for the three remaining regions, CO2 is the major contributor. The Asia and the Pacific region has the highest aggregate GHG emissions (7.9 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean (2 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), Africa (1.6 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), and Other (0.1 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent) (see figure 2 and table 2). In the Asia and the Pacific region, the three largest emitters are China (51 per cent), India (15 per cent) and the Islamic Republic of Iran (5 per cent). In the Latin America and the Caribbean region, they are Brazil (32 per cent), Mexico (19 per cent) and Argentina (13 per cent). In the Africa region, they are South Africa (24 per cent), Nigeria (15 per cent) and Cameroon (10 per cent). For the "Other" region, Azerbaijan is the largest emitter (45 per cent). For the Latin America and the Caribbean region, as outlined in figure 2, Brazil's share of emissions appears relatively small because the emissions from the LUCF sector are not accounted for. Brazil accounts for 88 per cent of the total aggregate emissions from the region for the LUCF sector. The energy sector was the largest source of GHG emissions for 70 Parties, whereas for 45 Parties the agriculture sector was largest and for six the waste sector was largest. Agriculture was the second largest emitter for most Parties, followed by the industrial processes sector, and then the waste sector. Removals by LUCF in most Parties offset GHG emissions from this same sector (see table 2). 2 equivalent) for the year 1994 or the closest year reported The energy sector was the primary source of emissions for all regions, except for the Latin America and the Caribbean region, where the agriculture sector came first (see figure 3). The agriculture sector is the second largest source of emissions for all regions, with the exception of the Latin America and the Caribbean region, where the energy sector is second largest. The only region for which the industrial processes sector accounts for a large amount of emissions is the Asia and the Pacific (0.5 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), although in terms of relative share this sector represents only 6.4 per cent of the total emissions from the region, excluding the LUCF sector. Figure 3. Aggregate GHG emissions and removals by sector by region (Gg CO2 equivalent) The LUCF sector is a net GHG sink for the Africa region (411 million tonnes CO2 equivalent), the Asia and the Pacific region (316 million tonnes CO2 equivalent), and the Other region (5 million tonnes CO2 equivalent). For the Latin America and the Caribbean region, LUCF is a net source of emissions (928 million tonnes CO2 equivalent). Although Parties report high uncertainty in the LUCF sector data, in the cross-regional aggregate there appears to be only a small difference (1.7 per cent) between the total aggregated emissions without LUCF (11.7 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent) and with LUCF (11.9 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent). Figure 4. Per capita GHG emissions (tonnes CO2 equivalent (excluding LUCF)) The per capita emissions (expressed in tonnes CO2 equivalent, excluding LUCF) average 2.8 tonnes for 122 non-Annex I Parties. The Africa region has the lowest average per capita emission with 2.4 tonnes, while South Africa has 9.1 tonnes. The Asia and the Pacific region has an average per capita emission of 2.6 tonnes, with China at 3.3 and India at 1.3 tonnes. The Latin America and the Caribbean region has 4.6 tonnes average per capita emission. Brazil has 4.1 tonnes, which is lower than the average for the region, because the LUCF sector is not taken into account and most of Brazil's emissions come from that sector. The Other region has the highest average per capita emission, at 5.1 tonnes; however, this covers only seven Parties with relatively small populations. Financial and technical needs and constraints Most Parties reported difficulties in preparing their GHG inventories, and indicated that their technical and institutional capacities were inadequate to meet their reporting obligations under the Convention for both the preparation and updating of national GHG inventories. Most of the reporting Parties identified the lack of activity data as a major constraint for the estimation of emissions of some source categories in at least one sector, which was usually energy or LUCF, and to a lesser extent agriculture, industrial processes and waste. Regarding energy use, most Parties reported broadly or specifically on the lack of activity data. The most common fields specified were household biomass consumption, vehicles and equipment efficiency in the transport and industrial subsectors, and international bunker fuels. Some Parties reported difficulties in obtaining activity data in the time series needed for the LUCF sector, as requested by the IPCC methodology. Data on land use and forest cover were often outdated or not in a suitable format. In the industrial processes sector, some Parties faced problems in collecting national activity data, particularly from the private sector. Some Parties reported that the needed data were sometimes considered to be confidential, whereas others indicated problems relating to the harmonization of the IPCC source categories with those used locally. Most Parties found the IPCC default emission factors for several source categories to be inappropriate, and they expressed a need for the development of appropriate emission factors for the respective sectors with a view to improving estimates of national GHG emissions. Parties emphasized, for example, limitations relating to the applicability of the IPCC non-CO2 emission factors and the need to study the composition of local fuel types, the development of specific emission factors for fugitive gases from oil fields, agricultural soils, and processes relating to the production of cement. Supporting continuity in the inventory preparation process Most Parties expressed their financial and technological needs in order to ensure the continuous collection and archiving of data with a view to improving future inventories. This warranted the establishment and maintenance of stable national institutions and inventory teams. The improvement of infrastructure coupled with more efficient equipment and better facilities would permit the creation and/or strengthening of statistical systems for managing basic information relating to GHG emissions on an ongoing basis. Parties also expressed the need to establish a reliable and effective GHG inventory database system. Financial and technical assistance is also needed for improving data quality (availability, accuracy and reliability) in various key socio-economic sectors, particularly in the LUCF sector. For many Parties, data are either lacking or highly uncertain. Specific technical needs relate to establishing systematic mechanisms to collect data, undertaking field studies and validation of emission factors, carrying out further surveys in order to reduce uncertainties in activity data, improving the use of methodologies to determine forest area, improving institutional capacity to collect forest data, and improving and expanding carbon sequestration studies. Parties also expressed the need to improve the availability and reliability of data through active cooperation with relevant government departments and agencies, industry, non-governmental organizations and other institutions that provide, collect and maintain relevant data. Access to adequate training was also considered to be an important element in enhancing local technical capacity and expertise in data collection, management and dissemination. Institutional requirements, research needs and the implementation capacity Parties also referred to the need to strengthen the capacity of institutions involved in the preparation of the GHG inventory, including the training of personnel. Some Parties requested assistance to expand the scope of their original inventories by including other gases. Some Parties stressed the need to develop a comprehensive energy balance to help compute GHG emissions in the energy sector on a continuous basis, and a few pointed out the need to link the energy balance with GHG emissions methodologies such that data changes in the energy balance are automatically reflected in the GHG emissions values. Some Parties stressed the lack of data on household consumption of biomass fuels, and requested funds to conduct and update, on a more sustainable basis, studies to gather consumption data for conventional and non-conventional fuels. Some Parties outlined technological and financial difficulties encountered in collecting data in the transport sector for accurate estimates of vehicular emissions and in measuring and applying default values for data sets. Several Parties indicated the need to undertake research studies on savannah burning, as well as the need to generate data on crop residues to help estimate emissions from burning of agricultural residues. Several Parties expressed a need for the training of personnel in the compilation and analysis of GHG inventories as well as in order to keep abreast of refinements to the IPCC methodologies. More generally, some Parties expressed the need for support for research on emission factors and for obtaining relevant activity data, and the need for GHG inventory workshops to help improve the expertise of national experts was also mentioned. Summary Parties have complied with Article 4, paragraph 1 (a), and Article 12, paragraph 1 (a), of the Convention, followed the UNFCCC guidelines on national communications (decision 10/CP.2), and sometimes provided more information than required. All but four Parties estimated, at least for one year, emissions of CO2, CH4 and N2O. A total of 107 Parties (88 per cent) provided emission estimates for some or all GHG precursors. Eighteen Parties (15 per cent) provided estimates of HFCs, PFCs and/or SF6. Sixty-four Parties (52 per cent) reported emission estimates of SO2. The aggregate total GHG emissions, excluding the LUCF sector, reported by 122 non-Annex I Parties for the year 1994 or the closest year reported, are 11.7 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent. CO2 is the primary gas emitted, with a total of 7.4 billion tonnes (63 per cent), followed by CH4, with 3 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent (26 per cent), and N2O with 1.3 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent (11 per cent). The level of emissions varied widely among reporting Parties. Aggregate GHG emissions expressed in CO2 equivalent, excluding LUCF, range from 4.7 to 4,057,306 Gg, this represents a scale from 1 to 863,257. Nineteen Parties reported emissions lower than 1 million tonne CO2 equivalent; in contrast, for 22 Parties the emissions were higher than 100 million tonnes CO2 equivalent. There are differences in the regional distribution of the aggregate GHG emissions resulting mainly from the national circumstances prevailing within each the region. For the Africa region, the majority of Parties (56 per cent) reported CH4 as being the highest contributor; for the three remaining regions, CO2 is the major contributor. The Asia and the Pacific region has the highest aggregate GHG emissions (7.9 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean region (2 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), Africa (1.6 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent), and Other (0.1 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent). The energy sector was the largest source of GHG emissions for 70 Parties, whereas for 45 Parties it was the agriculture sector, and for six the waste sector. Agriculture was the second largest emitter for most Parties, followed by the industrial processes sector, and then the waste sector. Removals by LUCF in most Parties offset GHG emissions from this same sector. The LUCF sector is a net GHG sink for the Africa, Asia and the Pacific and Other regions. For the Latin America and the Caribbean region, LUCF is a net source of emissions. Although Parties report high uncertainty in the LUCF sector data, in the cross-regional aggregate there appears to be only a small difference (1.7 per cent) between the total aggregated emissions without LUCF (11.7 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent) and with LUCF (11.9 billion tonnes CO2 equivalent). The per capita emissions (expressed in tonnes CO2 equivalent, excluding LUCF) are an average of 2.8 tonnes for 122 non-Annex I Parties. The Africa region has the lowest average per capita emission with 2.4 tonnes. The Asia and the Pacific region has an average per capita emission of 2.6 tonnes, the Latin America and the Caribbean region has 4.6 tonnes, and the Other region has the highest average per capita emission, with 5.1 tonnes. The above-mentioned 122 initial national communications have been submitted in accordance with the UNFCCC guidelines as contained in decision 10/CP.2, but new guidelines were adopted at COP 8 (decision 17/CP.8). This represents another challenge for non-Annex I Parties. To help Parties meet this challenge, the secretariat has issued a "user manual" to provide for an effective and efficient use of the UNFCCC guidelines as contained in the annex to decision 17/CP.8. Table 2. Aggregate emissions and removals of CO2, CH4 and N2O in CO2 equivalent by major source/sink category, including and excluding land-use change and forestry (Gg and percentages of total by Party) Year Energy Industrial processes Agriculture Waste LUFC Percentage of LUCF in total GHG Gg Central African Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo United Republic of Tanzania LUCF Democratic People's Republic of Korea Iran (Islamic Republic of) Lao People's Democratic Republic Micronesia (Federated States of) Total 122 non - Annex I Parties Table 3. Emissions (excluding LUCF) for three gases CO2 CH4 N2O 