%%%PROGRAMME BUDGETING|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|COST ANALYSIS|SUPPORT COSTS|FINANCING|

UNITED NATIONS Convention to Combat Desertification Distr. ICCD/COP(7)/2/Add.2 5 August 2005 Original: ENGLISH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES Seventh session Nairobi, Kenya, 17 - 28 October 2005 Item 6 (a) of the provisional agenda PROGRAMME AND BUDGET Addendum Programme and budget for the biennium 2006-2007 Supplementary Fund Note by the secretariat EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The present document provides information on the planned activities and related estimated funding requirements under the Supplementary Fund for consideration of by the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its seventh session. Under the Supplementary Fund, funding is sought for those activities in the secretariat's work programme for the next biennium for which sufficient funding would not be available under the core budget. GE.05-62909 Paragraphs Page I. INTRODUCTION 1 - 3 3 II. SUPPLEMENTARY FUND 4 - 51 3 A. Background information 4 - 6 3 B. Substantive support to the Conference of the Parties, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues 7 - 10 4 C. Science and technology 11 - 22 5 D. Facilitation of implementation 23 - 47 9 E. External relations and public information 48 - 51 14 III. CONCLUSIONS 52 17 1. By its decision 2/COP.1, the COP, at its first session, adopted the Ffinancial Rrules of the COP, its subsidiary bodies and the Convention Ssecretariat (ICCD/COP(1)/11/Add.1). In accordance with paragraphs 9 and 10 of the financial rules, the Secretary-General of the United Nations established the Supplementary Fund. The present document seeks to provides information on the planned activities and related estimated funding requirements under these Fundsthis Fund. 2. Supplementary funding is sought for those activities in the secretariat's work programme for the next biennium for which sufficient funding would not be available under the core budget. The work programme is described in document ICCD/COP(7)/2/Add.1. 3. Accordingly, supplementary funding is sought for, inter alia, tasks relating to policy advice for implementation, including promotion of the synergistic implementation of the Convention and assistance in subregional and regional collaboration and coordination; preparation of the next review of the implementation of the UNCCDConvention, including the preparation of national reports in regions other than Africa; support to the coordination and organization of activities to celebrate and follow up to the 2006 International Year of Deserts and Desertification (IYDD); collaboration among non-governmental organiszations; knowledge management, including science and technology and provision of public information. II. SUPPLEMENTARY FUND A. Background information 4. The Parties may note that the costs presented for activities under the Supplementary Fund are preliminary estimates on the basis of expenditures of earlier corresponding activities. The actual supplementary funding requirements for each activity depend on a variety of factors, such as possible cost-sharing arrangements with partners, flight and subsistence rates at the time of a meeting to be organized, or consultancy fees vis-à-vis the level of expertise required. Consequently, the supplementary funding requirements presented in this document are only indicative. Table 1 below provides an overview of the estimated requirements by programme, but the requirements are not broken down by object of expenditure, or, in many cases by year of expenditure, due to the likelihood of substantive changes. More detailed estimates will be provided through separate documentation to be submitted to donors and other partners involved in the supported concerned activities during the biennium. 5. With regard to the relationship between the supplementary and core-funded activities, the Parties may also note that in some cases, supplementary funding will be needed to cover the major share of the activity in concernquestion. Such is the case for one of the major tasks of the secretariat, namely support to the process of the review of the implementation of the Convention, including assistance in the preparation of national reports. The related supplementary funding needs include support to the technical preparation of the report in the country Parties in concernconcerned, consultancy services to facilitate the compilation and analysis of the reports, as well asand the travel and logistical costs relating to the regional and global review meetings. Most often, however, supplementary funding is essential to complement the resources drawn from the core budget, so as to successfully complete the tasks set by the COP. In such cases, the core budget resources, particularly those relating to personnel costs, are used to undertake or supervise analytical work, contacts with relevant partners or collection and distribution of information. Other related functions, such as the organization of meetings, printing of reports and publications or use of specific external expertise, require supplementary funding. D Table 1. Summary of Supplementary Fund estimated resource requirements by programme (Thousands of US dollars) Programme/expenditure items Total Programmes Substantive support to the COP, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues Science and technology Facilitation of implementation External relations and public information Subtotal programmes Overhead Total estimated resource requirements 6. Activities under the Supplementary Fund will be carried out by the programmes for substantive support to the COP, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues, science and technology, facilitation of implementation and external relations and public information. The activities, together with estimated costs, are described hereunder for consideration by the COP. B. Substantive support to the Conference of the Parties, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues 7. In line with its objectives and activities presented in document ICCD/COP/(7)/2/Add.1, the programme for substantive support to the COP, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues has the following supplementary funding needs for the biennium 2006-2007. Capacity building relating to GEF project proposals 8. Following the decision by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Assembly to designate land degradation as a new focal area of the GEF and the consequent designation of the GEF as a financial mechanism of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the affected developing country Parties UNCCD have requested support in becoming acquainted with the operational modalities of the GEF in the light of the specific requirements of the UNCCD process. For this purpose, the following activities will be carried out in the course of the biennium 2006 - 2007: (a) setting up of short-term consultative forums focusing on UNCCD national focal points/national coordinating bodies; (b) preparingation and disseminatingion of information material on the enabling activities and role of focal points, GEF Operational Programme 15 and GEF funding procedures and options; (c) liaisingon with GEF, its Iimplementation mplementing and Executing Agencies ,and participation in steering committees and contributingon to building the capacity of national coordinating bodies, and firming up the expected role of the different stakeholders. US$D 9. Desertification Information System to support national action programmes in the Mediterranean (DISMED): The system seeks to improve the capacity of national administrations of Mediterranean countries to effectively put in place effectively measures and policies to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought. The DISMED system will be further developed in the course of 2006. Other expenditures during the biennium will involve training and equipment to maintain and update the DISMED. Further development of the DISMED Training, equipment and maintenance of the DISMED Total -- DISMED 10. In line, among other, with the recommendation of the Expert Group on the Joint Work Programme on the UNCCD and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), support is sought to facilitate the preparation of project proposals for submission to the GEF and other potential sources. With this support, eight training courses will be organized during the biennium. These courses will be held in collaboration with competent institutions on a cost-sharing basis. Funding requirements for one course is estimated at US$D 60,000, including remuneration of trainers. Eight training courses of on project preparation Total -- Substantive support to the COP, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues C. Science and technology 11. It should be noted that several activities under the programme on science and technology, particularly those relating to synergies, will be carried out with strong close involvement of the staff under the programme on substantive support to the Conference of the Parties, its subsidiary bodies, legal advice and global issues. 12. In line with its objectives and activities presented in document ICCD/COP(7)/2/Add.1, the programme for science and technology has the following supplementary funding needs for the biennium 2006 - 2007. Support to the work of the Committee on Science and Technology (CST) Group of Experts 13. The Group of Experts met in Beijing, China, in October 2004 with the aim to of reviewing in depth the activities carried out by its members. The outcomes of the Beijing meeting included seven proposals to implement the main aspects of the two-year work plan, as presented below. Partial funding for some of the projects has been secured already, and while the remaining projects are expected to be launched in the course of the biennium. Establishing the Ccommunication Sstrategy of the CST Strategic framework to Eenhance Ssynergy Aapproaches Among between the Rio conventions Study to Ddevelop an Iintegrative Aassessment Mmethodology for Ppoverty and Lland Ddegradation Study on biophysical, Ssocio-economic, and Ccultural Kknowledge and Aactivities to Ccombat Ddesertification taking into account the perceived gaps between them Effective methodologies for the assessment of desertification at the global, regional, national and local levels , so that the Convention can be implemented in consultation and interaction with other related ongoing efforts (for example, the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA) and Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands (LADA) Evaluation of the Sstate of the Aart of Ccommon Bbenchmark and Iindicator Ssystems for the Mmonitoring and Aassessment of Ddesertification Evaluation and Rrecommendation of Gguidelines for both Sshort-term and Llong-term Eearly Wwarning Ssystems Total -- Support to the work of the CST Group of Experts Support to the collection and dissemination of information on the priority themes of the CST 14. Traditional knowledge, benchmarks and indicators and early warning systems: In order to develop approaches and practices under these mentioned three priority themes of the CST, the Parties, as well as relevant organizations and institutions, have been invited by the COP to, depending on the theme, carry out pilot studies and tests and provide case studies and information on lessons learned. Parties, relevant international and regional organizations, and interested public and private entities have been invited to facilitate and contribute scientifically, technically and financially to the initiatives undertaken by developing country Parties in this context. During the biennium 2006 - 2007, support will be provided to initiatives under the three themes. Traditional knowledge Benchmarks and indicators Early warning systems Total -- Traditional knowledge, benchmarks and indicators and early warning systems 15. International Research Centre on Traditional Knowledge: An agreement between the Italian Ministry of the Environment and the secretariat was signed in 2001, aiming at setting up a research centre in Matera, Italy. Within During the next biennium, the operationaliszation of the research centre will be undertaken to enable it to support the work on traditional knowledge. The main task of the cCentre is to study and document traditional and local knowledge and technologies to combat desertification. Operationaliszation of the cCentre 16. Mediterranean Training Programme for the harmonization of early warning systems and operational instruments for monitoring climate change and desertification (MTP): The project aims at enhancing the capacity of national coordinating bodies of Mediterranean countries effectively to plan policies and measures to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought by reinforcing their capabilities to make use of early warning systems and other operational instruments to monitor climate variation and desertification. The project is being launched in cooperation with the National Meteorological Service of Italy, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the European Agency for Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) and the network of WMO Regional Meteorological Training Centres (RMTC), in particular the centres in Algeria and Israel. US$ Training seminars Feedback Workshop Inter-regional Network Total - Mediterranean Training Programme 17. Know-how and technology transfer: With the aim to of enhancinge the knowledge base for know-how and technology transfer for the implementation of the UNCCD, support will be provided to related pilot studies and collection of information. Document ICCD/COP(7)/CST/INF.2 contains more information on CST activities in the field of know-how and technology transfer. Know-how and technology transfer Support to the UNCCD Fellowship Programme 18. It is proposed that Tthe UNCCD Fellowship Programme is proposed to be established during the biennium 2006 - 2007, in line with the fellowship programmes of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the CBD. The UNCCD Fellowship Programme will provide training for stakeholders working in the arid and semi-arid areas. The training programme will be composed of short-term courses, participation in relevant international conferences, study tours related to the Convention and preparation of technical documents. The details of the UNCCD Fellowship Programme are contained in document ICCD/COP(7)/CST/INF.1. Launching of the Fellowship Programme 19. In order to operationalisze the UNCCD-CBD Joint Work Programme on the biodiversity of dry and sub-humid lands, a joint UNCCD-CBD workshop will be organized. The workshop will aim to strengthen the capacity of UNCCD and CBD focal points to implement the two Conventions in a synergistic manner through exchanging experiences and interactive training modules focusing on the main aspects of the Joint Work Programme. Organiszation of a joint UNCCD-CBD workshop 20. The secretariat is called for upon to participate in scientific events and steering committees in the context of related international initiatives. More specifically, collaboration to strengthen synergies among between the Rio conventions through the Joint Liaison Group of the three convention secretariats will continue during the biennium. Selected themes identified by the Group will be further considered and developed towards cooperation programmes, with the involvement of representatives of Parties to the three conventions. Scientific exchanges and development of synergies in the context of the Joint Liaison Group 21. The Viterbo Workshop on Forests and Forests Ecosystems will be followed up through identifying elements for a joint approach in the forestry sector, and developing tools for decision makers and stakeholders of the three Rio cconventions that could spell out the enabling steps towards the elaboration of appropriate decisions and programmes in this sector. The Group of Experts project on the development of a strategic framework to enhance synergy approaches is closely linked with the follow-up actions to the Viterbo workshop. Follow-up to the Viterbo workshop Support to the networking of relevant institutions 22. By its decision 13/COP.5, the COP requested the secretariat to enter into the necessary contractual arrangements with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) for the implementation of Phase 2 of the survey and evaluation of existing networks, institutions, agencies and bodies (ICCD/COP(5)/11/Add.1). Document ICCD/COP(7)/CST/10 contains the details of this project. Survey and evaluation of pPhase 2 Total -- Science and technology 23. In line with its objectives and activities presented in document ICCD/COP(7)/2/Add.1, the programme for facilitation of implementation has the following supplementary funding needs for the biennium 2006 - 2007. Support to reporting in regions other than Africa 24. As perIn accordance with decision 1/COP.5, the affected country Parties from regions other than Africa are requested to provide information on the activities carried out in the implementation of the Convention for the fifth session of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC. 5) and and the eighth session of the COP (COP 8). In order to facilitate the reporting process, small grants will be provided to all eligible affected Asian, Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) and European country Parties. The utiliszation of the grant would include the recruitment of expertise to collect and compile information needed for the report, the mobilization of the stakeholders' mobilization and the organiszation of national level consultations to validate the report. 25. Also the preparation of subregional reports will be supported in Latin America and the Caribbean. Grants to 44 Asian country Parties Grants to 32 LAC country Parties Grants to 12 European country Parties Support to subregional reports in LAC Total -- Subregional reports Preparations for the review of the implementation of the Convention 26. In order to ensure timely and efficient compilation of the reports received from Parties and other relevant actors, external expertise will be sought to assist the programme. 27. Furthermore, regional review meetings will be organiszed prior to CRIC. 5, with the aimin order to consider regional trends as emerging from the reports, and consolidate regional responses to challenges in the implementation of the UNCCD. 28. In Africa, a meeting of the enlarged Bureau of the African Group will be organiszed in order to support African country Parties' preparations for CRIC. 5. Consultancies Regional review meetings in Asia Regional review meetings in LAC Regional review meetings in the Northern Mediterranean and Central and Eastern Europe Enlarged Bureau meeting of the African Group Total -- Preparations for the review of the implementation of the UNCCD Provision of assistance to Parties in meeting their obligations under the Convention 29. The Declaration on the commitments to enhance the implementation of the obligations of the Convention (decision 8/COP.4) requested all affected Parties to finalize their national action programmes (NAPs) by the end of 2005 (ICCD/COP(4)/11/Add.1). It is expected that in some affected country Parties, particularly in those that acceded to the UNCCD recently, the completion of the NAP, including the organiszation of the national validation forum, will be delayed until the biennium 2006 - 2007. Furthermore, several affected countries that have finalized their NAPs at an early phase of the Convention process have requested support to review and update their programmes in the light of the requirements of the UNCCD process, with the aimin order to streamline the NAP with other national strategies and programmes, transform the priority areas of the NAP into concrete projects and adjust the NAP to better respond to current conditions. Finaliszation and/or update of the NAPs in African country Parties Finalization and/or update of the NAPs in Asian country Parties Finalization and/or update of the NAPs in LAC country Parties Finalization and/or update of the NAPs in Central and Eastern European country Parties Total -- NAPs 30. In Africa, support will be provided also for the updatinge of country profiles and the use of benchmarks and indicators for NAP implementation, with the aim to of enhancinge the monitoring and assessment of the implementation of the Convention, taking into account the recommendations of CRIC 3. Furthermore, in-depth reviews on the implementation of the NAPs will be conducted with five African country Parties, with taking the latest national report as the starting point. Monitoring and assessment of NAP implementation in Africa 31. In LAC and Central and Eastern Europe, affected country Parties will be assisted in raising awareness on the Convention and strengthening the participatory approach in NAP implementation through the preparation of publications, translation of existing material and other activities. Awareness raising activities in LAC Awareness raising activities in Central and Eastern Europe Total -- Awareness raising 32. In LAC, support will be provided also for facilitating the mainstreaming of NAPs in poverty reduction in the context of the NAPsstrategies. Mainstreaming NAPs in Ppoverty reduction strategies in LAC Promotion of coordination and cooperation at the subregional level 33. Subregional action programmes have been finaliszed in four subregions of Africa, four subregions of Asia and two subregions of LAC. During the biennium 2006 - 2007, the subregional cooperation will continue through the organization of thematic workshops and consultative meetings. Five thematic workshops are foreseen to be organized in Africa. 34. In Asia, activities under the existing subregional action programmes and the development of the subregional action programmes in North-East Asia and Pacific will continue during the biennium. Furthermore, the follow-up to the Abu Dhabi Initiative, launched at the Asian regional meeting of 2003, will take place through subregional consultations. Three consultative meetings will be organized in this context during the biennium. 35. In Latin America and the Caribbean, activities under the existing subregional action programmes and the development of the subregional action programmes in Gran Chaco and Puna Americana will continue during the biennium. 36. In south-eastern Europe, the countries of the subregion have initiated the establishment of a drought management centre, in collaboration with relevant scientific institutions and United Nations specialized agencies. A planning meeting on the establishment of the centre will be held in the course of 2006. Thematic workshops in Africa Further development of subregional action programmes in Asia Consultative meetings for the Abu Dhabi Initiative in Asia Further development of subregional action programmes in LAC Workshop on the south-eastern European centre for drought management Total -- Promotion of coordination and cooperation at the subregional level 37. Support to regional preparations for COP 8: With the aimIn order to support the affected country Parties to preparein preparing for COP 8 and promote concrete progress in the implementation of the Convention at the regional level, regional meetings preparatory to COP 8 will be organized in 2007 in Africa, Asia, LAC, the Northern Mediterranean and Central and Eastern Europe. Regional meeting in Africa Regional meeting in Asia Regional meeting in LAC Regional meeting in Northern Mediterranean Regional meeting in Central and Eastern Europe Total -- Regional meetings 38. Promotion of regional thematic programme networks (TPNs): All TPNs on the six priority areas of the regional action programmes have been launched in Africa and Asia, respectively. The work under the established TPNs continues through the further development of the thematic focus and knowledge base, as well asand through the launching of pilot initiatives. However, catalytical support is critically needed to maintain the momentum of these initiatives. 39. In LAC, four out of six TPNs have been launched, regional collaboration for the further development of these networks will continue during the biennium. The pPreparations for the remaining two networks are well under way, and the respective launching meetings will be organiszed in 2006. 40. In Central and Eastern Europe, the identification of priority areas for regional cooperation has been completed. The establishment of three regional thematic networks and two training centres in order to operationalisze the priority areas will be considered through consultations and launching meetings involving the countries of the region. 41. A thematic conference on the role of organic agriculture and soil fertility in the framework of the implementation of the UNCCD in Europe is planned to be organised infor 2006. Further development of the thematic programme networks in Africa in Asia in LAC Operationalization of regional priority thematic areas in Central and Eastern Europe Conference on organic agriculture in Europe Total -- Thematic programme networks 42. Meeting on the Africa-LAC platform of cooperation: Support to the Africa-LAC platform of collaboration will continue through the process of technical and political awareness raising, and collaboration among countries from the two regions in implementing the three axes of the platform strategy (capacity building, policy improvement and implementation of concrete actions). These axes were developed in the course of the previous forums held in Brazil in 1998, Mali in 2000, Venezuela in 2002 and Tunisia in 2004). The next platform meeting will be organized in 2006 in cooperation with the Government of the Dominican Republic. Africa-LAC platform meeting Promotion of synergies 43. Local, national and subregional level synergy workshops will be organized in Africa, Asia, LAC and Central and Eastern Europe, with the aim to of facilitatinge synergistic implementation of the NAP and promotinge the potential of sustainable land management for mitigation and adaptation to climate change and biodiversity protection. Synergy workshops in Africa Synergy workshops in Asia Synergy workshops in LAC Synergy workshops in Central and Eastern Europe Total -- Promotion of synergies Facilitation of partnership building 44. In order to promote partnership building for the implementation of the UNCCD, support will be provided to the preparations for and organiszation of national consultative forums in Africa, Asia, LAC and Central and Eastern Europe, with the aim to of strengthening the mainstreaming of NAPs into other national development frameworks and to promote their relevance for poverty reduction. 45. In Africa, linkages between national, subregional and regional action programmes and relevant regional and global initiatives and processes, such as TerrAfrica, The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and United Nations Development Programme/GEF projects for least developed countries and small island developing sStates will be sought. Methods for this activity will include organizsation of and participation in related consultations. In Asia, linkages will be established between the programming tools of the Convention and the resource mobilization packages for natural resources management promoted by multilateral and bilateral donors. 46. In LAC, subregional consultations will be organized among the countries of the Caribbean and Mesoamerica. Furthermore, a regional level capacity-building programme for training in resource mobilization will be launched. 47. Activities to facilitate partnership building will be carried out in close collaboration with the institutions of the GEF family and the Global Mechanism. Support to national consultative forums in Africa Support to national consultative forums in Asia Support to national consultative forums in LAC Support to national consultative forums in Central and Eastern Europe Promotion on of linkages between NAPs, SRAPs and RAPs and relevant regional and global processes in Africa Support to subregional and regional activities for partnership building in LAC Total -- Facilitation of partnership building Grand total -- Facilitation of implementation of the UNCCD E. External relations and public information 48. In line with its objectives and activities presented in document ICCD/COP(7)/2/Add.1, the programme for external relations and public information has the following supplementary funding needs for the biennium 2006 - 2007. Support to the coordination and organization of activities relating to the IYDD 49. While tThe majority of activities in the field of external relations and public information during the biennium 2006 - 2007 are linked to the IYDD. a number of specific initiatives are foreseen to celebrate the Year: Support to the coordination of the IYDD: A team made up of interns, consultants and Ssecretariat staff would assist the Executive Secretary, as designated focal point, in the preparation, celebration and follow-up of the activities foreseen for the commemoration of the IYDD (including consultancy, travel and communication expenses) Television features productions on desertification will be supported for production and broadcast by major international media organiszations and networks, with focusing on the key messages of the IYDD. The Year 2006 information centre website will be created to enhance information flow, including specific sections dedicated for media monitoring, collection of country activities and information for relevant stakeholders. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Conference "The Future of Arid Lands" will take stock of 50 years of experience in dryland studies, policies and development programmes and will help to redefine future priorities to promote sustainable development in the world's drylands Training on environmental journalism will be provided to approximately 100 key journalists who already have an established media network within their respective countries y Regional or national events on links between desertification and food security are planned to be organized in collaboration with relevant institutions such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). These workshops will illustrate the relevance of the UNCCD for eliminating hunger and asserting the right to food in the context of achieving the Millennium Development Goals, while facilitating, in the framework of the FAO Special Programme for Food Security, the assessment of the effects of desertification on food security. Installation of IYDD Information Stands in the General Assembly Hall (60th and 61stsixtieth and sixty-first sessions) Promoting academic dialogue: International Scientific Conference 2006 on Deserts and Desertification is planned to be organized in cooperation with UNESCO. The conference "Deserts and Desertification" will help create visibility for the Year in the academic community, take stock of the contribution of science to the UNCCD process, and establish partnerships for future collaborative work among desertification-affected countries, United Nations bodies, researchers, private partners and non-governmental organizations. Event on desertification and migration will reflect the outcomes of the Almeria Symposium on Desertification and Migrations, that was held ten 10 years ago. It will seek to further elaborate on the current situation regarding migration induced by desertification and, identify with the assistance of the national and international community, identify ways and means to solve address the situation. International Roundtable on Promoting Investment in Sustainable Land Management - Synergy in the Implementation of the Three Rio Conventions, to be held in Kyoto, Japan, will showcase various investment opportunities and market schemes which emerged within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol of the UNFCCC and outside the Kyoto mechanism, such as carbon-offset market and potential financing opportunities, involving both official development assistance and private sector investments Global meeting for the assessment of the UNCCD implementation at the global level in the 10 years since the entry into force of the Convention. Venue: Argentina Regional meeting: Youth and the Environment. Lessons learned and Perspectives in Africa. Venue: Mali Global meeting on women and desertification: Assessment of the role of women in the implementation of the Convention. Venue: China Desert Nights: International Film Festival will be one of the main cultural events during the IYDD. It will seek to raise the awareness of the public at large on desertification as it relates to social and cultural dimensions, promote cultural identities and local capacities of dryland communities and identify and launch concrete actions in support to affected developing country Parties Total -- Support to the coordination and organisation of activities relating to the IYDD Support to NGO involvement in the UNCCD process 50. The participation of non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the Convention and their contribution to the meetings of the COP and its subsidiary bodies and those organized by the Parties is a necessary requirement for the successful implementation of the Convention. Furthermore, the active involvement of the civil society in the preparation and celebration of the 2006, International Year of Deserts and Desertification is a conditio sine qua non to ensure the expected results from the year. In this regard, the activities foreseen to facilitate the involvement of the NGO community are the followingas follows: NGO participation in CRIC 5 NGO participation in COP 8 NGO preparations for the open dialogue sessions during COP 8 NGO participation in preparatory meetings to CRIC 5 and COP 8 and the workshops relating to regional thematic programme networks Strengthening of communication mechanisms for delivery of information to NGO networks Support to civil society initiatives for the celebration of the IYDD Total -- Support to NGO involvement in the UNCCD process 51. The IYDD will significantly increase the demand for UNCCD public information products. Background documentation on desertification, including new translations of existing publications, will be provided primarily to media but also to governments, NGOs and other actors involved in the celebration of the IYDD. Campaign management, advertising, marketing and print material will include developing, producing and printing of miscellaneous IYDD information products. External consultancy services will be required for the production of public information material, as well as for liaison with potential donors for the IYDD activities. The IYDD booklet Flyers Five consecutive poster campaigns Press kits Pocket cards Memorabilia Consultancy services Total -- Public information and media outreach Grand total -- External relations and public information III. CONCLUSIONS 52. At its seventh session, the cCOP may wish to take note of the activities to be funded under the Supplementary Fund during the biennium 2006 - 2007 and the related estimates for funding requirements. The COP may further wish to invite Parties, as well as governments of States not Parties, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, to make contributions to the sSupplementary fFund. 