%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|

Summary record of the 20th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 26 May 2005, at 10 a.m. President: Mr. de Queiroz Duarte (Brazil) Contents Credentials of representatives (b) Report of the Credentials Committee Organization of work General debate (continued) The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m. (b) Report of the Credentials Committee (NPT/CONF.2005/CC/L.1) 1. Mr. Piperkov (Bulgaria), speaking as Vice-Chairman of the Credentials Committee, introduced the interim report of the Credentials Committee (NPT/CONF.2005/CC/L.1), which contained information on the status of credentials received as of 23 May. The Committee had met three times to examine the credentials of representatives participating in the Conference. On the basis of the information received from the Secretary-General of the Conference, the Committee had decided to accept the credentials of 149 States parties participating in the Conference, on the understanding that those delegations which had not presented their credentials in the form required by rule 2 of the rules of procedure would do so as soon as possible. The Committee would continue to review the receipt of credentials and was tentatively scheduled to meet later that day to update itself on the situation. 2. The President said that, as he had already informed participants at the 1st meeting of the General Committee, four intergovernmental organizations -- namely, the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization -- had requested permission to address the Conference. Since some representatives of intergovernmental organizations had already left New York, he wondered whether the Conference wished to deal with the issue in accordance with the last sentence of rule 44, paragraph 3, of the rules of procedure and invite the observer agencies to submit their views in writing, which would then be circulated as conference documents. 3. It was so decided. 4. Mr. Yoshiki Mine (Japan), presenting an urgent appeal by Mr. Nobutaka Machimura, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, said that, given the serious challenges currently facing the nuclear non-proliferation regime, it was an urgent task of States parties to maintain and strengthen the authority and credibility of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). To that end, on the very first day of the current Conference, the Minister had delivered his statement expressing Japan's strong hope that the Conference would issue a robust message enabling the NPT regime to be further consolidated. The time remaining was limited and the task ahead tremendous. Each State party shared a responsibility to make the Conference a success. With creative and cooperative efforts, a consensus document was still achievable. Japan would not spare any efforts to that end. 5. Mr. Kayser (Luxembourg) said that the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States members of the European Union had given his delegation the same mandate to work towards achieving consensus at the end of the Conference. The European Union was therefore completely in line with Japan in that regard. 6. The President said that all parties had worked diligently throughout the Conference and would continue to do so in the last remaining hours with a view to achieving consensus. 7. Mr. Fathala (Egypt), speaking as coordinator of the Arab Group within the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that he fully endorsed the statements made by the representatives of Japan and the European Union and was willing to cooperate with a view to achieving consensus at the end of the Conference. The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m. 