%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|TUNISIA|TERRORISM|TERRORISM FINANCING|WITNESSES|BORDER TRAFFIC|ILLICIT ARMS TRAFFICKING|

H Letter dated 10 March 2005 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council I write with reference to my letter of 16 December 2004 (S/2004/996). The Counter-Terrorism Committee has received the attached fourth report from Tunisia submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001) (see annex). I would be grateful if you could arrange for the present letter and its annex to be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Andrey I. Denisov Chairman Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism [Original: French] Note verbale dated 4 February 2005 from the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee The Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Committee and, with reference to his note of 22 October 2004, has the honour to transmit to him herewith the responses of Tunisia to the questions contained therein (see enclosure). [Original: Arabic] Fourth report of Tunisia on implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) The fact that the circle of terrorism is widening throughout the world today, despite the years of international collaboration aimed at dealing with this perilous scourge, strengthens our conviction that the effective handling of terrorism requires a unified international approach and avoidance of the fragmentation of efforts and disparity of views that reduce the capacity of the international community to prevent terrorism and curb its rampant spread. In this context, Tunisia reiterates its previous call for an international conference to be held for the formulation of a code of conduct on counter-terrorism that would permit the inclusion of points of agreement, including agreed principles and procedures, constitute a new instrument open to the accession of all States, enjoy moral authority and enable States to work increasingly closely with regard to counter-terrorism. In addition to the standardization of approach and in view of the fact that the means and potential for action in this sphere vary from one country to another in terms of actual availability and effectiveness, Tunisia believes that international cooperation on counter-terrorism should also develop to include the standardization of solutions, such that the same response would be made to the same threat in all States and a coherent, solid system of confrontation and prevention established that would prevent some countries from becoming centres for the activities of terrorist networks or serving as their bases. Believing firmly in the vital role that the United Nations plays in combating terrorism, which is a grave perversion of thought and conduct the impacts and consequences of which transcend national borders and threaten global security and stability, Tunisia has consistently submitted its reports to the Committee on Counter-Terrorism within the specified deadlines. Therefore, Tunisia submits herewith its fourth report in response to the third set of questions posed, for the purpose of clarification, by the Committee on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and enquires about the most advantageous and effective means of exploiting the reports submitted previously by Member States to the Committee and deriving direct benefit from their experiences in this domain. Since the adoption by the United Nations of resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, Tunisia has sought to become involved in the global system against terrorism and supported international efforts in this regard. Firmly believing in the necessity of deterring terrorist crime at home and the effectiveness of international cooperation abroad, Tunisia passed Act No. 75 of 2003 (10 December 2003) concerning support for international efforts to combat terrorism and prevent money-laundering. In addition to adhering to the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) in this Act, Tunisia also sought to reconcile two fundamental matters. The first matter concerns the formation of an integrated deterrent system based on the effective pursuit and tracking down of terrorists, which is demanded by the coherent organization of terrorist networks worldwide. The provisions of this Act, which is based on precise and broad concepts of terrorist crime, aim to maintain peace and security and ensure the stability of society at home and abroad. The provisions of the Act also seek to deal with sources of funding for terrorism and cut off its material supplies through the criminalization of money-laundering. The second matter concerns the call for effective responses to terrorist crime, which does not conceal the necessity of coordination with the Tunisian legal system or respect for the principles of human rights contained in the international instruments ratified by Tunisia and, also, the Tunisian Constitution. On this basis, Act No. 75 of 2003 (10 December 2003) concerning support for international efforts to combat terrorism and prevent money-laundering guaranteed respect for human rights and universal freedoms including, in particular, the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence, as principles that enjoy international consensus and are supported in national law. I. Implementation measures 1. Existent counter-terrorism machinery (1.1) Special counter-terrorism measures :: With regard to criminal investigation and prosecution: Effective counter-terrorism requires investigation and prosecution procedures appropriate to the seriousness of the threat posed by terrorist organizations. Therefore, the penalties article of Act No. 75 of 2003 contains a new set of measures the legitimacy of which is based on the requirement for effective responses to terrorist crime and which demonstrate three important features: Firstly, the Act entrusts the investigation and prosecution of terrorist crime directly to the judicial police commissioners and judicial bodies in the capital. This choice is based on the experience and know-how gained by these agencies and bodies by virtue of the volume and variety of cases to which they attend, on the one hand and, on the other hand, the human and material resources available to them, with their subdivisions and coherent organization, capable of confronting terrorist groups. Secondly, judicial police commissioners, district attorneys and examining magistrates can resort to extraordinary powers relating to detention, search and questioning when they attend to terrorism-related cases and are thus capable, in their prosecution of terrorists, of the effective responses that this sort of organized crime requires, while respecting the fundamental principles of human rights and general freedoms guaranteed by the Tunisian Constitution and stipulated in the Act. Thirdly, the legislation has sought to encourage informing on terrorist networks and projects. Set penalties imposed on informants who inform the authorities concerned about instructions and provide them with information that makes it possible to solve a crime and arrest its perpetrators, or prevent it from being carried out, are cancelled or reduced in severity. At the security level: - An expert body on counter-terrorism contributes to the adoption of the security precautions that are the subject of the present paragraph; - A number of cadres and officials from the Ministry of the Interior and Local Development who are involved in the matter participate in numerous internal and external sessions and meetings in order to enhance their mastery of the skills and experience required for dealing with terrorist activities. :: With regard to links between terrorism and other criminal activities: Terrorism resorts to organized crime, in particular the illegal trade in drugs and arms as well as theft. Convinced that terrorist groups are established and develop only in the presence of financial networks that support them and provide the funds that enable them to accomplish their terrorist projects, Tunisian law has sought to deal with the financing of terrorism through the criminalization and deterrence of money-laundering operations. Aware also that effective resistance to illegal financing extends beyond deterrence alone to prevention, Tunisian law established a financial analysis committee the functions of which include the tracing and investigation of suspicious operations and transactions, in regard to which it can seek assistance from its counterparts abroad. In addition, the expert body on counter-terrorism contains a special unit against organized crime. :: With regard to the protection of potential terrorist targets: In view of the threat posed by terrorist organizations to some persons who are targets for attack by virtue of their positions or testimony, the law has provided them with special protection under Act No. 75 of 2003 and stipulated that the names and addresses of judicial police commissioners or members of judicial bodies working on terrorism cases should be confidential. Security procedures for the protection of sensitive national installations, head offices of diplomatic missions, consular centres and similar offices in addition to private centres were generally increased within a security system that takes into consideration potential threats based on analysis of developments in the overall situation with regard to security at various points of tension in the world, the strategies adopted by countries towards terrorism and identification of the repercussions of these strategies on the interests of countries or their nationals in Tunisia. The Ministry of National Defence provides protection and security on site at a number of sensitive national locations that are potential terrorist targets, including some power stations, radio and television broadcasting stations, offshore installations and passenger ships in the context of application of the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code. :: Strategic analysis and forecasting of emerging threats: Tunisia has held numerous meetings at the national level in order to analyse the phenomenon of terrorism and explore means of countering it in the light of potential threats, relying on the experience of security experts at the national level on the one hand and cooperation with friendly and fellow Arab countries on the other hand. (1.2) Difficulties encountered in relation to counter-terrorism At present, Tunisia is not encountering notable difficulties at the domestic level in relation to counter-terrorism, by virtue of the sound coordination between the different security agencies involved. However, some difficulties should be noted with regard to the coordination of efforts with some countries, of which the following are the most significant: - The lack of response on the part of these countries, in particular European countries, to the repeated efforts of Tunisia to convince them of the terrorist nature of the Al-Nahdha movement and that it should be included on the list drawn up by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban, in particular after its military wing, the Tunisian Combatant Group, was included during October 2002 on the same list and on the European Commission list, in addition to the involvement of some of its members in the Al-Qaida organization. - Research and investigation in the field of counter-terrorism has confirmed that the failure of these countries to coordinate with Tunisia and heed its opinion in consideration of requests for political asylum from Tunisian extremists has allowed some such elements to exploit this noble right in service of their objectives, in particular with regard to residency, raising money and forming groups with terrorist goals. - Tunisia has achieved a number of successes in discovering and disbanding terrorist cells before they were able to implement their plans, and its policy of precaution and prevention has prevented foreign terrorist elements from infiltrating the country. Moreover, the bilateral agreements that it has ratified with a number of Arab and European countries have contributed to the provision of information on active terrorist groups in the international domain. In this context, the national programme to raise awareness of the dangers of terrorism and expand the network of informers has served to overcome the difficulty of collecting information that would lead to the early discovery of terrorist elements and plans. (1.3) Penal measures relating to the prosecution of terrorists and their supporters Act No. 75 of 2003 concerning support for international efforts to combat terrorism and prevent money-laundering includes a number of sections in which terrorist and related crimes are defined and the penalties stipulated for perpetrators of and accessories to these crimes and persons who conceal terrorist activity. The above-mentioned Act also provides for means of using and classifying personal information in criminal proceedings as evidence and sets out a system for witness protection. Tunisia has introduced training programmes for officials implementing the Act and responsible for investigation and prosecution in terrorism and related money-laundering cases, and has allocated technology for the identification of property and monies originating from terrorist acts. In an effort to support the principle of specialization in security work, highly efficient counter-terrorist administrative and security structures equipped with modern equipment have been established and receive ongoing support through training in investigation and prosecution. Moreover, Tunisia has strengthened its legal system with the promulgation of the above-mentioned Act, under which the Tunisian Financial Analysis Committee was established in the Tunisian Central Bank for the purpose of monitoring suspicious operations and transactions. With regard to coordination and the exchange of experiences with the relevant international mechanisms and organizations, the Tunisian Financial Analysis Committee can make use of its counterparts in the foreign countries with which it has cooperation agreements. (1.4) In relation to investigation techniques The specialized Tunisian security agencies enjoy efficiency, expertise and specialized training in the prevention of terrorism, which has made it easier to uncover terrorist cells seeking to move their activities to Tunisia and thwart their operations from the initial preparatory stages, through the use of modern techniques for monitoring financial transfers and secret operations aimed at uncovering and disrupting links and communications between terrorist groups. The Tunisian Financial Analysis Committee is dedicated to the principle of cooperation between the various agencies concerned with the investigation of money-laundering operations, as their composition represents various security, judicial and financial bodies. Cooperation increases the efficiency of their coordination when monitoring suspicious operations and transactions in order to prevent illegal financial activities and deal with terrorist funding and money-laundering. With regard to recourse to the law and criminal proceedings, the Tunisian security agencies employ various means of investigation, among which are security operations including eavesdropping activities and identification of the property of criminal groups. All activities are carried out in full coordination with the judicial authorities. The various ministries and authorities concerned at the national level cooperate directly with regard to the exchange of information and data related to terrorist funding and the prosecution of its support networks. (1.5) With regard to witness protection in terrorist cases The risks to those who divulge information on terrorist networks and their members of being targeted appear to be serious. Attacks against witnesses are ways of retaliating against them or their relatives and spreading alarm among other witnesses, in order to convince them not to pass on the information available to them. For these reasons, Tunisian law has adopted some measures for the protection of witnesses in terrorist cases, at two levels: First, the law provides that all data relating to the disclosure of the identity of witnesses and others who participated in the investigation and disclosure of the crime must be kept in an independent record, in a file separate from the original file. Moreover, data and signatures must be kept in a confidential notebook, numbered and signed by the Deputy Procurator in Tunis. The data are only disclosed if required by the right of defence accorded to the accused, on condition that there is no possibility that the life or livelihood of the individual or the life or livelihood of his family members is thereby put at risk. Secondly, the judiciary can be permitted to conduct investigations or hold sessions in a location other than the customary location, if necessary. Permission to secure the place of investigation or session represents an additional guarantee to witnesses. 2. Effectiveness of customs, border and immigration controls (1.6) With regard to effective border controls In seeking to apply the common procedures adopted by the World Customs Organization and in view of the importance of controlling border transit points, Tunisia has adopted an integrated security plan to control people and goods. The plan relies on the appropriate human resources, advanced screening equipment including metal and explosives detectors and, also, sniffer dogs to detect attempts to smuggle drugs and weapons. The security authorities pursue the objective in full coordination with customs authorities in order to establish adequate plans and measures to ensure optimum effectiveness and returns in the implementation of these controls. (a) The Directorate General of Customs has designed a software application for the prior bill of lading, which will be launched shortly. The application will make available data on means of transport and goods loaded as cargo prior to the arrival of a ship or aircraft. However, this procedure is limited to carriers linked to the computerized system introduced in order to deal with foreign trade procedures and is optional at the same time. A draft order has been submitted concerning control of the electronic means of preparing and filing the prior bill of lading. In 1999, the Public Customs Administration authorities began to concentrate on X-ray machines with a view to using scanner equipment in order to subject all containers and trailers, even when empty, to checks. In the case of any doubt, customs authorities conduct an extensive physical inspection of all contents of the container or trailer concerned. However, scanner checks are not yet commonplace at all border customs offices, as the equipment is not available at all the offices. (b) Travellers and their personal belongings are checked upon arrival or departure primarily by the customs authorities and, to some extent, by the security authorities, which devote their attention to a televisual surveillance system. In those cases in which information is provided by the security authorities, customs authorities conduct extensive checking procedures. The requisite security investigations are conducted at passenger departures, in particular on passengers who are the object of suspicion or for reasons linked to security requirements. Personal luggage is checked by customs and security authorities by means of X-ray. Goods for import or export are checked by the customs authorities, which sometimes, when doubt exists, receive information from the security authorities. Luggage left in public places in national airports is treated with caution. Customs and security authorities have dogs trained in the detection of drugs and explosives. (c) Customs authorities, the National Guard and the Tunisian Army cooperate closely in guarding the border strip between the points of entry into Tunisia and conduct regular joint border patrols. At the legislative level, Tunisia has sought to amend and update Act No. 40 of 1975 (14 May 1975) concerning passports, mentioned in Act No. 6 of 2004 (3 February 2004), which increased the penalties imposed on the organizers of international boundary violations, out of concern for the security of all surrounding or neighbouring States. With regard to customs, Tunisia has not concluded any cooperation agreements on counter-terrorism with neighbouring countries. Land border security - Deployment of National Guard land border units The work of the border units centres on three contiguous zones of territory starting from the border strip, in each of which a particular task is carried out. - Joint border security exercises (peaceful operations) A model for the coherent intervention of all units in case of an emergency has been established, with coordination between all entities parties to the land border security system. Training for this intervention takes place on an ongoing basis in the form of joint exercises in border security (peaceful operations). In this regard, general security units adjacent to the land and sea border, which is considered the second zone, work to implement the provisions of the border security system for dealing with any terrorist infiltration, in addition to monitoring foreigners resident in national territories in accordance with nationality of origin. In addition, tourist police teams within the tourist security system contribute to the requirement to maintain security and stability and, through so doing, prevent any terrorist or terrorism-related act. Moreover, explosives and hazardous materials control units operate within the framework of the authorized security system to monitor institutions that produce and use explosives and hazardous materials. In this context, the Directorate of Investigation and Inspection has sought to concentrate advisory units along the border strip and form terrorism prevention cells at the core of investigation and inspection teams. Sea border security system The following procedures were adopted with regard to strengthening control of the sea borders and optimizing the utilization of human and material resources: - Promotion in October 2001 of the entity responsible for the "sea border" zone to the level of directorate in order to increase its effectiveness and the benefit derived from its work on the tasks for which it is responsible; - Inspection of nine maritime zones; - Concentration of the sea border security system on the following items in order to control the coastline: :: Control of ports, coasts and beaches; :: Control of Tunisian waters; :: Focus on electronic coverage of some coasts; :: Conducting daily air patrols; :: Coordination with the navy and customs in order to control Tunisian waters. The territorial units belonging to the National Guard and National Security also control the road network and roads leading to the sea. (d) In conformity with the arrangements for air navigation, the Tunisian authorities seek to obtain a passenger manifest prior to the arrival of inbound aircraft on international journeys to national airports, depending on the degree of security threats and conditions worldwide. The Tunisian authorities reciprocate by sending passenger manifests to foreign airports, as required. Tunis Air prepares an air cargo manifest for those journeys for the security of which it is responsible and enters the manifest into the documentation system. It conducts the same procedure on behalf of other air transport companies. (e) The National Committee for the Security of Civil Aviation was established, as were local committees at every airport. The airports provide plans of action in case of emergency. In case of emergency, coordination occurs between the customs authorities, police authorities and the air transport company. The customs authorities conduct regular monitoring campaigns parallel to those conducted by the security authorities, the Civil Aviation Authority and airports. Every airport contains areas allocated to the public and restricted areas for authorized individuals. Points of access to restricted areas are controlled by customs and border police officials. Persons lingering in zones subject to customs restrictions and their means of transport are subject to close inspection in order to prevent the infiltration of suspicious materials or smuggling of persons. The entry of persons and vehicles to restricted areas requires an entry permit, which may be permanent, temporary or incidental. The permanent entry permit is granted to persons and applies also to vehicles operating in restricted areas within the airport. Temporary entry permits are granted to incidental users assigned tasks in restricted areas within the airport. The same applies to vehicles. Incidental entry permits are granted to visitors assigned to accomplish incidental tasks in restricted areas within the airport. Such persons must be accompanied by persons bearing a permanent entry permit. The same procedures apply to cars. Entry permits to restricted areas are issued by the senior airport official after consultation with police authorities and customs. Passengers may enter the areas allocated to them on arrival or departure, provided that they carry the following documents: - A current travel document accompanied by the required visa, as necessary; - A ticket for departure issued by an airline and bearing the name of the passenger. Air transport personnel may enter restricted areas with their entry badges. The senior airport official, who is responsible for issuing entry badges to restricted areas, must ascertain that: - All requirements relating to entry badges are submitted in writing by employers on behalf of their officials; - Requests are justified; - In cases where police authorities or customs have doubts with regard to persons, entry badges are not granted; - Airport rules require that entry badges with a clear picture should be worn on clothing upon entering and while in restricted areas. Airlines and pilots are notified of the presence of chemical materials (hazardous) on an aircraft. However, such materials are not loaded separately from other cargo unless they are subject to strict packing, loading and unloading conditions. 3. Controls on preventing access to weapons by terrorists Weapons and trade in weapons in Tunisia are subject to close security control and are regulated under Act No. 33 of 1969 concerning the classification, acquisition, marketing, repair and carrying of weapons. In addition, regulatory procedures and measures have been adopted the objective of which is to control the import and export of firearms and issue licences through customs and security, provided that the weapons or their owners meet certain specifications and criteria. The security authorities pay considerable attention to controlling the sale, manufacture and repair of weapons, gunpowder manufacture, means of keeping weapons registers and securing the weapons of citizens while the required formalities are completed. (1.7) The customs authorities have implemented the World Customs Organization recommendations concerning implementation of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, in coordination with the authorities concerned in the Ministry of the Interior and Local Development. (1.8) Weapons are classified, in general, in accordance with Act No. 33 under five categories, three of which relate to firearms: - Category 1: Firearms and their ammunition designed for military operations by land, sea or air; - Category 2: Defensive firearms and their ammunition as well as weapons and their ammunition used for marksmanship, shows and decoration; - Category 3: Hunting weapons and their ammunition. There is an absolute ban on the introduction of category 1 weapons, whether assembled or dismantled, into Tunisia except in the case of weapons authorized by the Tunisian armed forces. A special licence from the security forces is required for the import of category 2 weapons, except in the case of second-hand weapons, when it is sufficient for the importer to present a valid current licence to possess imported weapons, issued by the Tunisian authorities. Weapons authorized by the Tunisian armed forces are excepted from this procedure. Category 3 weapons may be imported only with a special licence issued by the security authorities. A licence to import and possess hunting weapons can be granted by the security authorities to foreign tourists for a limited period not exceeding three months. Tourists in transit are obliged to deposit hunting weapons with customs authorities and weapons are only returned to them by the authorities 24 hours prior to their departure from the Tunisian borders. For this purpose, border authorities from the Ministry of the Interior issue tourists with a transit licence, on which are shown the date and time of exit. Every customs office must keep a register (in conformity with the models prepared for that purpose) in which information is recorded relating to importers, goods, periods licensed and settlement on return of hunting weapons with the intention of their re-exportation. (1.9) Customs and security authorities cooperate closely in verifying the authenticity of licences and other official documents in relation to the import, export and transit of firearms. (1.10) Arrangements in operation with regard to the import and export of firearms The second report submitted by Tunisia concerning the measures adopted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) contains a response on this topic, although, in view of the importance of the topic, it should be emphasized that trading in arms in Tunisia is subject to prior licensing from the Ministry of the Interior and Local Development in conformity with the above-mentioned Act No. 33 of 1969 (12 June 1969), and that the process whereby such licences are documented is subject to a set of security standards pursuant to a directive aimed at limiting the spread of weapons in the country. Private individuals are absolutely forbidden to import, keep, possess or carry military weapons. With regard to weapons export, Tunisia does not manufacture weapons and so does not export them, nor does it import weapons for export. The above-mentioned Act imposes penalties on any infraction of the legal provisions regulating activities relating to the purchase, import, possession and carrying of or dealing in weapons, up to a maximum of 10 years' imprisonment and a fine of up to 3,000 dinars, in addition to seizure of the weapons and authorization of their confiscation. The import, export, transport and storage of firearms and explosive materials in general is subject to particular security procedures, which can be summarized as follows: The State has the prerogative over the manufacture, import, export, transport, storage, utilization and trading of explosive materials through the competent public bodies and establishments in the explosives sector under the Ministry of the Interior and Local Development or under its supervision. Although the State may authorize natural or legal persons to carry out all or some of these operations, the transport and storage of firearms are subject to a series of legal provisions and security mechanisms that regulate the procedures that may be used and the method whereby these may be carried out. Stone quarries and other places in which explosives are used are subject to particularly close control with regard to the storage, transport and protection of explosives. Laboratories that use hazardous chemicals which could be used in the manufacture of explosives are under constant control. In addition, Tunisian criminal law applies deterrent provisions to those who violate these arrangements, in support of the national effort aimed at regulating this sector. The transport of military weapons is conducted uniquely by customs officials, armed forces or internal security forces personnel, accompanied by a special escort. Storage and warehousing activities are carried out using secure warehouses equipped for the purpose. Such warehouses are subject to detailed, intensive, periodic inspections, without prior notice, in order to ensure their safety and the security of the weapons. Moreover, all individuals appointed to undertake such an operation and every person participating therein must undergo a detailed security check. Every natural or legal person wishing to participate in such an operation must be able to meet the technical conditions and safety obligations required by all stages of such operations. In order to obtain the permission required for the manufacture, import, export, transport, storage, use or trading of explosive materials, it is necessary to submit a request to the Minister of the Interior and Local Development, accompanied by the following documents: - A personal information note obtained from the competent authorities under the Ministry of the Interior and Local Development, showing in particular the name, title and national identification card number for natural persons or name of the institution, its legal form, registered head office and date of establishment for legal persons; - A copy of the national identification card of the person requesting the licence, if a natural person, or of the legal representative, if a legal person; - A transcript of the criminal record (Certificate No. 3) of the person requesting the licence, if a natural person, or of the legal representative, if a legal person; - A copy of the articles of association, for a legal person; - A technical safety study on hazards certified by the Ministry of the Interior and Local Development. The licence indicated above may be withdrawn irrevocably, in particular when public security and order are at risk. 2. Assistance and cooperation Tunisia has given special priority to cooperation and the exchange of experiences and information and has encouraged coordination with friendly and fellow Arab countries at the bilateral and multilateral levels by various of the means permitted in the context of commitment to international legality, the rule of law and respect for human rights and individual and collective freedoms. It has presented the Tunisian experience of counter-terrorism and the mechanisms devised in order to deal with terrorism. Moreover, Tunisia has sought to establish cooperation in particular with regard to the identification and investigation of elements involved in terrorist crimes, with the support of the specialized security apparatus of Interpol. In submitting this fourth report, Tunisia seizes the opportunity to welcome the establishment of the Executive Directorate of the Committee pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004) and reiterates its commitment to cooperate with all friendly and fellow Arab countries that wish to do so, based on its experience and expertise and in order to derive reciprocal benefit from useful experiences in the context of technical cooperation, in the effort to unite the response of the entire international community to terrorism, its causes and its serious implications. 