%%%INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|FEDERAL GOVERNMENT|LOCATION OF OFFICES|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|GOVERNANCE|

Letter dated 12 May 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to draw your attention to the European Union-United States joint statement on Somalia, issued on 12 May 2005 (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of this letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Jean-Marc Hoscheit Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations [Original: English, French and Spanish] European Union-United States joint statement on Somalia, issued on 12 May 2005 The United States and the European Union welcome Somali efforts to conclude an agreement on the relocation of the Somali transitional federal institutions to Somalia, including the efforts of the Somali parties to facilitate demilitarization in Mogadishu, which should be incorporated into a national plan as soon as possible. The Somali reconciliation process is at a critical stage. There is an urgent need for a viable agreement on relocation and security endorsed by the transitional federal institutions. In order for this process to succeed, the Somali people, through the transitional federal institutions, must make their own decisions regarding how best to relocate to Somalia and begin the gradual process of establishing governance. The European Union and United States urge all Somali parties to continue their efforts towards reconciliation and dialogue and quickly come to an agreement that will facilitate the relocation of the transitional federal institutions to Somalia. The European Union and the United States also welcome the visit of Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Ghedi to Mogadishu. This visit represents a positive step forward in the reconciliation process. We deeply regret, however, the incident of 3 May at Mogadishu Stadium during the Prime Minister's visit and we extend our condolences to the families and relatives of the victims. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate countries Croatia* and Turkey, the countries of the stabilization and association process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the EFTA countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European Economic Area, align themselves with this statement. * Croatia continues to be part of the stabilization and association process. 