%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DARFUR (SUDAN)|SUDAN|COSTS|FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS|

Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan Addendum 1. Further to my main report on the United Nations Mission in Sudan dated 3 January 2005 (S/2005/57), I wish to inform the Security Council that the financial implications for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in the Sudan are currently projected at some $1,009.8 million for a 12-month period, including $862.3 million in recurrent and $147.5 million in non-recurrent costs. 2. The projections provide for the phased deployment of 10,130 military personnel, including 5,070 troops, a force protection component of 4,150, 750 military observers and 160 headquarters and staff officers. The projections also provide for the phased emplacement of 755 civilian police personnel and 1,018 international staff, as well as 2,623 national personnel and 214 United Nations Volunteers. 3. An indicative breakdown of the financial implications for the deployment of the peacekeeping operation by main categories of expenditure is provided, for information purposes, in the annex to the present addendum. 4. It is my recommendation that, should the Security Council decide to deploy the peacekeeping operation in the Sudan, the General Assembly consider the related costs as an expense of the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations and that the assessments levied on Member States be credited to a special account established for that purpose. * Reissued for technical reasons. Cost estimates for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in the Sudan for a 12-month period (Thousands of United States dollars) Category Cost estimates Military and police personnel Military observers Military contingents Civilian police Formed police units Subtotal Civilian personnel International staff National staff United Nations Volunteers Operational costs General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment Quick-impact projects Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements 