%%%PEACEBUILDING|RULE OF LAW|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|ORGANIZED CRIME|

Letter dated 2 November 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council With reference to Security Council resolution 1575 (2004), I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 14 October 2005, which I received from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), covering the period from 1 June to 15 September 2005 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Letter dated 14 October 2005 from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union addressed to the Secretary-General In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1575 (2004), I attach the third three-monthly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 June to 15 September 2005. I would be grateful if you would transmit this report to the President of the Security Council. (Signed) Javier Solana Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina Introduction 1. This report covers the period from 1 June to 15 September 2005. 2. The Security Council, by its resolution 1575 (2004) of 22 November 2004, requested Member States, acting through or in cooperation with the European Union, to report to the Council on the activity of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), through the appropriate channels and at least at three-monthly intervals. This document is the third such report to the Council. Political background 3. Overall, during the reporting period, the political and military situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained stable. 4. On 11 July a ceremony was held at Potocari to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the massacre of Bosniaks in the United Nations-protected safe zone of Srebrenica. For the first time, the commemoration was attended by the President of Serbia, Boris Tadic, and by the President of Republika Srpska, Dragan Cavic. Despite some security concerns beforehand the ceremony was conducted peacefully. 5. Following the failure of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respond adequately to the disrupted oath-taking ceremonies held on 16 April (noted in the second EUFOR report), the Commander of EUFOR and the Senior Military Representative at NATO headquarters Sarajevo used their authority under the General Framework Agreement for Peace and together ordered the removal of the Chief of Staff of the Republika Srpska Army, General Djukic. The Commander of EUFOR additionally ordered the Republika Srpska Minister of Defence to suspend training of recruits at the Manjaca base and to dismiss the offending recruits. The active participation of war veterans at future ceremonies was also forbidden and the rule book for future ceremonies is being rewritten. 6. A milestone agreement on a draft new Bosnia and Herzegovina Defence Law and Law on Army Service was signed by all defence reform commissioners on 18 July. The Republika Srpska National Assembly endorsed the entire defence reform package on 31 August. The Federation was expected to discuss it on 7 September, which would pave the way for the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament to endorse the draft laws later this year, in order to ensure that the reforms take effect by 1 January 2006. 7. Cooperation with the Tribunal has continued positively since the beginning of 2005. Bosnia and Herzegovina State law enforcement and security agencies have been making an effort to implement measures to improve cooperation, and the Tribunal working group set up jointly by the Prime Minister's Cabinet and the European Union Special Representative/Office of the High Representative continues to oversee implementation of those measures. On 8 August indictee Milan Lukic was arrested in Argentina, on 25 August Dragan Zelenovic was apprehended in western Siberia and on 13 September Sredoje Lukic surrendered to Republika Srpska authorities in Banja Luka. Outstanding Republika Srpska indictees now number five. European Union stabilization and association process 8. As reported previously, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made commendable progress in recent months on a number of the priority reform areas of the European Commission feasibility study. However, failure to reach an agreement on police restructuring in accordance with the European Commission's conditions means that it will not now be possible for Bosnia and Herzegovina to start negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement with the European Union by the tenth anniversary of the Dayton peace process. The European Union hopes that this might still be possible before the end of 2005, but emphasizes that a prerequisite for this is agreement on police reform. The European Union has urged all parties to make renewed efforts to reach an agreement in line with European Union requirements. EUFOR activities 9. EUFOR currently comprises around 6,500 troops, from 22 European Union member States and 11 third countries, which are deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina in three regional multinational task forces and at EUFOR headquarters. Cyprus and Malta also contribute to the common costs of the operation. 10. EUFOR continues to conduct operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in line with its mandate, that is, to provide deterrence to ensure continued compliance in relation to its responsibilities under annexes 1a and 2 of the General Framework Agreement and to contribute to the maintenance of a safe and secure environment. 11. The multinational task forces have continued to conduct a variety of activities, including presence patrolling; local observation team activities; weapons-collection operations; specific operations to ensure compliance with the General Framework Agreement and to prevent anti-Dayton activities and information operations which complement all other such activity. EUFOR has been proactive in conducting a series of well coordinated operations throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in support of the fight against organized crime. Such operations contribute to enhancing the mission's profile as well as supporting the mission implementation plan of the Office of the High Representative and capacity-building for local authorities and law enforcement agencies. 12. Over the reporting period EUFOR, coordinating closely with the European Union Police Mission, assisted the local authorities in maintaining a safe and secure environment over the period of the tenth anniversary of Srebrenica. EUFOR adopted a posture of "out of sight but not over the horizon", being prepared to intervene if the situation deteriorated, and contingency plans were developed for the deployment of reserve forces, if required. In the event, however, the local authorities showed that they are able to deal with such major public gatherings, as the commemoration took place without any incidents and EUFOR was able to maintain a discreet but vigilant presence throughout the period. 13. EUFOR, in cooperation with the European Union Police Mission, continues to support the local police, including the State Border Service and State Investigation and Protection Agency, and other law enforcement agencies such as the Indirect Taxation Authority. Liaison and cooperation take place on a very regular basis as well as for specific operations. Indications are that local law enforcement agencies perform better with the commitment and support of EUFOR. Several EUFOR-led operations carried out in support of the fight against organized crime resulted in prosecutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies increasingly are taking the lead in proposing and planning such operations. 14. Illegally held weapons and ammunition continue to be widely available in Bosnia and Herzegovina despite nearly 10 years of continued collection. Specific operations are conducted to collect voluntarily surrendered arms and ammunition, under amnesty conditions, or if necessary, in more directed operations. From 1 June to 31 August, almost 500 small arms, over 189,000 rounds of ammunition, 2,368 hand grenades and mines and over 255 kg of explosives were collected or surrendered. Outlook 15. The failure to reach agreement on police restructuring in accordance with the European Commission's principles, and the consequent failure of Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet its mid-September deadline for opening negotiations on a stabilization and association agreement in time for the tenth anniversary of Dayton is a matter of concern. It is unclear at present when a deal on police restructuring might be reached that will allow the start of the negotiations, but the European Union stands ready to assist in further negotiations once an agreement which satisfies the European Commission conditions is reached. The EUFOR pattern and tempo of operations will continue, in close cooperation and coordination with other European Union actors, the wider international community and the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities. 