%%%SANCTIONS|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|ARMS EMBARGO|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo Letter dated 15 August 2005 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Committee I have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo concerning the steps it has taken to implement the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 1596 (2005) (see annex). (Signed) Ileka Atoki Ambassador Permanent Representative The Government of National Unity and Transition is in possession of reliable information concerning serious violations of the arms embargo imposed by the United Nations under Security Council resolutions 1493 (2003), 1533 (2004), 1552 (2004) and 1596 (2005). The violations are being perpetrated by armed groups including the group controlled by Kunda Batware and Mutebutsi; Serufuli's militias (self-defence units); armed groups in Ituri (Floribert Ndjabu's Front des nationalistes et des intégrationnistes [FNI]; Thomas Lubanga's Union des patriotes congolais [UPC-L]; Kawa Mandro's Parti pour l'unité et la sauvegarde de l'intégrite du Congo [PUSIC]; and the Front de résistance patriotique du Congo [FRPI]); the Forces de liberation de Rwanda (FDLR) in North and South Kivu; the Gédéon and Tshinja-Tshinja group in northern Katanga; and other groups supported by certain members of the world international high finance in complicity with Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. However, political, administrative and security conditions are impeding the expected conclusion of investigations launched in Kinshasa. Logistical obstacles prevent the Government from conducting investigations and prosecuting perpetrators throughout the country. The difficulties include the porosity of borders, the lack of material and financial support and the fact that some officials do not have the genuine political will to achieve integration and unification, all of which undermine the situation with respect to security, political, administrative, economic, social and humanitarian matters. These problems have led in turn to the absence of integrated and unified customs, immigration, civil aviation and security services. Status of the embargo (a) With regard to the integration and brassage of army units, the Government has already integrated three brigades and one commando battalion. Of these, the 1st brigade, trained in Kisangani, is currently deployed in Ituri and the commando battalion, trained in Angola, is deployed in Kinshasa. The 2nd brigade, trained in Kitona, and the 3rd brigade, trained in Kamina, have not been deployed yet. However, three other brigades of the Forces armées de la Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) are undergoing the integration and brassage process in Mushaki, Luberizi and Nyaleke. With regard to the police, the Government of National Unity and Transition has trained and integrated the following: :: the General Inspectorate of Police; :: provincial inspectorates of police; :: a close protection corps (CPR); :: three integrated Police Unit battalions (two trained in Kasangulu with assistance from the European Union and one trained in central Kapalata [Kisangani] with assistance from the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo [MONUC]); :: four police d'intervention rapide (PIR) battalions (two trained in Kinshasa by French instructors and two trained in Mbandaka by Angolan instructors). (b) The État-major Géneral, État-major forces and État-major military regions (divisions) have been integrated. All army units -- whether integrated or not -- that include former combatants and parties that signed the Global and All-Inclusive agreement on the Transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and operate under the aforementioned État-major units are part of the regular army of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1493 (2004) and 1596 (2005), the arms embargo does not apply to these units. The same is true for all police units under the command of the provincial inspectorates operating under the integrated command of the General Inspectorate of Police. (c) A fifth police d'intervention rapide battalion is currently being integrated in Kasangulu. In order to enhance capabilities to combat arms trafficking, as called for by the embargo, it is absolutely essential for the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to succeed in reunifying the administration and the security services (for example, the Direction générale de migration [DGM], the Agence nationale de renseignements [ANR], the Office de douanes et accises [OFIDA], the Régie des voies aériennes [RVA], the Direction de l'Aéronautique Civile [DAC] and the Office congolais de contrôle [OCC]) and in ensuring the effective brassage and integration of army and police elements. The international community is invited to support the focal point responsible for combating the use of small arms and light weapons [SALW] as well as the country's other structures involved in implementing arms embargo measures. Inventory of weapons The Government is prepared to facilitate access by the United Nations Group of Experts in connection with the inventory of weapons and related materiel in the possession of the army and the police. However, it should be noted that the Government of National Unity and Transition has already begun such an inventory among regular army and police units. The inventory is still in progress because the disarmament and integration process has not yet been completed. Civil aviation 1. The Government of National Unity and Transition abides by the international standards concerning regulation and control of civil aviation laid down in the Chicago Convention of the International Civil Aviation Organization. However, because political and administrative reunification has not yet been fully achieved in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the concerns regarding the situation in the eastern part of the country expressed by the Group of Experts in its report contained in document S/2005/30 dated 25 January 2005 remain valid. 2. In 2004, the Ministry of Transport and Communications met with all provincial division chiefs to discuss various issues pertaining to the aviation sector, including the regularization of authorizations granted to certain airlines by the former rebel movements. However, the measures agreed upon could not be introduced, particularly in the eastern part of the country, owing to interference by certain politicians over whom the central Government has no control. These include the provincial authorities of North and South Kivu, Province Orientale and Maniema, who continue to grant licences to airlines operating in their provinces. The aircraft of some companies thus have dual registration, which severely complicates control efforts. It should be noted that some companies have already agreed to regularize their status in Kinshasa. Others, however, remain uncooperative. 3. A Division d'exploitation technique des aéronefs has been established in the Direction de l'aéronautique civile and is responsible for the day-to-day monitoring of the legality of aircraft and crew documentation. Although the division has existed for two years, it does not yet have a presence in the interior of the country. Accordingly, it operates only at the airport in Djili and exercises no authority in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 4. There are 284 airports in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Régie des voies aériennes (RVA) controls traffic only at 52 of the major airports. The Direction de l'aéronautique civile is responsible for the remainder. Many individuals own private airfields for their personal use and are permitted by law to do so. However, the Direction de l'aéronautique civile is in dire need of technical capabilities for air surveillance. Although the Direction générale de migration has instructed all its provincial offices to exercise their authority at all civil aviation airports and airfields under their jurisdiction, these instructions are not followed in areas formerly controlled by rebel movements. 5. No special steps have been taken to strengthen surveillance at airports and airfields in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Before the war the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo managed five international customs airports: Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Kisangani, Goma and Gbadolite. Only two remained under its control during and after the war: Kinshasa and Lubumbashi. 6. With regard to paragraph 45 of the Dar es Salaam Declaration of Principles on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes Region adopted on 20 November 2004, although RVA officials met with their Ugandan counterparts in Entebbe in 2004, no cooperation agreement on air traffic control has been signed yet with the countries in the region. 7. Government entities have been unable to complete any investigations of Congolese nationals in the eastern part of the country. 8. The Government of National Unity and Transition would be pleased to assist the United Nations Group of Experts in verifying the legal status of private airports in Beni-Wageni and Butembo. It should be noted that although the private Beni-Wageni airport belongs to ENRA, a company of the Bemba Saolona Group, the airport is available for public use and RVA has installed an air navigation system there. The State owns the Butembo airfield but does not control it. 9. Flights of aircraft belonging to companies registered with the Direction de l'aéronautique civile are tracked by its units and logbooks of the flights are maintained. However, flights of aircraft belonging to companies based in the eastern part of the country which are not licensed by the Direction de l'aéronautique civile are not controlled by that entity at all. The Government is prepared to provide the United Nations Group of Experts with access to all reports concerning the Yak 40 (registered as EK-88262) and to reports on calamities or serious accidents involving aircraft in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as from 1 July 2004. The information regarding the Yak 40 contained in the second report of the Group of Experts (S/2005/30) remains applicable. List of aircraft accidents in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Second half of 2004 -- first half of 2005) No. Registration Type A/C Operator Site of accident Date of accident Nature of incident Causes of accident Comments 9Q-CHH ALOUETTE II ITAB LUKUNI (KATANGA) Forced landing Technical factor Aircraft completely destroyed ES-ELI AN-28 FLYING AIR SERVICE BENI MAVIVI Airstrip closed Human factor No comments 5Y-TWH C208 PEACE AIR COMPANY KARUBA (SOUTH KIVU) Struck cliff 3D-KIK CARAVELLE SE 210 TAC SERVICE GISENYI (RWANDA) Wrong landing strip Destruction and fire 3XR-KL LET 410 AFRICAN AIR SERVICE OKOMBE Substantial damage 9Q-CEG FILAIR BENI (NORTH KIVU) Human and environmental factors Aircraft recoverable 9Q-CUZ C402B AIR TROPIQUES KIN-NDOLO Forced water landing Human and technical factor Aircraft total loss + 1 dead 5Y-AJF C310R RONALD DE SMET Struck pedestrians when landing Pedestrians on landing strip 2 dead 9Q-CCS C188 KWILU-NGONGO KWILU-NGONGO (BAS-CONGO) Lost power 1 injured 9Q-CFO AN-2 AIR KASAI MUTSHIMA (KASAI OCCIDENTAL) 3C-ZZY PEGASUS AVIATION KAMPENE Struck ground 3 dead ER-AJI FLIGHT EXPRESS TEMBO (BANDUNDU) Hard landing Aircraft nose wheel broken 9Q-CIH AN-12 AEROLIFT CONGO ENTEBBE (UGANDA) Poor weather conditions Aircraft completely destroyed + 6 crew members killed EK-26026 AN-26 KISANGANI AIRLIFT LUBUTU (ORIENTALE) Landed short of airstrip Investigation in progress 11 dead 9Q-CVG VICTORIA AIR BITALE 26 dead 9Q-CSD KABUNGU (KASAI OCCIDENTAL) Weather-related Customs, borders and immigration 1. The Direction générale de migration (DGM) has not taken any steps to strengthen border controls in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given the delay in reunifying the administration, it is clearly impossible for DGM to expand its management, control and outreach efforts in this part of the country. DGM has no access to data regarding or to the realities prevailing in the eastern border area. Instructions on strengthening controls and screening have been communicated to the other border areas. The Office des douanes et accises (OFIDA) attempted to assign agents to the reunified territories in order to strengthen controls in those regions. Unfortunately, the agents were subjected to extortion and were ordered back to Kinshasa. Even worse, the agents posted in Beni -- inspectors Mata, Ilunga and Kabongo -- received death threats. During their tour of duty, customs revenue recorded by the Central Bank came to only 5 per cent of the amount traditionally generated by the territories concerned. Wartime provincial coordinators continue to manage customs operations in these areas. Notwithstanding the steps that have been taken to strengthen OFIDA's capabilities, the agency cannot force any changes owing to the precarious security situation. 2. In the western part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, all border traffic controls normally proceed in accordance with international regulations. Mutual assistance agreements for this purpose were signed recently with the Republic of the Congo, Belgium, Zimbabwe and South Africa. The central Government does not exercise any authority in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 3. Since the Direction générale de migration does not control border traffic in the eastern part of the country, it is difficult for it to identify and protect revenue generated there. OFIDA conducts physical verifications of goods in the parts of the country controlled by the Government but is unable to do so in the eastern areas. Good-neighbourliness Status of relations between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries of the Great Lakes region (a) Bilateral relations The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda The normalization of diplomatic relations between the two countries began with the reopening in Kinshasa of the Ugandan embassy, which had been closed at the outbreak of hostilities in which Uganda had played an active role. The Democratic Republic of the Congo participated in the workshop on firearms for police chiefs held in Kampala, Uganda, from 4 to 8 April 2005. Mechanisms for consultations between the États-majors of the two countries have been put in place. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi On 10 February 2005, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorized a visit to the country by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burundi in keeping with their desire to normalize relations of good-neighbourliness between the two countries. The Direction générale des douanes of Burundi welcomed the request from the Office de douanes et accises of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the establishment of a framework for cooperation with a view to developing a partnership and providing mutual assistance for the control of goods along their common border. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda Although formal diplomatic relations have not been established yet, political figures from the two States have exchanged visits and maintain contact with one another. In 2004, two Vice-Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo attended the inauguration of the President of Rwanda. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Rwanda visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo recently to request its support for Rwanda's candidacy for the presidency of the African Development Bank. The Joint Verification Mechanism was established along their border and is operational. (b) Regional relations The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo played an active role in the preparatory meetings for the International Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes Region. The Tripartite Agreement for peace was signed in Kigali in October 2004 by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda. The next meeting, to be held in Kigali on 5 August 2005, will focus on strengthening border controls. Interparliamentary meetings were held in Brussels and Bujumbura for the purpose of harmonizing the legislation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi on matters relating to small arms and light weapons (SALW). In order to combat the illicit circulation and trafficking of weapons in the region, on 15 March 2000 the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries of the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa signed the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa. In April 2004 they signed the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons. And very recently, on 21 June 2005, the same countries established the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons, which is based in Nairobi. National focal points on small arms and light weapons have been designated in all countries of the Great Lakes region. The focal points are responsible for ensuring the implementation at the national level of the Nairobi Declaration and of all protocols concerned with small arms and light weapons. Unfortunately, the focal point of the Democratic Republic of the Congo receives no assistance. In contrast, the other focal points enjoy the support of the international community, which introduced the initiative. Information concerning specific issues 1. Statistics It is an obvious fact that the weapons and ammunition used by rebel groups to sow terror in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are financed by illicit trafficking in the country's natural resources. The correlation between the illicit exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the persistence of armed conflict is well-known and has been documented in a number of national and international publications. The non-transparent exploitation of these resources has become a major threat to the country's sovereignty and deprives the State Treasury of substantial sums of money. The statistics below illustrate amply the scope of the looting. Its impact is better understood when the disastrous role played by neighbouring countries is borne in mind. Year Gold (g) Cassiterite (kg) Coltan (kg) Wolframite (kg) Amethyst (kg) 2005/6 mos. Total Source: KAYONGA ABBAS, Rapport Général des états de lieux de la Division Provinciale des Mines et Géologie du Sud Kivu à Bukavu, de 1998 au 31 octobre 2003. - Not available. Exploitation of gold-bearing and tin-bearing products Cassiterite Cassiterite production in and exports from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and have developed as indicated below: Industrial mining Artisanal mining Weight (tons) Value USD Sources: - BCC: rapport annuel 2002-2003 - Kayonga Abbas: rapport général des états des lieux de la Division provinciale des Mines et géologie du Sud Kivu. According to a report which the Initiative for Central Africa (INICA) published on its website in 2005, although Rwanda produced 283 tons of cassiterite in 2003 it exported 1,458 tons of the mineral. A comparison shows that the Democratic Republic of the Congo produced 1,223 tons of cassiterite in 2003, whereas Rwanda produced 283. Rwanda's production is low, but it exported 1,458 tons of the mineral. The difference of 1,175 tons, worth USD 939,530, represents the amount plundered from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. According to a United Nations report on the pillaging of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda produced 0.0044 tons of cassiterite in 2000 but exported 10.83 tons. The difference of 10,826 tons represents the amount plundered from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Coltan Coltan production in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the country's exports of the mineral have developed as indicated below. Value USD Source: BCC, rapport 2002-2003 par Kayonga Abbas. According to the report on the INICA website in 2005 Rwanda produced 128 tons of coltan in 2003 but exported 732 tons of the ore. The difference, 604 tons worth USD 36,240,000, also represents output plundered from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A comparison shows that the Democratic Republic of the Congo produced 94.8 tons of coltan in 2003, whereas Rwanda produced 128 tons. Rwanda's production is low, but it exported 732 tons of the ore. The difference of 604 tons represents the amount plundered from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United Nations report on the pillaging of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo indicates that from 1994 to 1999 Uganda produced 2.26 tons of coltan and exported 90.6 tons during the same period. The difference, 88.34 tons worth USD 5,300,400, represents the amount plundered from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Gold Gold production in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the country's exports of the metal have developed as indicated below. Source: BCC: le rapport annuel 2002-2003 Abbas Kayonga; le rapport général des Etats des lieux de la Division provinciale de Mines et Géologique du Sud-Kivu Nota bene: 1. In addition to the amount of gold which the National Bank of The Democratic Republic of The Congo has reported was mined in the western part of the country, production figures for South Kivu reported by the director of the Division provinciale des mines are also included. 2. Only output from South Kivu has been taken into account for 2003. According to the Group of Experts designated by the United Nations, gold production and export figures in Uganda developed as indicated below. Production (tons) Exports (tons) Source: partenariat Afrique Canada CENADEP-* le pillage des ressources naturelles de la République Démocratique du Congo From 1994 to 2000, Uganda exported 42.51 tons of gold but produced only 0.0298 tons. The difference, 42.48 tons, was produced mainly in Province Orientale, Maniema and North Kivu. Human Rights Watch, in its report entitled "The Curse of Gold," provides official figures for gold imports, exports and production. A Exports (USD) B Imports (USD) C Local production of gold (USD) D Difference D = A- (B=C) (USD) Unavailable Source: Bureau Ouganda de la statistique, Ministère de l'Energie et du Développement Minéral et Banque centrale Ougandaise, cité dans le rapport du Human Rights Watch. In 2002 alone, gold exports plundered from Ituri through Uganda were valued at USD 58,875,183. Ituri is not the only region experiencing such losses. Other affected areas include the gold-bearing district extending from Mahagi to Pueto in Katanga; Musefu, Luiza and Muene-Ditu in Kasai; Sandoa in Katanga; and the gold-bearing districts of Bas-Fleuve and Les Cataractes in Bas-Congo. It is clear from the foregoing information that nearly all the gold produced in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is removed illegally. This represents an annual loss of several hundred million United States dollars. The proximity of the mining areas to neighbouring countries encourages the illicit export of gold to those countries, in particular Rwanda, Burundi, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda. The prices offered by neighbouring countries compared to those paid in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the fact that owners of large businesses in the border areas require foreign currency in order to import basic necessities also invite illicit exports of gold. The tax system applicable to gold in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a disincentive given the existence of free trade zones in neighbouring countries. Pyrochlore (a) Mineral deposits Two mineral deposits should be mentioned: one in Lueshe (Rutsuru) and another in Bingo (Beni) in North Kivu. (b) Exports Exports consist of the output from SOMIKIVU in Lueshe, which is the only industrial mine. Some 178,800 kg of pyrochlore worth approximately USD 464,940 have been extracted. (c) Remarks Pyrochlore is currently extracted only by industrial methods and only the Lueshe mine is operational. Wolframite Wolframite occurs with cassiterite. Some cassiterite exports also include wolframite. The fight against fraud Massive fraud is rampant in the gold and tin sector for various reasons. On the one hand, insecurity is widespread in Ituri and the Ministry of Mines and its specialized units in particular (the Centre d'évaluation, d'expertise et de certification de substances minerals précieuses et semi-précieuses [CEEC]) have no presence in Beni and Butembo. In addition, borders with neighbouring States are porous and the laws of those States are unfair. Issues :: The Government of National Unity and Transition believes that bilateral control mechanisms are required in order to strengthen surveillance and control over exports of natural resources from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. :: The Government believes that trafficking can be controlled effectively only if regional subgroups mobilize and work together. 2. Summary of gold, cassiterite and wolframite comptoirs approved by the Ministry of Mines Comptoir Address Exports (kg) Approval date EURO TRADE INTERNATIONAL ABNER CONGO D AZUR sprl KING'S MINE Av. Mole n° 2919 5.766 kg 61 860 gold CONGO MINERALS TRADING Kinshasa av. de l'Equateur 126 272 gold Ets PANJU Av. In-strielle Commune d'Ibanda OLIVE Bukavu SOCORI/KOTECHA SHENIMED OKIMO 142 673 gold MUYEYE BYABOSHI MPC 3. List of companies operating in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are not registered with the Ministry of Mines 1. Goma Comptoirs No. and date of approval Physical addresses AMUR Av. La Frontière, Q. Katindo n°35 CLANAB Av. Rond-Point n° Ets GAMA GEMICO (SHABANI) Av. Des Touristes n° MAISON ENOCK MINING PRCESSING Av. Rutshuru n° MUNSAD Av. Butembo n° 19/01 M.H.I. Av. Du Lac n° 266 SODEXMINES Av. Des Ronds-points Coltan & Cassiterite Av. des Accasias n° 31 MAISON ERNEST GM & Head Coordinator (ORFAP) W.M.C. Av. des Ibis n° 4 SOMIKIVU Immeuble Jambo Safari Pyrochlore operation 2. Bukavu Av. Walungu Muhumba, C/Ibanda M.D.M. Av. Luhundula Muhumba, C/Ibanda BUSHI Av. Kasongo n°4, C/Ibanda M.P.C. 90, Av. Eplumumba; C/Ibanda 128, Av. Eplumumba; C/Ibanda 3. Kindu Av. Lumumba / Kindu GLOBAL MINERALS Kipala Kitima Kabungulu Information concerning Mr. Kiksoni Kambale - Trader in Butembo (North Kivu) - Owner of the Congocom comptoir, specializing in gold transactions - Manager of Butembo Airlines (BAL), which has a virtual monopoly on air traffic between Butembo and Mongbwalu (Province Orientale), where his agents purchase gold for his account - Supports RCD-KML in Butembo and the Front des nationalistes et des intégrationnistes (FNI) led by Floribert Ndjabu in Mongbwalu - Owns a gold foundry in Butembo and ships ingots to Uganda Commercial Impex in Kampala which in turn exports them to Switzerland and South Africa - Mr. Kambale also ships weapons and food to FNI - He also sells gold on behalf of FNI - BAL's fleet consists of a leased Antonov aircraft that is flown almost daily between Butembo and Mongbwalu - The Congolese State has not authorized Mr. Kambale to conduct business (gold trading or air service) in its territory. Information concerning Mrs. Gabrielle Severin - Belgian national - Occupation: missionary with the archdiocese of Bukavu - Type of visa: missionary visa No. 0064/16/013724/ANI/89 - Passport No. S 183209 - Address: 6, Av. Kasali, Bukavu The Government has acted in the manner expected of it and is determined to ensure that the embargo is observed by Congolese entities. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, through its department responsible for liaison with MONUC, should ensure collaboration between the joint mission analysis cell of MONUC and the pilot cell of Congolese experts. This unit will be the focal point for all contacts on the issues in question. The United Nations Group of Experts will also be interested to learn that the cell of Congolese experts will include representatives from the following institutions, ministries and departments: :: Office of the President of the Republic :: Office of the Vice-President responsible for the Policy, Defence and Security Committee :: Office of the Vice-President responsible for the Economic and Finance Committee :: Ministry of the Interior :: Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (the Government department responsible for liaison with MONUC) :: Ministry of Regional Cooperation :: Ministry of Finance :: Ministry of Budget :: Ministry of Foreign Trade :: Ministry of Mines :: Ministry of Transport and Communications :: Ministry of National Defence, Demobilization and Former Combatants :: National Security Council :: National Intelligence Service :: Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo :: General Inspectorate of Police :: État-major for Military Intelligence :: Direction générale de migration :: Office des douanes et accises :: Régie des voies aériennes :: Focal point responsible for combating the use of small arms and light weapons Lastly, in order to enhance the ability of the Congolese experts to monitor the embargo, the logistical arrangements for their work should be improved and they should receive appropriate training. Done in Kinshasa on 29 July 2005. Raymond Ramazani Baya Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation For the Government of the 