%%%LAWS AND REGULATIONS|BELIZE|ARMS LIMITATION|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) Note verbale dated 10 August 2005 from the Permanent Mission of Belize to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) The Permanent Mission of Belize to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and has the honour to refer to his letter transmitting a matrix that summarizes Belize's first national report. On behalf of the Government of Belize, the Permanent Mission of Belize is pleased to convey to the Committee the following points regarding the matrix: :: Belize does not object to the inclusion of the additional information obtained from the public records of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). :: Belize does not possess weapons of mass destruction and is fully committed to disarmament and non-proliferation. :: The chemical weapons (prohibition) bill is under consideration by the relevant authorities. As Belize stated in its first report to the Committee, the bill makes it an offence to develop, produce or use chemical weapons, or to assist with such activities, and otherwise regulates chemical weapons. The bill also establishes domestic control to prevent the proliferation of chemical weapons. In particular, the bill requires those dealing with toxic chemicals to provide information to the Government and maintain appropriate records. The Government may also seek information or authorize inspections of facilities. The bill also has provisions concerning national control lists. :: Belize is actively considering membership in the IAEA and expects to submit its application for membership before the General Conference in September 2005. :: Belize has recently signed with the United States of America an agreement concerning cooperation to suppress the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems and related materials delivered by sea. Belize is actively considering concluding a similar agreement with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 