%%%SANCTIONS|COTE D'IVOIRE|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|SIERRA LEONE|ARMS EMBARGO|TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS|FROZEN ASSETS|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning C么te d'Ivoire Note verbale dated 24 March 2005 from the Permanent Mission of Sierra Leone to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Committee The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sierra Leone to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning C么te d'Ivoire, and has the honour to report herewith on steps that the Government of Sierra Leone has taken to implement the measures imposed by paragraphs 7.9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004). Arms embargo (paragraph 7) Sierra Leone does not manufacture, supply, re-export or transfer arms or ammunition to any State or non-State entity. It subscribes to and scrupulously implements the Economic Community of West African States moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms and light weapons. Conscious of the implications for the consolidation of peace in Sierra Leone by hostilities and instability in other countries in the subregion, and deeply concerned about the illicit trafficking of arms in the subregion by mercenaries and other non-State actors, Sierra Leone is determined to ensure compliance with all arms embargoes imposed by the Security Council. Accordingly, all State security and protection institutions, including the military and police, and customs and immigration, have been informed about the provisions of resolution 1572 (2004) pertaining to the arms embargo concerning C么te d'Ivoire. In particular, they have been instructed to be vigilant in ensuring that no part of the territory of Sierra Leone is used as a transit point for the illicit transfer of arms and ammunition destined for any country, including C么te d'Ivoire. Travel ban (paragraph 9) Sierra Leone looks forward to receiving the list of individuals and entities to which the travel restrictions imposed under paragraph 9 of the resolution would apply. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has been instructed to apprise customs and immigration authorities at all airports, seaports and border crossings of the measures stipulated in paragraph 9 of the resolution. They have also been informed that the list of individuals would be communicated to them in due course. Freezing of assets (paragraph 11) While awaiting the list of persons and entities whose funds, other financial assets and economic resources are to be frozen in accordance with paragraph 11 of the resolution, Sierra Leone will take all appropriate measures for the implementation of the provisions of this paragraph, based on, among other things, its Banking Act (2000) and relevant guidelines of the West African Economic and Monetary Union. Violations of the arms embargo The Government of Sierra Leone is prepared to lend all necessary assistance in the group of experts established under resolution 1584 (2005) in fulfilling its mandate, particularly in the gathering of relevant information on any violation of the arms embargo measures imposed by paragraph 7 of resolution 1572 (2004). Information pertaining to the list Sierra Leone does not have at its disposal any credible information regarding individuals or entities that could be included in the list pursuant to paragraph 14 of resolution 1572 (2004). Any such information would be communicated to the Committee expeditiously. 