%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|PEACEMAKING|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|ASSASSINATION|ARMS EMBARGO|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|PIRACY|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|FOOD SECURITY|MALNUTRITION|CIVIL SOCIETY|WOMEN|MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION|RELIEF PERSONNEL|STAFF SECURITY|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 5302nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 November 2005, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council reaffirms all its previous statements and resolutions concerning the situation in Somalia, in particular the statement by its President (S/PRST/2005/32) of 14 July 2005 and resolution 1630 of 14 October 2005. "The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of 11 October 2005 (S/2005/642), and reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia and its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. "The Security Council expresses its concern over recent reported military activities and hostile rhetoric, and emphasizes that any resort to military force as a means for dealing with the current difference within the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) is unacceptable. The Council condemns in the strongest terms the assassination attempt on 6 November 2005 against Prime Minister Ali Mohammed Gedi in Mogadishu. "The Security Council expresses its concern and disappointment over the lack of progress in ameliorating the contention between the leaders of the TFIs, and over the non-functioning of the Transitional Federal Parliament (TFP), which has an essential role in promoting the peace process. The Council calls upon all Somali parties and the leaders of the TFIs to take concrete steps towards reaching a consensus agreement through inclusive dialogue without delay. The Council commends the Prime Minister's Initiative for the early convening of a full Council of Ministers in Mogadishu, to be followed by a full session of Parliament. The Council underlines that primary responsibility for progress in restoring an effective functioning government to Somalia lies with the leaders and members of the TFIs. "The Security Council underlines its strong support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his efforts at facilitating the peace process in Somalia, supporting ongoing Somali-owned internal initiatives. The Council calls upon all Member States to provide their full and active support in this regard. "The Security Council commends the neighbouring countries, Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), African Union, the League of Arab States, European Union and concerned Member States for their keen interest and persistent efforts in support of the peace process in Somalia. The Council urges them to use their influence and leverage through a common approach to ensure that the TFIs resolve their differences and build trust, through an inclusive dialogue, and to move ahead on the key issues of security and national reconciliation. "The Security Council affirms its continuing support to the TFIs and reiterates the need for a national security and stabilization plan to be agreed, through which any efforts to rebuild the security sector should be directed. "The Security Council condemns the increased inflow of weapons into Somalia and the continuous violations of the United Nations arms embargo. The Council further reminds all States of their obligations to comply fully with the measures imposed by resolution 733 and urges them to take all necessary steps to hold violators accountable. "The Security Council expresses serious concern over the increasing incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia. The Council condemns recent hijackings of vessels in the area, particularly of ships carrying humanitarian supplies to Somalia. The Council urges the TFIs, regional actors and relevant international organizations to work together to address this problem. "The Security Council expresses its growing concern over the situation of one million Somalis in a state of humanitarian emergency or suffering from severe livelihood distress and the rising civil and food insecurity in parts of Southern Somalia, where malnutrition levels have increased. The Council stresses that improving humanitarian access to all Somalis in need is an essential component of durable peace and reconciliation. "The Security Council recognizes the role of civil society, in particular women's groups, and their contribution to progress on demobilizing militias and improving the humanitarian situation in Somalia. "The Security Council strongly urges the TFIs to ensure humanitarian access and provide guarantees for the safety and security of aid workers. The Council condemns in the strongest terms the killing of a United Nations national security officer on 3 October in Kismayo. The Council calls for those responsible to be held accountable. "The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the peace process in Somalia and the commitment of the United Nations to assist in this regard." 