%%%POLITICAL CONDITIONS|COTE D'IVOIRE|

Official communiqué of the 5253rd (closed) meeting of the Security Council * Reissued for technical reasons. Held in private at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 31 August 2005, at 10 a.m. In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the following communiqué was issued through the SecretaryGeneral in place of a verbatim record: "At its 5253rd meeting, held in private on 31 August 2005, the Security Council considered the item entitled `The situation in Côte d'Ivoire'. "In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council's prior consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended an invitation under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Mosiuoa Gerard Patrick Lekota, Minister of Defence of South Africa, in his capacity as the representative of the Chief Mediator on Côte d'Ivoire of the African Union. "The President, with the consent of the Council, invited the representatives of Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria (representing the Chairman of the African Union), to participate in the discussion of the item without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure. "In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council's prior consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended an invitation under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d'Ivoire. "The members of the Council heard briefings by His Excellency Mr. Mosiuoa Lekota, Minister of Defence for South Africa; His Excellency Mr. Aminu Wali, Permanent Representative of Nigeria; and Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d'Ivoire. "Members of the Council and the representative of Côte d'Ivoire exchanged views with the above-named briefers." 