%%%RULES AND REGULATIONS|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|

Secretary-General's bulletin Amendments to staff rules 106.2, 106.3, 109.10, 206.3 and 206.7 The Secretary-General, pursuant to staff regulation 12.2 and in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/268 of 23 December 2004, hereby promulgates the text of the amendments to staff rules 106.2, 106.3, 109.10, 206.3 and 206.7, which are set out in the annex to the present bulletin. These amendments shall be provisional until the requirements of staff regulations 12.3 and 12.4 have been met. The amendments promulgated by the present bulletin shall enter into force on 16 May 2005. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Secretary-General Amendments to Staff Rules Rule 106.2 Sick leave (c) A staff member may take uncertified sick leave of not more than three consecutive working days at a time, for up to seven working days in a calendar year, when incapacitated for the performance of his or her duties by illness or injury. Part or all of this entitlement may be used to attend to family-related emergencies, in which case the limitation of three consecutive working days shall not apply. Rule 106.3 Maternity and paternity leave (b) Subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General, a staff member shall be entitled to paternity leave in accordance with the following provisions: (i) The leave shall be granted for a total period of up to four weeks or, in the case of internationally recruited staff members serving at a non-family duty station, up to eight weeks. In exceptional circumstances, leave shall be granted for a total period of up to eight weeks; (ii) The leave may be taken either continuously or in separate periods during the year following the birth of the child, provided it is completed during that year; (iii) The staff member shall receive paternity leave with full pay for the entire duration of his absence. (e) Annual leave shall accrue during the period of maternity or paternity leave. Rule 109.10 Last day for pay purposes (a) When a staff member is separated from service, the date on which entitlement to salary, allowances and benefits shall cease shall be determined according to the following provisions: (i) On resignation, the date shall be either the date of expiration of the notice period under rule 109.2 or such other date as the Secretary-General accepts. Staff members will be expected to perform their duties during the period of notice of resignation, except when the resignation takes effect upon the completion of maternity or paternity leave or following sick or special leave. Annual leave will be granted during the notice of resignation only for brief periods; Rule 206.3 (d) Up to seven days of uncertified sick leave in any twelve months of consecutive service may be used as family leave, in order to attend to family-related emergencies, in which case the requirements otherwise applicable for sick leave in excess of three consecutive days shall not apply. Rule 206.7 (b) Subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General, project personnel shall be entitled to paternity leave in accordance with the following provisions: (i) The leave shall be granted for a total period of up to four weeks or in the case of individuals serving at a non-family duty station, up to eight weeks. In exceptional circumstances, leave shall be granted for a total period of up to eight weeks; (iii) The individual shall receive paternity leave with full pay for the entire duration of his absence. 