%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

TD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Distr. 2 August 2005 Original: ENGLISH 1. The Trade and Development Board, at its fifty-first session, held from 4 to 15 October 2004, approved the application of Traidcraft Exchange (TX) for designation under rule 77 of the rules of procedure of the Board. 2. The Trade and Development Board, at its thirty-sixth executive session, on 3 May 2005, approved the applications of 3D--> Human Rights - Equitable Economy - Sustainable Development (3D-->Three), Center of Concern (CoC), the Centre for International Environmental Law (CIEL) and the Organisation Camerounaise de Promotion de la Coopération Economique Internationale (OCAPROCE) for designation under rule 77 of the rules of procedure of the Board. 3. The Board, at its thirty-sixth executive session, also took note of the changes of name of the following non-governmental organizations, which already enjoy observer status with UNCTAD: the International Federation of Purchasing and Materials Management, the Liaison Office of the Rubber Industry of the European Economic Community, the Association of European Shipbuilders and Shiprepairers, the Union of International Fairs and the Association of the Chocolate, Biscuit and Confectionery Industries of the EEC. 4. The following entries should therefore be added to the list of non-governmental organizations participating in the activities of UNCTAD: General category Classification* Session of Board at which designated IFPSM International Federation of Purchasing and VII Supply Management 1 OCAPROCE Organisation Camerounaise de Promotion de la Coopération Economique Internationale TDB/EX(36) (No English equivalent exists) TX Traidcraft Exchange LI UFI Global Association of the Exhibition II Industry 2 Special category Classification* Session of Board 3D-->Three 3D--> Human Rights - Equitable Economy - TDB/EX(36) Sustainable Development.C.1 CAOBISCO Association of the Chocolate, Biscuit, XXV(I) and Confectionery Industries of the UE 3 .C.1 CIEL Centre for International Environmental Law TDB/EX(36) CoC Center of Concern.C.1/C2 TDB/EX(36) CESA Community of European Shipyards' Association 4 XXXIV(I) .C.3 BLIC European Association of the Rubber Industry 5 IX(I) 5. Accordingly, the number of non-governmental organizations included in the list provided for in rule 77 of the rules of procedure of the Board now totals 194: 106 in the General Category and 88 in the Special Category. There are 16 national non-governmental organizations included in the Register. * Non-governmental organizations in the special category may attend sessions of the Trade and Development Board and sessions of the Commissions and their subsidiary bodies as indicated in this column. C1: Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities C2 : Commission on Investment, Technology and Related Financial Issues C3 : Commission on Enterprise, Business Facilitation and Development 