%%%COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY|BEIRUT (LEBANON)|LEBANON|PEACEBUILDING|TIMOR-LESTE|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|APPROPRIATIONS|STAFF ASSESSMENT|CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION|EAST TIMOR SITUATION|STAFFING|COSTS|SUPPORT COSTS|ADMINISTRATION|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|

Sixtieth session Agenda item 124 Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Summary The present report is submitted in the context of the anticipated action by the Security Council on the report of the Secretary-General on the International Independent Investigation Commission and on the situation in Timor-Leste. The report contains the proposed resource requirements for the International Independent Investigation Commission for the period 16 June to 31 December 2006 and for a technical roll-over of the existing mandate of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for the period from 21 June to 31 August 2006. The estimated requirement for the two missions for the respective periods amount to $22,442,500 net ($24,951,300 gross). After taking into account the estimated savings of $3,262,500 realized against the appropriations for these missions, the net additional requirements amount to $19,180,000 net ($21,688,800 gross). The General Assembly is requested to appropriate an amount of $19,180,000 net ($21,688,800 gross), under the procedures provided for in resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986. Paragraphs Page Introduction International Independent Investigation Commission Resource requirements Analysis of resource requirements United Nations Office in Timor-Leste Action required of the General Assembly I. Introduction 1. It is recalled that, by its resolution 60/247, the General Assembly appropriated an amount of $355,949,300 for special political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007. 2. Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council (A/60/585 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2), as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Support Office (A/60/694), the General Assembly, in its resolutions 60/248 and 60/255, approved charges totalling $304,040,800 against the provision for special political missions appropriated under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for 2006-2007. Furthermore, in his report on estimates in respect of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) (A/60/585/Add.3), which is presently before the Assembly, the Secretary-General proposed to utilize the unallocated balance of $51,908,500 remaining in the provision for special political missions to meet, in part, the requirements for UNAMA for the period from 1 April to 31 December 2006. Should the Assembly approve utilizing the balance in the provision for special political missions as proposed by the Secretary-General, the amount appropriated in the provision for special political missions will have been fully exhausted. 3. The present report is submitted in the context of the anticipated action by the Security Council in connection with the report of the Secretary-General on the International Independent Investigation Commission and on the situation in Timor-Leste. The report contains the proposed resource requirements for the Commission for the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006, estimated at $17,189,000 net ($19,175,100 gross), and for a technical roll-over of the existing mandate of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for the period from 21 June to 31 August 2006, amounting to $5,253,500 net ($5,776,200 gross). 4. It is estimated that unencumbered balances of $3,006,200 and $256,300 would remain, respectively, under the provisions for the International Independent Investigation Commission for the period from 1 January to 15 June 2006 and for UNOTIL for the period from 1 January to 20 June 2006. Accordingly, it is proposed that the requirements for the two missions presented in the present report in the amount of $19,180,000 net ($21,688,800 gross) be considered under the procedures provided for in General Assembly resolution 41/213. Any expenditures against these proposed appropriations would be strictly subject to the extension of the mandates of the two missions by the Security Council. II. International Independent Investigation Commission Overview of the Commission and its future role 5. The International Independent Investigation Commission was established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1595 (2005) for an initial period of six months. The Commission, based in Lebanon, was established to assist the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of all aspects of the 14 February 2005 bombing in Beirut. By its resolution 1644 (2005), the Security Council decided to extend the mandate of the Commission, initially until 15 June 2006, and also authorized the Commission to extend technical assistance as appropriate to the Lebanese authorities with regard to their investigations of the 14 other attacks perpetrated in Lebanon since 1 October 2004. 6. As indicated in the Commission's third report to the Security Council (S/2006/161), its work has entered into a new phase of its operations, commensurate with the natural progression of a criminal investigation, progressively obtaining a deeper understanding of the structural and political environment in which the crimes took place, establishing an enhanced capacity to pursue new lines of enquiry and applying a methodological approach in order to ascertain the reliability of information obtained and to corroborate new evidence. In view of the ongoing discussions about the establishment of a tribunal of an international character, it will be critical for the success of the Commission's work to ensure the application of recognized standards of international law, taking Lebanese law into account, and to carry out its operations in line with widely accepted professional standards. In anticipation of the latter, the Commission has enhanced the management of various support systems (for example, information and language services) commensurate with the requirements of cases of such a complex nature in other national or international settings. In the current phase, security of both its premises and its staff continues to be one of the Commission's main priorities. 7. The Secretary-General notified the Security Council that the Commission commenced full operations with effect from 16 June 2005. As previously reported, the Commission established its main operational base at the Monteverde Hotel in the Beit Meri area of Beirut on 9 July 2005. The Commission has decided to remain at the Monteverde Hotel, both for security reasons and in order to avoid any further disruption of its investigative work. Based on expert advice from the Lebanese army and Internal Security Forces, it is deemed the best option, at this point in time, to expand accommodation and office space within the premises and further improve external and internal security measures for both staff and facilities. The Lebanese Government has indicated it is further willing to financially assist with the measures needed in this respect (for example, procurement and deployment of prefabricated accommodation units and additional external security installations). 8. In addition, the Commission is continuing to use, to the maximum extent possible, resources of other parts of the United Nations system, most notably the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia and the United Nations Information Centre. However, these resources are limited in their own right and, owing to the duration of the Commission's mandate, cannot be permanently borrowed but need to be established within the Commission itself. The Commission will also continue to use national staff members in its operations. However, for reasons of both ensuring confidentiality and limiting security risks for national staff members due to exposure to sensitive information, the Commission has taken a policy decision to limit the number of national staff members in the substantive areas and to make use of national experts on an "as needed" basis through consultancies. It should be noted that national staff do not live on the premises. 9. The present budget proposal covers the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006. The proposed requirements for the six months amount to $17,189,000 net ($19,175,100 gross). This consists of $13,859,600 net for civilian personnel costs and $3,329,400 for operational costs. It should be noted that the Government of Lebanon provides for the cost of office premises, valued at $1,752,000. 10. The total staffing proposed for the period comprises a total of 229 staff (179 international staff and 50 national staff), reflecting an increase of 53 positions (49 international and 4 national staff) from the total staffing level of 176 authorized for the period from 1 January to 15 June 2006. Mandate of the International Independent Investigation Commission and planned results 11. As indicated above, the Commission's work has entered into a new phase. As the investigation into the 14 February 2005 terrorist bombing is progressing and becoming more complex with existing evidence and information being corroborated, new leads being pursued and previously overlooked areas being examined, the actual day-to-day work of the Commission has also become more complex. The result is more detailed data collection and examination, forensic and other analysis and case management. The expansion of the Commission's mandate to provide technical assistance in 14 additional cases has also added considerable demands on the investigative and administrative capacity of the Commission due to the complexity of each of these cases, which is comparable to that of the investigation into the Hariri assassination. Moreover, the Commission is hopeful that international cooperation will yield even more results in the near future and will result in additional information, documents and access to witnesses. 12. Security of staff and premises continues to be one of the Commission's main priorities, particularly during any movements, official or personal, outside the main operational base. In this respect, the Commission has reviewed its existing security structure and requirements, jointly with the Department of Safety and Security, an outside security consultant and its Lebanese counterparts in the army and the Internal Security Forces. It has embarked on a course of vigorously improving security in areas previously not addressed but vital to the continued operations of the Commission. 13. The expected accomplishments would lead to the fulfilment of the proposed objective within the time frame of the Commission, and the indicators of achievement show a measurement of progress towards such accomplishments during the budget period. The objective, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement are presented below. Objective: to assist the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of the 14 February 2005 terrorist bombing; and to extend technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities regarding their investigations of terrorist acts perpetrated in Lebanon since 1 October 2004. Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement (a) Availability of clear, complete and detailed presentation of facts and circumstances surrounding the 14 February 2005 bombing that would enable the successful prosecution of those responsible (a) (i) Identification of a unifying case hypothesis Performance measure: Number of case hypothesis identified 1 January-15 June 2006: 1 (partial) 16 June-31 December 2006: 1 (full) (ii) Identification of suspects of the crime Number of suspects identified 1 January-15 June 2006: 19 16 June-31 December 2006: 15 approximate (iii) Whereabouts of suspects established Number of suspects' whereabouts established 16 June-31 December 2006: 10 (b) Structure, internal procedures and standard operating procedures adopted that conform with applicable international standards, taking into account Lebanese law and ensuring that judicial procedures are adopted and adhered to (b) Increased number of standard operating procedures Number of standard operating procedures 1 January-15 June 2006: 6 16 June-31 December 2006: 8 (c) Progress towards the establishment of a tribunal with an international character to try the perpetrators of the crime (c) Background legal and operational knowledge of international justice and prosecution management provided 1 January-15 June 2006: 6 meetings with Lebanese authorities 16 June-31 December 2006: 8 meetings with Lebanese authorities (d) Enabling the Lebanese authorities to complete their investigations into the 14 other cases of terrorist attacks as a result of technical assistance provided by the Commission (d) (i) Factual, legal and comparative analysis of each case achieved Number of cases 1 January-15 June 2006: 14 16 June-31 December 2006: 14 (ii) Increased number of investigative recommendations Number of investigative recommendations 16 June-31 December 2006: 42 Outputs :: Individual legal and factual analysis report for each case: 15 in total :: Comparative legal and factual analysis report for all cases: 15 final :: Horizontal linkage report: 1 final :: Legal analysis, Lebanese and international law report External factors 14. The Commission is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) all parties concerned cooperate in providing information and facilitating the testimony of witnesses; (b) there are no delays in the proceedings for reasons beyond the Commission's control, such as the unavailability of witnesses to certify statements and provide testimony; (c) the security environment is conducive to its work; and (d) there is no impediment of case development or intimidation of witnesses and suspects. A. Resource requirements 15. The proposed resource requirements for the Commission for the period 16 June to 31 December 2006 are estimated at $17,189,000 net ($19,175,100 gross) as shown in tables 1 and 3. Table 2 details the staffing requirements. Total requirements (Thousands of United States dollars) 1 January to 15 June 2006 Variance 16 June to 31 December 2006 Category of expenditure Appropriation Estimated total expenditure Savings (deficit) Total net requirement Non-recurrent requirements I. Civilian personnel costs II. Operational costs Net requirements Staff assessment Gross requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (non-budgeted) Table 2 Total staffing requirements Professional category and above General Service and related categories National staff USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 Total Field/ Security Service Principal level General Service Total Inter- national National officer Local level United Nations Volunteers Grand total 1 Jan.-15 June 16 June-31 Dec. Change 16. The total level of staffing complement being proposed for the Commission for the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006 amounts to 229. The staffing complement would consist of 179 international staff, comprising 91 positions in the Professional category and above, 79 positions in the Field Service and the Security Service, nine positions in General Service (Principal and Other levels) and 50 national staff, comprising four National Officers and 46 local level staff. 17. The proposed staffing requirements reflects an increase of 49 international positions (23 in the Professional category and above and 26 in the Field Service and General Service categories) and four positions at the local level. Detailed justification and rationale for the proposed staffing changes are contained in the paragraphs below. 1. Office of the Commissioner 18. The Commissioner at the Under-Secretary-General level assists the Secretary-General in the execution and implementation of the Commission's mandate and is responsible for the overall management of the Commission as well as for setting up its overall strategy in terms of policies and investigations. Directly reporting to the Commissioner are: the Chief of Investigations (D-2), the Chief Legal Adviser (D-1), the Chief of Staff (D-1), the Spokesperson (P-5), the Senior Political Adviser (P-5) and the Special Assistant (P-5). The Office of the Commissioner comprises: (a) the Immediate Office of the Commissioner; (b) the Office of the Chief of Staff; (c) the Legal Advisory Services Section; and (d) the Investigations Division. Immediate office of the Commissioner 19. The immediate office of the Commissioner comprises six positions (1 USG, 3 P-5, 1 P-4 and 1 General Service (Other level)). The Commissioner is supported by: a Spokesperson (P-5) responsible for conducting media analysis of strategic relevance and acting as the official voice of the Commission with media and other interested parties as required; a Senior Political Adviser (P-5), who provides advice on relevant Lebanese political matters, develops political analysis and policy advice to the Commissioner, prepares drafts of the Commission's regular and ad hoc reports, provides briefings on external policy, political and organizational matters and drafts speaking notes, as requested, by the Commissioner; and a Special Assistant (P-5) responsible for providing operational and management support to the Commissioner and the Chief of Staff in the delegation of appropriate tasks. The Commissioner is assisted by a Personal Assistant (General Service (Other level)). 20. A Political Affairs Officer position (P-4) is currently assigned to the Department of Political Affairs at Headquarters to provide the necessary substantive and operational back-up support to the Commission, including, constant interface with the members of the Security Council and other Member States, coordination with the specialized agencies, United Nations departments and offices, daily interaction with the Commission staff, and the preparation of special and periodic reports, including reporting obligations to the Security Council and briefings. Office of the Chief of Staff 21. The Chief of Staff (D-1) reports to the Commissioner and acts as the principal senior management interface for the dissemination, implementation, enactment and monitoring of administrative policies and decisions. The incumbent oversees the day-to-day support service operations of the Commission, including security services, language services, and administrative support services, ensures, through senior staff management structure, coordination and communication between each of the Commission's components and acts in support of the primary core investigative objectives and functions of the Commission. Legal Advisory Services Section 22. The Legal Advisory Services Section provides legal advice on matters of international and Lebanese law, as well as the legal framework within which the Commission's activities, including investigative work, can be conducted both within Lebanon and abroad. The Section also provides advice on the legal aspects of the Commission's operational activities and serves as a focal point for requests for assistance to Governments, international organizations and other relevant parties and individuals. The Legal Advisory Services Section provides a critical link between the different parts of the Commission by advising on all issues pertaining to the execution of its mandate, general legal and policy questions and by developing internal standard operating procedures on investigative and managerial aspects of the work. 23. The Legal Advisory Services Section is headed by the Chief Legal Adviser (D1) and supported by one Cooperation Officer (P-5), two Legal Officers (1 P-4 and 1 P-3) and one Administrative Assistant (Field Service). It is proposed that one National Officer position be redeployed to the Language Services Section. Investigations Division 24. Since the core of the work of the Commission rests with the Investigations Division, 70 positions, or roughly 84 per cent of the overall level of substantive staffing requirements (a total of 83 positions), are dedicated to it. The Division is overseen by the Office of the Chief of Investigations, comprising the Chief of Investigations (D-2), the Deputy Chief (D-1), a Senior Legal Officer (P-5) and a Planning Analyst (P-4). The Office is supported by three Administrative Assistants (2 General Service/Other level and 1 local level). One new Case Manager Officer position (P-2) is proposed to manage the case-related filing system and to provide full administrative support in the preparation of the disclosure requirements for the cases so that they are compatible with the standards of existing international tribunals. It is proposed that one National Officer position be redeployed to the Language Services Section. 25. The focus of the Commission's primary investigation falls in two principal project areas, the crime scene, and the execution of the crime on the day in question; and linkage of individuals to the crime committed. In order to meet the objectives of each of these projects, two sections have been established: (a) the Case Linkage Section; and (b) the Case Crime Scene Section. 26. The Case Crime Scene Section is developing a single unifying theory of the events that occurred on the day in question and how the attack was carried out. It includes a series of systematic interviews of approximately 60 identified individuals associated with the scene of the crime. 27. The Case Linkage Section establishes links between the perpetration of the Hariri assassination and those who commissioned and enabled it, including identifying all the perpetrators. The Section conducts interviews of identified individuals and ensures that all information, both forensic and investigative, is fully collated, analysed and integrated into the case, including a vast amount of newly acquired electronic material. 28. Each section is headed by a Senior Investigator (P-5), reporting directly to the Chief of Investigations and the Deputy Chief. Each section comprises an Analyst (P-4), a Legal Officer (P-4) and an Investigator (P-4), working as a three-person core-competency supervisory group, with three Analysts (P-3), three Investigators (P-3) and one Analyst (P-2) providing support. The work of each section is complemented and supported by two Administrative Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 local level). It is proposed to strengthen the current staffing structure of each section by one Language Analyst Assistant (Field Service) in order to ensure a coordinated review of documentation before it is sent to the Language Services Section for translation. The two new Language Analyst Assistants will work closely with the analysts on documentation. This will ensure the prioritization of documents to be translated, thereby significantly reducing the quantity of documents sent for translation since only the most necessary documentation will be sent to the Language Services Section. 29. Since the mandate of the Commission has been expanded to include the provision of technical assistance in 14 additional cases, the Investigations Division has been expanded to include a group responsible for providing operational and technical support to the national authorities in their investigations of other terrorist attacks and to ensure the delivery of integrated support services to all of the Investigations Division. For the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006, it is proposed to further expand the Operational Support Section into two integrated but distinct sections: the Operational Support Section and the Information and Communications Technology Support Section. Together the sections would provide support to the Hariri Case, technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of 14 other cases as well as integrated electronic systems support, forensics support and witness protection services for the different investigation projects. The sections would also ensure that the investigation is conducted in a manner enabling effective prosecution at a later stage, fully respecting international legal standards. 30. The Operational Support Section is headed by a Senior Investigator (P-5) and is supported by one Analyst (P-4), one Case Legal Officer (P-4) and one Investigator (P-4), working together as a three-person core-competency supervisory group, together with a Forensic Coordinator (P-4), a Witness Protection Coordinator (P-4), four Analysts (P-3), two Investigators (P-3), and one Analyst (P-2). The work of the Section is supported by one Administrative/Legal Assistant (Field Service) and one Administrative Assistant (local level). It is proposed to increase the staffing complement of the Section by five positions, namely three additional Forensic Experts (1 P-4 and 2 P-3) and one Language Analyst Assistant (Field Service). 31. The additional Forensics Coordinator (P-4) would be responsible for the coordination and analysis of forensic material related to the 14 other cases, including horizontal analysis across the cases, while the existing Forensics Coordinator (P-4) will be responsible for the Hariri Case and the ongoing increased forensic exploitation of the crime scene, convoy vehicles, increased DNA analyses and the analysis of over 1,000 newly acquired artefacts. Two new Forensics Expert positions (P-3) are proposed to assist the Forensics Coordinators in accelerating the examination, cataloguing and analysis requirements for the existing 19 forensic projects. 32. A position for one Language Analyst Assistant (Field Service) is proposed in order to ensure a coordinated review of documentation before it is sent to the Language Services Section for translation. 33. The Information and Communications Technology Support Section would be responsible for ensuring that: all information obtained is fully integrated into the electronic case management systems; electronic analysis tools are used; forensic collection and analysis is made available; and witness protection capabilities are provided. The Section will be headed by a Senior Systems Development Officer (P-5) and supported by three professional positions, namely one Computer Forensics Officer (P-4), one Database Administrator (P-3) and one Evidence Custodian (P-2). The work of the Section will be assisted by 11 existing Field Service data management staff to be redeployed from the Case Linkage Section (3 Field Service positions); the Case Crime Scene Section (5 Field Service positions) and the Operational Support Section (3 Field Service positions). 34. In order to meet the staffing requirements of the new Section, it is proposed that the existing position of Systems Development Officer (P-4) be upgraded to the P-5 level in view of the complexity of the work involved and the necessity of managing a number of diverse staff and ensuring the transition of the information and communication technology (ICT)-related work processes from managing an early stage single investigation to potentially up to 15 cases eventually progressed to a mature investigation phase and under advanced case development. The Senior Systems Development Officer will be responsible for the effectiveness and appropriateness of all ICT systems implemented and maintained within the Commission. The incumbent will also be responsible for conceptualizing, developing, and implementing ICT strategies, the effective oversight of all ICT-related projects, all ICT-related budgetary activities, the effective oversight of all ICT-related procurement activities, the effective management of all ICT staff, the provision of authoritative technical and policy advice to senior Commission staff, and the development and implementation of appropriate and effective ICT-related standards, practices and procedures. 35. With regard to the proposed three new positions in the Professional category and above, one Computer Forensics Expert (P-4) would be required to perform full forensics exploitation of over 150 electronic devices with a potential total of 200 gigabits of data therein. This exploitation is required before investigative analysis can commence. This is a highly specialized skill with highly specialized electronic tools, and the Commission currently does not have such skills or capacity. It is anticipated that a significant number of further electronic devices will be acquired between now and December. In addition, one Systems Database Administrator (P-3) is proposed to assist the Senior Systems Development Officer and maintain and enhance the Commission's relational database management system. The incumbent will be responsible for ensuring the security, integrity and appropriate availability of all of the Commission's information stored within the database management system as well as managing all database backup and recovery tasks. 36. The proposed Evidence Custodian (P-2) will be responsible for the custody of all collected evidence including logging, storage and provision of all potential evidentiary materials received by the Commission. More specifically, the incumbent will be responsible for: (a) defining and implementing all evidence-handling policies, practices and procedures; (b) ensuring chain-of-custody is maintained as appropriate; (c) preserving the physical integrity of all artefacts and potential evidence; (d) defining the metadata to be recorded for each artefact and ensuring that this metadata is recorded as required; and (e) assisting the Chief of Investigations in all evidence-related budgetary and recruitment matters. It should be noted that as of now these responsibilities have been shared between several investigators. In view of the increasing amounts of evidentiary materials being collected, the current arrangements would no longer be adequate, and it is necessary to assign these functions to a full-time position. 2. Support services Total inter- National Officer 1 Jan.- 15 June 2006 16 June-31 Dec. 2006 Language Services Section 37. With a view to accommodating the significantly increased requirements generated by the intensified investigation into the Hariri assassination, the expanded mandate of the Commission and the prospects of improved cooperation with the Syrian Arab Republic, it is necessary to strengthen the Language Services Section. In particular, an adequate and readily available capacity for translating primary and secondary sources and documents from Arabic into English remains a critical feature of progress in the work of investigators and analysts. In line with the systematic and professional approach advocated by the Commission in its third report to the Security Council, and given the highly sensitive and confidential nature of the substantive matter, it is necessary to provide an in-house language service that adheres to the standards widely accepted for other international organizations and judicial institutions. Hence an internal review and assessment has resulted in a more refined structure of the Commission's language services, comprising a coordinator function, translators/revisers, transcribers, language assistants and interpreters. These positions will primarily have to be recruited internationally in order to minimize the exposure of national language staff to sensitive information and thereby reduce the potential security risk to such personnel, who do not live on premise and thus would not enjoy the same levels of protection as international colleagues. 38. As a result, it is proposed to increase the staffing complement of the Language Services Section, which currently provides interpretation, translation and transcription services from nine staff (3 P-4 interpreters, 2 P-4 translators, 2 P-3 translators and 2 National Officers as interpreters/translators) to 31 staff (1 P-5, 11 P-4, 10 P-3, 1 Field Service, 1 General Service/Principal level, 3 General Service/Other level and 4 National Officers). 39. Under the proposed new structure, the Section will be headed by a Chief of Section at the P-5 level responsible for the overall coordination and management of the work of the Section. The proposed staffing will comprise five P-4 Interpreters, six P-4 Translator/Revisers, 10 P-3 Translators, one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Documents Control Assistant (General Service/Principal level), three Typists/Transcribers (General Service/Other level) and four National Officers as interpreters/translators. Two National Officer positions are redeployed from the Legal Services Section and Investigations Division. The National Officers would consist of a basic core of local translators whose work would be limited to terminology, open source material and non-confidential documents, which would minimize their exposure and security risk, in line with the security advice provided. The number of international revisers/translators proposed is based on an estimate of 10,000 pages of translation for six months. Security Safety Services Section 40. In view of the high priority that security constitutes for the Commission, based on the regional and in-country risk/threat assessment, the sensitive nature of the work of the Commission, and the mere association of staff members with the Commission, the Security and Safety Services Section continues to be a sizeable component of the Commission. 41. The Section is headed by a Senior Security Adviser (P-5) and supported by 51 staff including: the Deputy Security Adviser (P-4), the Chief Main Operations Base (P-3), the Chief Security Information Operations Centre (P-3), 47 Security Officers (33 Security Service and 14 local level) and one Administrative Assistant (General Service/Other level). Owing to the proposed increase in investigators, analysts, language and other staff as well as the continued high threat and risk level of security, it is proposed to strengthen the Security and Safety Services Section by 15 new positions, including one Security Information Analyst (P-4) and 14 Security Officers (Security Service). 42. The Security Information Analyst position at the P-4 level is required to build an in-house capacity to carry out regular ongoing assessments of the threat and risk level to the Commission and its staff. Due to the complexity of the environment and the various risks involved for staff and United Nations facilities, a dedicated capacity will be necessary to liaise with other United Nations entities, the interlocutors within the Lebanese Army and the Internal Security Forces, and Commission staff with relevant knowledge. 43. With respect to the proposed 14 new Security Officers positions, eight of these positions are required to supplement the already existing security complement owing to the proposed increase in the overall staffing structure by 49 international positions. The proposed increase of eight is based on a ratio of one Security Officer per six international positions and takes into account the security arrangements put in place by the Lebanese army and the Internal Security Forces. 44. The remaining six positions are required to strengthen the existing close protection complement of the Commissioner as well as to enhance the protection capability for the Commissioner, senior staff and investigators arising from the current threat/risk assessment. Close protection resources thus far have not been sufficient to allow for effective protection in connection with movements of the Commissioner in a high risk environment. Additionally, close protection resources, when not engaged in actual movements, will be utilized to conduct essential operational planning and counter-surveillance of both the main operations base and other sites routinely visited by the Commission. All resources are to be employed on normal internal security duties and will provide assistance to other functions as required, including the Security Information Operations Centre and close protection. 3. Administration Administrative Support Section 45. In the present phase of consolidating the Commission's investigative capacities, including through a much improved information management and language service system, the Administrative Support Section has the main responsibility for providing efficient administrative and logistics support, including expediting the recruitment and procurement of the additional resources needed. 46. The approved staffing level for Administration for the period from 1 January to 15 June 2006 is 40 positions. For the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006, it is proposed to increase the Field Service support staff from nine to 13 to strengthen the support capacity of the Finance Unit (1 Field Service), the Personnel Unit (1 Field Service) and the Communications/Information Technology Unit (2 Field Service). In addition, in view of the proposed increase in the number of staff in the Investigations Division, it is proposed to increase the number of national staff by four. The increase represents the addition of four drivers required for transportation of staff to and from the main operational base. Accordingly, the proposed staffing requirement would amount to 48. It is also proposed to upgrade the position of Budget Officer from P-3 to P-4 in view of anticipated increased responsibilities in the functions of the post. 47. The Administrative Support Section is headed by the Chief Administrative Officer (P-5) and supported by a Communications and Information Technology Officer (P-4) and four P-3 positions (Finance, Procurement, Information Technology and Personnel). It is proposed that the position of Budget Officer (P-3) be upgraded to P-4 in view that the functions would in effect be combined with the responsibilities of a Senior Administrative Officer, including the focal point for all matters related to the Board of Auditors and Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) audits. In addition to being the main interface on budgetary matters with Headquarters, the incumbent would act as functional deputy for the Chief Administrative Officer and also as officer-in-charge during the absence of the Chief Administrative Officer. The work of the Section is supported by 13 Field Service staff (3 for Finance, 4 for Personnel, 5 for Information and Communications Technology and 1 for General Services) and 28 local level staff. 48. The Finance Unit will require an international cashier (Field Service) since UNIFIL, which provided the service in the past, will be unable to continue to do so. The Personnel Unit will need additional support in view of its already heavy workload, and the proposed increase in international staff. In the case of communications and information technology, two Field Service positions are proposed for one Communications Assistant (communications and information services inventory/billing) and one Radio Technician post. The current Communications Assistant is a staff member on loan from UNIFIL, who has returned to her parent office. Because of the sensitivity of communications of the Commission, it was decided that this function should be performed by international staff. Similarly, there are two national Radio Technicians on loan from UNIFIL who will return to their parent office. Of the two, one will be replaced locally. It is proposed to add one international Radio Technician position (Field Service) for dealing with PABX, telephone programming and configurations. 49. The proposed administrative and support structure reflects the minimum requirements to ensure an appropriate level of administrative and logistical support and sufficient checks and balances in the work of the Administration. The provision of an efficient and effective administrative and logistics support is necessary to the implementation of the mandate given by the Security Council. Detailed cost estimates Category Appropriation (1 Jan.-15 June 2006) Estimated total expenditure up to 15 June 2006 Requirements for 16 June to 31 December 2006 1. International staff 2. National staff Total group I 3. Consultants 4. Official travel 5. Facilities and infrastructure 6. Ground transportation 7. Communications 8. Information technology 9. Medical 10. Other supplies, services and equipment Total group II 11. Staff assessment 12. Voluntary contributions in kind (non-budgeted) 1. Civilian personnel Cost estimates International and national staff 50. Requirements for civilian personnel estimated at $13,859,600 would provide for the salaries and common staff costs of 179 international ($7,412,400) and 50 local ($1,401,800) staff (1 USG, 1 D-2, 3 D-1, 12 P-5, 31 P-4, 38 P-3, 5 P-2, 79 Field Service/Security Service, 1 General Service/Principal level, 8 General Service/Other level, 4 National Officers and 46 Local level). Provision is also made for mission subsistence allowance for the international staff, based on a rate of $165 per day for the first 60 days and $124 per day afterwards ($3,792,300); for hazard duty allowance ($1,133,100); and for overtime requirements, including for security staff to provide supplementary protection of the Commissioner when he is travelling ($120,000). The requirements for international and local staffing are calculated on the basis of a planned deployment of a total of 166 staff in June, 213 by July, 227 by August, and 229 from September onwards. In addition, a vacancy factor of 15 per cent has been applied in estimating international staff costs and a vacancy factor of 10 per cent for national staff costs. 2. Operational costs Consultants 51. The provision of $393,900 is made to cover a variety of expert consultant services to assist the Commission in its investigation, including different types of forensics expertise, explosives expertise, international criminal law and procedure and legal consultants specialized in Lebanese law to research criminal and substantive legal issues. Official travel 52. Requirements for official travel are estimated at $554,800. This amount would provide for: (a) travel of teams of investigators, security staff and interpreters to other countries for investigations and interviews with witnesses ($279,500); (b) travel of the Commissioner, his senior staff and staff of the Department of Political Affairs to and from the Commission's location ($232,200); (c) specialized investigative software training courses for investigations staff ($9,700); (d) administrative staff travel for budget and finance as well as logistical support training ($29,600); and (e) training for security officers and close protection coordination officers ($3,800). Facilities and infrastructure 53. The requirements for facilities and infrastructure, estimated at $528,400, would provide for purchase of two used generators as a backup in case of power supply interruption ($45,800), provision for acquisition of accommodation and refrigeration equipment ($26,100), replacement of obsolete office furniture and equipment ($43,100), acquisition of safety and security equipment ($204,800), utilities ($5,000), maintenance services ($26,400), rental of premises to cover hotel rooms that need to be retained when staff are on short time official business, as well as the cost of rental of conference rooms needed for the witnesses' interviews ($35,000), rental of photocopy machines ($12,500), stationery and office supplies ($25,000), spare parts and maintenance supplies ($26,500), alteration and renovation services ($55,000), and fuel for generators ($23,400). 54. The requirements, in the amount of $204,800, would provide for replacement of fire extinguishers, ammunition for security personnel, dysfunctional equipment, infrared imagery, ballistics vests and shatter-resistant film for renovated office space and the Government prefabricated units for staff accommodations. 55. The requirements for fuel for generators ($23,400) estimated at 6,000 litre per month for 6.5 months would be utilized to back up the power system. Ground transportation 56. Requirements for ground transportation are estimated at $363,300, and would provide for worldwide third-party liability coverage for six armoured vehicles ($1,400); petrol, oil and lubricants, estimated for 20 commercially rented vehicles and six United Nations-owned armoured vehicles, based on prior period expenditure and expected increased utilization of more vehicles ($53,400), rental of 20 commercial vehicles for the transportation needs of the Commission ($298,500); repairs and maintenance of armoured vehicles for normal wear and tear ($6,000), and spare parts and supplies ($4,000). Communications 57. Resources in an amount of $469,800 are requested for communications to provide for the replacement of communications equipment that can no longer be provided on loan from another mission and to set up an independent communications system ($154,500); commercial communications ($275,500); communications support services ($3,000), spare parts and supplies ($20,400) and acquisition of conference equipment such as camera and projectors ($16,100). Information technology 58. Requirements for information technology are estimated at $727,300, and would provide for the purchase of equipment ($409,000); acquisition of software ($37,000); information technology services ($54,000); rental of software ($201,400), spare parts and supplies ($26,000). 59. Additional equipment will be procured to ensure reliability and uninterrupted functioning of the Commission's data processing infrastructure. The additional equipment is required for the Investigations Division and the proposed additional staff. The equipment includes two firewalls, memory upgrades and specialized equipment, including special monitors and computers with greater processing speeds. 60. The licenses and fees of software are essential management tools for the investigation, including Casemap, Sanction, Analyst's Notebook network control software, and central software licenses managed from Headquarters. Medical 61. An amount of $6,300 is requested to provide for combat field medical pouches, life savers and trauma kits. Other supplies, services and equipment 62. Requirements for other supplies, services and equipment are estimated at $375,300, providing for: acquisition of other equipment including crime scopes, fingerprint cases, protection suits, trajectory kits and lasers ($56,400); subscriptions to daily newspapers and magazines ($4,000); new and replacement uniform for security guards ($10,300); training fees, supplies and services ($55,000), other hospitality ($3,500); other freight and related costs ($50,000); rations reserve packs and bottled water ($8,000); and other services such as contractual interpretation and translation services ($98,400). 63. Voluntary contributions in kind consist of the value of office premises ($1,300,000), and prefabricated accommodations for staff ($452,000), provided by the Government of Lebanon. International Independent Investigation Commission: organizational chart (For the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006) III. United Nations Office in Timor-Leste 64. By its resolution 1599 (2005), the Security Council decided, inter alia, to establish UNOTIL, which would remain in Timor-Leste until 20 May 2006, as a follow-on mission to the United Nations Mission of Support in Timor-Leste (UNMISET). The resource requirements for UNOTIL for the period 1 January to 20 May 2006 amounting to $13,584,800 net as presented in the report of the Secretary-General on estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council (A/60/585/Add.1) were approved in the context of General Assembly resolution 60/255. 65. In its resolution 1677 (2006), the Security Council, expressing its deep concern over the incidents of 28 and 29 April as well as the ensuing situation in Timor-Leste, decided to extend the mandate of UNOTIL until 20 June 2006. Upon review of the status of expenditures of UNOTIL for the period from 1 January to 20 May 2006, it was determined that sufficient resources would be available for the operation of the mission through 20 June 2006. 66. In view of the current conditions prevailing in Timor-Leste, a future role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste remains under consideration. Pending a decision of the Security Council on the situation in Timor-Leste, resource requirements are sought for a technical roll-over of the existing mandate of UNOTIL for the period from 21 June to 31 August 2006. By prorating the overall recurrent requirements for the period from 1 January to 20 June 2006, it is estimated that a total of $5,253,500 net ($5,776,200 gross) would be required for the period from 21 June to 31 August 2006 as shown in table 4. Given the estimated unencumbered balance of $256,300 for the period from 1 January to 20 June 2006, the additional requirements would amount to $4,997,200 net ($5,519,900 gross). Requirements for 2006 21 June to 31 August 2006 Estimated Expenditures 1 Jan. 2006 to 20 May 2006 1 Jan. 2006 to 20 June 2006 21 June- 31 Aug. 2006 I. Military and police personnel 1. Military observers 2. Civilian police II. Civilian personnel 3. International staff 4. National staff 5. United Nations Volunteers III. Operational costs 6. General temporary assistance 7. Consultants 8. Official travel 9. Facilities and infrastructure 10. Ground transportation 11. Air transportation 12. Communications 13. Information technology 14. Medical 15. Other supplies, services and equipment Total group III IV. Other programmes 16. Public information programme 17. Staff assessment 67. The General Assembly is requested to: (a) Approve the budgets for the International Independent Investigation Commission for the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006 and for UNOTIL for the period from 21 June to 31 August 2006 in the amounts of $17,189,000 net ($19,175,100 gross) and $5,253,500 net ($5,776,200 gross), respectively, totalling $22,442,500 net ($24,951,300 gross); (b) Take note of the unencumbered balances of $3,006,200 and $256,300 remaining in the amounts already appropriated, respectively, for the Commission and UNOTIL, totalling $3,262,500; (c) Appropriate under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 41/213, an amount of $19,180,000 under section 3, Political affairs, and $2,508,800 under section 35, Staff assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the programme budget for 2006-2007. 