%%%JEWISH HOLOCAUST|PALESTINE QUESTION|HISTORICAL RESEARCH|GENOCIDE|ETHNIC AND RACIAL GROUPS|RELIGIOUS INTOLERANCE|

Sixtieth session Agenda item 72 Holocaust remembrance Note verbale dated 20 January 2006 from the Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations addressed to the President of the General Assembly The Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations presents its compliments to the President of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly and, pursuant to its note verbale dated 30 December 2005, has the honour to transmit herewith the text containing the explanation of the position of the Islamic Republic of Iran that the Iranian delegation intended to present on the resolution entitled "Holocaust remembrance", adopted under agenda item 72 at the 42nd plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 1 November 2005 (see annex). The Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations would be grateful if the text of the present note verbale and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly. Explanation of position of the Islamic Republic of Iran on the resolution entitled "Holocaust remembrance" adopted by the General Assembly on 1 November 2005 The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns genocide against any race, ethnic or religious group as a crime against humanity. Many abhorrent cases of genocide that have regrettably occurred throughout history necessitate a thorough and comprehensive examination by the United Nations of the pain and suffering that this horrific crime has inflicted on various peoples and groups, avoiding a restrictive approach to a particular ethnicity or religion. Addressing historical events of horrific enormity, with a view to avoiding their recurrence, requires a commensurate degree of scientific scrutiny and rigour. Rendering political judgements on such events and closing the door to any scientific inquiry on their characteristics, scope and extent would seriously undermine the sincerity of the endeavour, particularly in its preventive aspect, which should aim at precluding the reoccurrence of similar atrocities. The basic principles of democracy, including the right to freedom of expression and belief, should pave the way for exploring different aspects of historical events without any arbitrary restrictions. Moreover, genocide and the immense sufferings associated with that horrific crime should not be manipulated for political purposes. Regrettably, the Zionist regime has routinely attempted to exploit the sufferings of the Jewish people in the past as a cover for its crimes being perpetrated today against Palestinians in the occupied territories, including massacre, demolition of houses, properties and farmlands, as well as acts of state terrorism. The international community should take strong action against such atrocious crimes of the Zionist regime and not allow it to manipulate humanitarian sentiments to pursue its illegitimate goals. 