%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SUPPORT ACCOUNTS|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|COSTS|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|ADMINISTRATIVE ASPECTS|

Sixtieth session Agenda item 136 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Performance report on the budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Resource performance A. Department of Peacekeeping Operations B. Executive Office of the Secretary-General C. Office of the United Nations Ombudsman D. Office of Internal Oversight Services E. Office of Legal Affairs F. Department of Public Information G. Department of Management H. Department of Safety and Security III. Activities of the Training and Evaluation Service IV. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Summary The present report contains the performance report on the budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005. Performance of financial resources (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005.) Variance Category Apportionmenta Expenditure Amount Percentage Post requirements Non-post requirements Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements a As approved in resolution 58/298. Human resources incumbency performance Authorized staff Actual incumbency (average) Vacancy rate (percentage)b Professional and above General Service and related b Based on monthly incumbency and planned strength. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section IV of the present report. FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations HABITAT United Nations Human Settlements Programme ILO International Labour Organization MINURSO United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara MINUSTAH United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti MONUC United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ONUB United Nations Operation in Burundi UNAMA United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan UNAMI United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq UNAMSIL United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone UNDOF United Nations Disengagement Observer Force UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFICYP United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIFIL United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon UNLB United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy UNMEE United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea UNMIL United Nations Mission in Liberia UNMIS United Nations Mission in the Sudan UNMISET United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor UNMOGIP United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan UNOCI United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services UNOTIL United Nations Office in Timor-Leste UNSAS United Nations Standby Arrangements System UNSECOORD Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator UNTSO United Nations Truce Supervision Organization WFP World Food Programme WHO World Health Organization 1. The surge in peacekeeping operations in early 2004 continued through the reporting period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005. The total of 17 peacekeeping missions remained the same, including two missions (UNTSO and UNMOGIP) that are funded by the regular budget. The composition of the missions changed during the period in that the peacekeeping operation in Timor-Leste (UNMISET) was closed in May 2005 and a new mission was established in the Sudan (UNMIS) in March 2005. In addition, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provides a full range of administrative and logistical support services to 13 special political missions, 11 of which were managed by the Department of Political Affairs, with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations having the substantive lead in 2 (UNAMA and UNOTIL). The three peacekeeping operations that were established in the months of April, May and June 2004 -- ONUB, UNOCI and MINUSTAH -- became fully operational during the 2004/05 reporting period. With these three missions at their full operational capacity and the establishment of a new mission in the Sudan, the overall peacekeeping budget level increased considerably, from $2.7 billion in 2003/04 to $4.4 billion in 2004/05. This trend was only slightly offset by the downsizing of the mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The overall level of peacekeeping activity has had an impact on the level of support and backstopping provided by all departments at United Nations Headquarters. 2. The number of troops and other personnel deployed in the missions during the period also increased. The peak number of troops deployed in 2003/04 was approximately 49,000. This number increased to 58,843 in 2004/05. At the same time the number of United Nations police officers reached 6,765, compared to 5,251 in the previous reporting period. The peak number of military observers increased moderately from 2,022 in 2003/04 to 2,177 in the current reporting period. At the aggregate level, these trends resulted in a maximum number of 67,150 police and military personnel being deployed during 2004/05, a 19 per cent increase from the 2003/04 level of 56,261. The level of civilian staff in the missions also increased by 16 per cent, from 10,545 in 2003/04 to a peak level of 12,236 in the 2004/05 reporting period. 3. The impact of these changes in the volume of peacekeeping in general and in the number of personnel to be supported has been that some of the activities and projects, which had been planned for in the 2004/05 budget, were not completed. All departments supporting peacekeeping operations have had to focus their resources on deploying and backstopping the newly established and expanding missions. Consequently, the non-implementation of certain activities has resulted in slightly lower budget implementation compared with the previous period and underexpenditures in posts, official travel, facilities and infrastructure and information technology. These factors will be dealt with in greater detail in the variance analyses. 4. During the period under review, the Secretariat has continued to improve its performance in the management of peacekeeping operations. The achievements of this work in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other departments are described in the context of the results-based frameworks in the present report. The actual performance of the offices and departments concerned is presented against the baselines that were established in the 2004/05 budget (A/58/715). The extent to which progress has been made against the expected accomplishments is presented in the results-based frameworks, which compare actual indicators of achievement with planned indicators of achievement. Information on planned and actual outputs is provided in the addendum to the present report. 5. In the present report, the Secretariat has continued recent years' efforts to make the frameworks more concrete, streamlined and reader-friendly. In light of the need to reprioritize resources in response to the surge in peacekeeping, particular efforts have been made to explain, where appropriate, the impact on the actual outputs compared to the planned outputs of the approved budget (A/58/715). 6. The Secretariat's efforts to rationalize and optimize the management of peacekeeping are reflected in its ability to cope with the increased workload within the level of resources approved prior to the surge in peacekeeping. For a number of outputs, activities and invested resources were planned on the assumption that support was to be provided to 11 ongoing peacekeeping missions and 9 special political missions by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, while actual completed outputs have increased owing to the addition of four missions (UNMIS, ONUB, UNOCI and MINUSTAH) and 13 special political missions. This development has been particularly important for support provided by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as evident in the addendum to the present report. In the Civilian Police Division, for instance, the streamlining of the management of rosters for potential candidates for judicial and corrections officers enabled staff to handle the increased number of candidates to be registered. The same point can be made with reference to the management of requests for referrals in the Investigations Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. In the Department of Safety and Security, a change in the training concept whereby trainers travelled to missions instead of trainees travelling to New York, led to actual savings compared to the approved budget for official travel. In the Department of Management, significantly higher outputs than budgeted were achieved in a number of different areas, e.g. in terms of the number of budget and performance reports prepared, the number of foreign exchange purchases and fund movements, the number of payments to Member States and the number of medical examinations. II. Resource performance 7. The resources approved for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 were $121,610,300, from which expenditures amounted to $118,025,500, resulting in an unencumbered balance of $3,584,800, or a budget implementation rate of 97.2 per cent, which is slightly lower than the rate of 99.2 per cent in the previous reporting period. Table 1 below presents a summary of resource performance by category during the current reporting period. Table 2 shows other income and adjustments. 8. The unencumbered balance is attributable primarily to underexpenditure in respect of post resources, while balances were also left unspent under official travel, facilities and infrastructure, communications, information technology, medical, and other supplies, services and equipment. 9. The General Assembly, in section XI of its resolution 59/276, authorized the establishment of a new consolidated Department of Safety and Security effective 1 January 2005, which incorporated UNSECOORD and the Security and Safety Service. Consequently, the report on the performance of these two entities in the 2004/05 reporting period has also been consolidated and will be presented in section H below, on the Department of Safety and Security. Table 1 Summary of resource performance by category Approved apportionment I. Post resources II. Non-post resources General temporary assistance Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Communications Information technology Medical Other services, supplies and equipment Subtotal, category II Gross requirements, categories I-II III. Net requirements, categories I-III Table 2 Other income and adjustments (Thousands of United States dollars) Interest income Other/miscellaneous income Savings on or cancellation of prior-period obligations Total (Millions of United States dollars) Approved Approved posts Average incumbency 1. Results-based framework (a) Office of the Under-Secretary-General Expected accomplishment 1: improved ability of the Secretary-General, the Security Council, the General Assembly, other intergovernmental bodies and troop-contributing countries to make fully informed decisions on issues related to peacekeeping Planned indicators of achievement Actual indicators of achievement Positive feedback on Department of Peacekeeping Operations work expressed in the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations Delegations commended the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for its "timely information-sharing with troop-contributing countries" and stressed their appreciation for increased cooperation and consultation with troop-contributing countries by the Department in the 2005 report of the Special Committee (A/59/19/Rev.1, para. 16) During the Fourth Committee's consideration of peacekeeping operations (20-25 October 2005), delegates expressed appreciation for the initiative of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to hold informal briefings on issues related to peacekeeping operations outside the formal session of the Special Committee Endorsement of the Secretary-General's recommendations by the Special Committee and the Fourth Committee The Special Committee addressed 3 of the Secretary-General's substantive recommendations contained in his 2005 report :: It noted with interest the recommendation on a standing police capacity (A/59/19/Rev.1, para. 83), which was subsequently endorsed by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit Outcome :: The Special Committee endorsed the comprehensive strategy in the Secretary-General's 2005 report to address sexual exploitation and abuse (Zeid report) (see A/59/710) :: The proposal for a United Nations strategic reserve remains under consideration by the Special Committee (A/59/19/Rev.1, para. 45) Expected accomplishment 2: reduction of the time required to plan, rapidly deploy and establish peacekeeping operations in response to Security Council mandates Number of troop-contributing countries/police-contributing countries increased from 92, as of 1 November 2003, to 94 Number of troop-contributing countries/police-contributing countries as of June 2005 was 105 Number of Member States contributing to the rapid deployment level of the United Nations Standby Arrangements System (UNSAS) increased from 2, as of 9 February 2004, to 6 8 units pledged at the rapid deployment level by 4 Member States Deployment of a traditional/complex mission headquarters within 30/90 days of Security Council mandate Deployment of 1 complex mission headquarters in the Sudan (UNMIS) within 90 days of mandate Expected accomplishment 3: increased efficiency and effectiveness in conducting, managing, directing and supporting peacekeeping Lessons learned and best practices analyses in the areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, gender and rule of law adopted as policies and procedures in mission operations Lessons learned and best practices in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration were taken into consideration when establishing integrated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration units in MINUSTAH and UNMIS and used in the planning and implementation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration operations in Haiti and the Sudan, among others Lessons learned and best practices for effective approaches to judicial and corrections rule of law issues in peacekeeping implemented in the planning and support processes of operations in the Sudan, Haiti and Liberia, and MONUC Lessons learned and best practices for gender mainstreaming in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, elections and gender-based violence programming activities used to inform planning and operational activities in UNMIL, MINUSTAH, UNMIS, MONUC and ONUB Expected accomplishment 1: improved ability of the Secretary-General, the Security Council, the General Assembly, other intergovernmental bodies and troop-contributing countries to make fully informed decisions on issues relating to peacekeeping Security Council adoption of recommendations for new or significant adjustments to operations Security Council adoption of 16 recommendations for new or significant adjustments to operations: MONUC (3), ONUB, UNOCI (2), UNAMSIL (2), UNMEE (2), UNMIS, MINUSTAH (4), UNFICYP Security Council substantive requirements fulfilled within mandated time frames to establish new, or new phases of, missions 9 mission planning processes completed in line with Security Council substantive and time requirements: MONUC expansion (3-4 month troop deployment); UNOCI: High Representative for Elections appointed; UNAMSIL (2) downsizing, integrated office; UNMIS; MINUSTAH; MINURSO (2): revision of civilian and of military structures; UNFICYP: force reduction Expected accomplishment 3: increased efficiency and effectiveness in conducting, managing, directing and supporting peacekeeping operations Relevant benchmarks of mission or mandate implementation plans met 8 missions met benchmarks: UNMIL, UNOCI, MONUC, ONUB, UNAMSIL, UNMEE, MINUSTAH, MINURSO Joint field programmes implemented in collaboration with peacekeeping partners 18 joint (bilateral or multilateral) field programmes implemented with international peacekeeping partners (c) Office of Mission Support Establishment of a repertoire of replicable support models for a variety of strategic conditions: :: Common operational and logistics support arrangements with regional organizations and agencies Common Services Agreement was concluded for logistics support arrangements with 11 United Nations agencies, funds and programmes (Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNSECOORD, FAO, HABITAT, UNDP, UNOPS, UNICEF, WHO, WFP, UNESCO, UNHCR) in UNAMI :: General Assembly resolution adopting the report of the 2004 Working Group on contingent-owned equipment The report of the 2004 Working Group on contingent-owned equipment was considered by the General Assembly, which took note of the report :: Reduction in the average time for the processing of contingent-owned equipment claims to 6 months Achieved Successful deployment of a fully functional mission of up to 5,000 persons within 90 days of a Security Council mandate :: Participation of peacekeeping partners during mission planning and deployment Peacekeeping partners participated during mission planning and deployment of UNMIS :: 100 per cent readiness of strategic deployment stocks Strategic deployment stocks ready and deployed in 9 missions Strengthened field operations through actions and initiatives that put mission needs first: :: Average vacancy rates for field missions reduced to 15 per cent, while meeting gender and geography goals The Department of Peacekeeping Operations achieved an average vacancy rate of 24 per cent reflecting expansions in MONUC and the Sudan. In addition, the Department documented and analysed high turnover rates in the field missions, where more favourable conditions of service offered by field agencies and other peacekeeping partners contributed to the high turnover of civilian staff :: Increase in the percentage of planned immediate operational requirements achieved on the planned date to 95 per cent Planned immediate operations requirements became part of strategic deployment stocks equipment, which was effectively deployed to the missions :: Reduction of the rate of serious accidents in the field missions The Department of Peacekeeping Operations could not undertake the collection and analysis of data for road accidents owing to unforeseen workload generated by the surge of new complex peacekeeping missions. There were no aviation accidents during the period under review (d) Military Division Military advice is incorporated in all planning documents, resolutions and reports Military input was used in preparation of 23 Security Council resolutions and 46 reports of the Secretary-General Number of Member States contributing to the rapid deployment level of the United Nations Standby Arrangements System (UNSAS) increased from 2 (as at 9 February 2004) to 6 (2004/05) 8 units have been pledged at the rapid deployment level of UNSAS by 4 Member States All troop-contributing countries participate in predeployment training for new peacekeeping missions Predeployment training was provided to all (4) emerging troop-contributing countries upon request Increased numbers of trained on-call personnel from 25 to 50 (target 75 in 2005/06) The trained on-call list has been discontinued, as Member States are pledging a general number rather than specific United Nations military observers or staff officers Surveyed positive feedback from field missions on the guidance and support provided by the Military Division Positive feedback was received during the annual heads of military components conference Surveyed feedback from Member States on the competency of the Military Division in the effective management of peacekeeping operations Positive feedback reflected in the positive working relations with military advisers of Member States Appreciation for increased cooperation and consultation expressed in the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/59/19, para. 19) Number of times UNSAS/on-call list utilized increased from 4 (2002/03) to 5 (2004/05) (target: 6 in 2005) 4 times to generate 45 units for 4 missions Number of emerging contributing countries using Department of Peacekeeping Operations-recognized training increased from 0 (2002/03) to 3 (2004/05) 9 Member States (3 of them emerging troop-contributing countries) are using Department of Peacekeeping Operations-recognized training Increased number of courses by peacekeeping training organizations using Department of Peacekeeping Operations standard training modules, from 25 (2003/04) to 35 (2004/05) (target: 45 in 2005/06) 40 courses (e) Civilian Police Division 60 per cent of surveyed responding Member States provided positive feedback on briefings In its report (A/59/19/Rev.1, para. 19), the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group indicated that "many delegations stressed their appreciation for the increased cooperation and consultation through briefings to, and meetings with, troop-contributing countries" Security Council adoption of recommendations for new or significant adjustments to police components of peacekeeping operations (UNOCI, UNMIS, MINUSTAH, UNAMSIL and UNMISET) Endorsement of the standing police capacity concept developed during reporting period by the 2005 World Summit Outcome Increase in the number of countries contributing police from 71 in 2003/04 to 81 in 2004/05 Number of Member States contributing to the 100 police person on-call roster increased from 6 to 10 10 Member States contributing to 100 police person on-call roster Established on-call list of 5 Member States for formed police units 50 correction and judicial officers identified for a skill-based database Database of more than 50 corrections and judicial officers is operational Positive feedback from missions on the guidance and support provided by the Civilian Police Division on police, judicial and corrections matters Positive feedback was received from police commissioners during police commissioners' conference regarding the level of support and advice provided by the Police Division 15 Member States participating in the newly developed Police, Military Staff travel rotations system (PM STARS) module 31 Member States participating, representing an increase from 5 in the previous reporting period (f) Mine Action Service Deployment of mine action assets to support mission within 14 days of a Security Council resolution Zero rate of landmine incidents among mission personnel 2. Human resources incumbency performance Authorized staff Actual incumbency (average) Vacancy rate (percentage)a a Based on monthly incumbency and planned strength. 3. Performance of financial resources I. Post resources II. Non-post resources 4. Analysis of variances 10. The unspent balance of $72,600 is attributable to lower than expected requirements for replacements during maternity leave and extended sick leave. 11. The primary reasons for the unspent balance are: (a) the activities of two planning, liaison and advisory teams from the Military Division were redirected and conducted during the start-up phase instead of after the establishment of MINUSTAH; hence, costs were charged to the Mission budget; (b) the cancellation of the participation of one staff exchange partner administered by the Executive Office of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The travel was cancelled because operational requirements did not allow the release of the staff member to participate in the programme. 12. The underexpenditure of $38,000 was incurred owing to the delay in the recording of actual charges for the rental of office equipment. 13. The underexpenditure is due primarily to the transfer of responsibility for maintenance of the Galaxy Data Centre to the Information Technology Services Division in the Department of Management. The transfer of responsibility is due to the rationalization and consolidation of the work processes between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Management in accordance with the organizational information and communications technology strategy. Funds approved for this purpose were consequently made available to the Division, thus resulting in savings reflected in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. In addition, this unspent balance is due to the delays experienced in the procurement of some information technology equipment. 14. The unspent balance is due to the cancellation of some training activities in the Office of Mission Support. Efforts were directed to refocus its activities temporarily to support the establishment of new peacekeeping missions. In addition, some workshops were conducted in-house instead of at external training facilities. Provision of comments and guidance to missions within 5 days of submission of Secretary-General's mission reports, letters or notes to the Executive Office of the Secretary-General 4. Analysis of variances1 Posts 15. The unspent balance is attributable to the fact that actual common staff costs were lower than budgeted standard costs. 100 per cent of cases addressed and action taken within 30 days 4. Analysis of resource variances1 16. The actual vacancy rate of 16.7 per cent for the new post was significantly lower than the budgeted rate of 50 per cent, thus resulting in the additional requirement of $14,700. 17. The unspent balance is attributable to the postponement of training activities, including participation in specialized courses at the International Ombudsman Association in Washington, D.C. 18. The unspent amount is attributable to the fact that actual costs of furniture and alterations of premises for a new post were lower than the budgeted standard rates. 19. The unspent amount is attributable to telephone and fax-related expenditure inadvertently charged to the regular budget. 20. As a result of the postponement of training activities, the budgeted resources for the acquisition of training materials were unutilized. 25 per cent of recommendations from inspection reports implemented during the first year (2004/05) 10 per cent of the recommendations contained in the report on the review of the operational capacity of the United Nations military observers (A/59/764) were implemented or are under implementation, as the report was only issued in April 2005 70 per cent of peacekeeping recommendations issued by the Investigations Division accepted and 48 per cent implemented by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, other departments and missions 75.4 per cent of peacekeeping recommendations accepted and 49.2 per cent implemented 85 per cent of peacekeeping recommendations issued by the Internal Audit Division accepted and 60 per cent implemented by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, other departments and missions 95 per cent of peacekeeping recommendations accepted and 64 per cent implemented 21. The unspent balance of $1,752,300 resulted from lower than budgeted staff costs relating to the resident auditors in the peacekeeping missions. This was because provisions for the resident auditors were budgeted at New York standard staff cost, while a number of these posts were encumbered by mission appointees (300-series contracts) whose actual salaries were lower. As evident in the 2005/06 budget report, the staff costs for the resident auditor posts in the missions have been budgeted on the basis of the respective mission's average staff costs. This practice will continue in the budget for the 2006/07 period. 22. In addition, actual costs were lower because of higher than expected vacancy rates for General Service staff. This was due to difficulties with recruitment owing to the freeze on external recruitment of General Service staff in effect during the period. 23. Resources were approved for hiring general temporary assistance for maternity and sick leave replacements. The temporary freeze on external recruitment of General Service staff posed a challenge in recruiting such replacements in a timely manner, resulting in an unspent amount of $13,200. 24. The additional requirements for consultancy services relate primarily to the hiring of a consultant to assist the Internal Audit Division in developing and implementing an information and communications audit strategy. 25. The unspent balance is attributable to actual costs of equipment, furniture and office supplies being slightly lower than the budgeted standard costs. 26. The unutilized balance of $13,100 resulted from the absorption by the United Nations Office at Vienna of the communications charges of the Office of Internal Oversight Services regional investigation hub in Vienna and from lower than expected actual communications costs in the Office of Internal Oversight Services regional investigation hub in Nairobi. 27. Expenditures were higher than expected because of additional requirements for training for staff members in the Internal Audit Division. Additional training activities included 14 classes aimed at the enhancement of audit skills and an online "skills training package". All (100 per cent) of agreements, contracts and other documents prepared or reviewed by the Office will contain provisions or other undertakings maintaining and protecting the status and the privileges and immunities of the United Nations Achieved. In addition, the privileges and immunities of the Organization were maintained, unless waived, in 100 per cent of the legal or other proceedings in which the United Nations or its staff or property were involved All (100 per cent) recommendations made by the Office for resolution of claims will be based on a legal analysis setting forth the likely legal liability, if any, of the Organization and the basis of any proposed amicable resolution of such claims Achieved, including a $3.2 million claim against UNTSO for use of premises, which was settled for approximately one third of that amount and an arbitral award in the amount of $11,000 in respect of a claim of $2.7 million against the Organization All (100 per cent) requests for legal advice will be addressed within 30 days of receipt by the Office 96 per cent of the 2,500 requests for advice addressed or work commenced within 30 days 28. The unspent balance is due primarily to a staff member at a lower level encumbering a post at a higher level for most of the year. 29. The reduced requirement for travel resources is due to the fact that a planned mission to UNMIL for two legal officers was carried out by only one officer. 30. Additional resources were required for the purchase of accessories for videoconference equipment. 31. An amount of $3,000 was budgeted for training in the Practising Law Institute in New York. However, owing to other priorities, the training activities were postponed until the 2005/06 period. Therefore, these funds remained unspent. Deployment of a traditional/complex mission headquarters within 30/90 days of Security Council resolution Achieved (UNMIS) 70 per cent of relevant peacekeeping missions indicating satisfactory quality of support Achieved. All surveyed (13) peacekeeping missions satisfied with the overall quality of support 32. The variance is due primarily to the actual vacancy rate of 0 per cent being lower than the budgeted rate of 5.5 per cent. In addition, the actual staff costs were higher than the budgeted standard salary costs. 33. The unspent balance of $2,400 is due to lower than budgeted maintenance costs for existing equipment, which is relatively new. Results-based framework Cases from mission staff disposed of within 30 days from receipt of recommendation from Joint Appeals Board and Joint Disciplinary Committee 12 per cent of all the decisions rendered on reports from all Joint Appeals Boards resulted from appeals, including requests for suspension of action, from staff in peacekeeping missions and/or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Decisions on those reports were taken, on average, within 31 days 36 per cent of decisions on reports from all joint disciplinary committees, including decisions on summary dismissals, resulted from disciplinary proceedings against staff in peacekeeping missions and/or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Decisions on those reports were taken, on average, within 9 days (b) Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts Contributions Service Agreement of General Assembly on basis of assessment for peacekeeping activities The matter will be revisited at the sixty-first session of the General Assembly Submission of monthly report on the status of contributions within following month Peacekeeping Financing Division Positive feedback from the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly on the quality of peacekeeping budgets, performance reports and other reports submitted Positive comments on the quality and timeliness of the submission of reports, as indicated in the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/59/384, A/59/390, A/59/412, A/59/419, A/59/736 and Add.1, 3-6, 9-12 and 15 and A/59/784), formal statements by 4 delegations and 2 regional groups in the Fifth Committee at its regular (October 2004) and resumed fifty-ninth (May 2005) sessions and General Assembly resolution 59/296 (sections II and III) 100 per cent of submission deadlines for reports to the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management are met: 31 December 2004 for active missions; 28 February 2005 for closed missions, support account and UNLB Achieved for all active missions on the normal budget planning cycle; reports for new missions (ONUB, UNOCI, MINUSTAH and UNMIS) and missions with mandate changes (UNMISET, UNAMSIL and MONUC) submitted within 3 months of respective Security Council resolutions Treasury Investments secure with pooled returns equal to or above 90-day United States Treasury bill interest rate (United Nations benchmark) Earned a return of 1.25 per cent versus United Nations benchmark (90-day United States Treasury bill) return of 0.98 per cent, amounting to $86 million in income. Ranked ninth among 93 funds (government/agency -- short-term) 80 per cent of communications to Member States on assessments for peacekeeping activities issued within 30 days after adoption of related resolutions by General Assembly and Security Council 90 per cent of communications issued within 30 days Elimination of backlog of assessment documents submitted for translation and issuance Liabilities for troops do not exceed 3 months Achieved (payments made in October and December 2004, March, April and June 2005) Percentage of responding missions rating the quality of budgetary policies and services of the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts as "good" or "very good" increased from 75 per cent in 2002/03 to 85 per cent in 2004/05 No Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts survey conducted during the reporting period Accounts Division Positive opinion of the United Nations Board of Auditors on peacekeeping financial statements A positive audit opinion received for 2003/04. The audit opinion in respect of 2004/05 is foreseen in February 2006 and is expected to be positive 100 per cent of financial statements are available to the Board of Auditors within 3 months after the end of the financial period Authorized payments to troop-contributing countries are processed by quarterly due dates Payments to international staff and vendors are processed within 30 working days of receipt of all appropriate documents. Target: 100 per cent (target 2003/04: 90 per cent) Payroll: achieved. 100 per cent of payroll payments, for a total annual expenditure of $349.3 million, processed on time Staff separations: 62 per cent processed within 30 working days for July-December 2004; 60 per cent processed within 30 working days for the period January-June 2005 Education grants: 88 per cent processed within 30 working days (40 per cent increase in claims owing to increased number of peacekeeping staff) Vendor and travel claims: 87 per cent of vendor claims and 99.6 per cent of travel claims processed within 30 working days (33 per cent increase in travel claims owing to increased number of peacekeeping staff; 7 per cent increase in vendor claims owing to new missions) Appropriate insurance coverage obtained for peacekeeping assets, operations and staff (including health and life insurance) (c) Office of Human Resources Management Operational Services Division Positive feedback from Member States on the implementation of human resources delegated authority monitoring system No formal feedback was recorded Division for Organizational Development 50 per cent of staff in all missions registered in e-PAS 43 per cent of mission staff are registered in e-PAS as at June 2005 Medical Services Division 100 per cent of mission medical evacuation requests and urgent deployment requests for medical clearances are processed on the same day (d) Office of Central Support Services Archives and Records Management Section Increase in number of missions for which archive material is available at Headquarters to the Organization, Member States and the general public (baseline: 65 per cent). Target: 100 per cent of active peacekeeping missions visited by the Archives and Records Management Section Archive material available for 75 per cent of closed missions and for 27 per cent of active missions Volume of peacekeeping mission records available at Headquarters increased 8 per cent compared to previous financial period On-site visits to 2 missions (UNMIL and UNMISET) Procurement Division Purchase orders against existing contracts issued within 14 days upon receipt of funded requisitions to replenish goods and necessary follow-up with vendors to ensure timely delivery of correct equipment and services in support of strategic deployment stocks Purchase orders issued within 42.5 days on average; the lead time to process purchase orders against existing contracts was affected by the increased number of requisitions (14 per cent increase from 2003/04) and immediate operational needs to support new and expanding missions Information Technology Services Division 99 per cent availability of information and communication technology infrastructure provided by the Information Technology Services Division to missions 10 per cent reduction in the number of days to process confirming requisitions from 53 days in the 2002/03 fiscal year to 48 days Achieved. Conforming requisitions processed in 37.5 days on average (e) Overall resource requirements of the Department of Management (i) Human resources incumbency performance (ii) Performance of financial resources Facilities and infrastructurea a Reflects accommodation costs for all offices. 34. The unspent balance of $918,000 is attributable primarily to higher than expected vacancy rates among professional posts owing to delayed recruitment of staff for a number of new posts. 35. The additional requirement of $102,600 is related primarily to the transfer of responsibility for the maintenance of the Galaxy data centre from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the Information Technology Services Division, for which the Department made funds available to the Division for hiring temporary assistance. Higher than expected requirements for general temporary assistance in the Operational Services Division in order to process a larger than planned number of recruitment actions also contributed to the overexpenditure. 36. The additional requirement of $55,700 is due primarily to the hiring of a consultant to undertake a comprehensive study of the relocation of procurement and information technology functions to UNLB, as requested by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report (A/58/796). 37. The unutilized balance of $319,700 is attributable to cancellations and postponements of visits to missions by the Procurement Division, the Operational Services Division and the Peacekeeping Finance Division. The increase in workload related to the surge in peacekeeping operations necessitated the review of priorities, resulting in the cancellation and/or postponement of planned travel to the missions. In the Division for Organizational Development, the injury of a staff member led to training-related travel being postponed or undertaken by a consultant, thus leaving unspent approved funds under official travel. Facilities and Infrastructure 38. The Office of Internal Oversight Services regional investigation hubs in Vienna and Nairobi were provided rent-free accommodation within the United Nations premises. This resulted in the unspent balance of $131,500. Hence, no provision will be made for rental of premises in Vienna and Nairobi for Office of Internal Oversight Services regional investigation hubs in the 2006/07 support account. 39. The additional requirement of $331,300 is due to costs associated with the transfer of responsibility for the maintenance of the Galaxy data centre from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the Information Technology Services Division. 40. The costs of the actual requirements for such medical supplies as vaccines and medical kits for mission personnel were slightly lower than budgeted. 41. The unspent balance of $29,400 relates primarily to the postponement of some planned training activities in the Division for Organizational Development. This was due to the need to reprioritize resources in order to focus on activities in support of the surge in peacekeeping operations, that is, primarily, advice on the application of human resources rules and regulations and on the administration of justice. Positive formal feedback from legislative bodies on advice and reports Formal feedback was not recorded but programme continuation was approved for the 2005/06 budget cycle No peacekeeping mission civilian personnel killed or wounded by malicious acts 1 civilian member of a peacekeeping mission was killed by gunshot wounds in September 2004 100 per cent of security-related recommendations adopted by peacekeeping missions Security-related issues/recommendations were adopted by peacekeeping missions Emergency response teams are deployed from Headquarters within 8 hours Hostage incident management teams deployed to support the freeing of hostages held in Haiti and Afghanistan within 12 hours 42. The additional requirement of $105,900 is due to the actual vacancy rate being lower than budgeted and to actual salary costs being higher than the budgeted standard salary costs. 43. The unspent balance is attributable to a change in the Department of Safety and Security training concept, where the trainers travelled to the missions instead of the trainees travelling to New York. 44. The provision of $1,400 remains unspent, because actual costs were inadvertently charged to the regular budget. 45. The unspent balance of $12,000 is due to the fact that costs related to communications were inadvertently charged to the regular budget. 46. The unspent balance is due to actual costs of information technology equipment for new staff being lower than budgeted. 47. The additional requirement of $6,000 results from costs of conference facilities and support to a Department of Safety and Security/Department of Peacekeeping Operations workshop held at the International Training Centre of ILO. A. Training assistance requested and provided Host Period Sri Lanka Croatia Peru Switzerland Kenya Hungary Germany Austria Liberia Turkey Finland Greece September 2004 September/October 2004 October 2004 November 2004 December 2004 March 2005 April/May 2005 May 2005 B. Regular activities Activity United Nations peacekeeping operations seminar United Nations Police seminar Mission training cell support training United Nations logistics officers course United Nations training assistance team seminar Standardized training module 2 gender seminar Standardized training module 3 course development workshop Standardized training module 2 disarmament, demobilization and reintegration workshop Standardized training module 2 interoperability workshop Standardized training module 3 pilot course Standardized training module 2 police module workshop Integrated mission training centre course United Nations Police senior management seminar Standardized training module 2 final seminar Ecuador India Malaysia UNDOF/UNIFIL Mexico Jordan Ghana United States of America Canada Indonesia Nigeria United Kingdom Senegal Estonia Russia Sept/Oct 2004 March/ April 2005 June 2005 48. All peacekeeping training events requested by Member States were conducted. 49. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are as follows: (a) To decide that Member States shall waive their respective shares in other income for the period ended 30 June 2005 amounting to $2,121,900 and their respective shares in the amount of $2,987,600 from the unencumbered balance of $3,584,800 for the period ended 30 June 2005, to be applied to meeting the current and future after-service health insurance liabilities of the United Nations; (b) To apply the remaining unencumbered balance of $2,719,100 in respect of the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 to the support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007. 