%%%HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|NICARAGUA|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS|ELECTION OF MEMBERS|

Sixtieth session Agenda item 112 (e) Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections: election of 47 members of the Human Rights Council Note verbale dated 31 March 2006 from the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General The Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Office of the Secretary-General and has the honour to inform it that the Government of Nicaragua has decided to put forward its candidacy for membership in the Human Rights Council during the election to be held in the General Assembly on 9 May 2006 in New York. Nicaragua, as a founding Member of the United Nations loyal to the principles of the Organization, has always drawn on its own national experience to help to achieve the important goals which the United Nations has set, particularly as regards the strengthening of international peace and security, the eradication of poverty and the encouragement of development, with constant attention at all times to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Nicaragua is convinced that it can continue to help the United Nations to attain its objectives, bearing in mind that the Organization currently faces daunting reforms and must constantly adapt to the challenges imposed by the new international environment. In recent years, Nicaragua has been recognized by the international community as a steadfast partner in combating corruption and providing good governance, and for putting forward disarmament proposals which have had a positive impact on the region. Nicaragua will be able to share such experience with other States if it becomes a member of the Council. Nicaragua was a member of the former Commission on Human Rights on four occasions, most recently during the period 1995-1997. It was always able to play a purposeful and objective role in the work carried out by that important body, especially in the promotion of dialogue and cooperation among Member States, observers, intergovernmental organizations and civil society. Nicaragua attaches particular importance to its candidacy and is well aware that, far from being a privilege, membership in the Council represents a serious commitment and a heavy responsibility. It hopes that it will not be forgotten that membership is based on equitable geographical distribution, with due regard for the participation of small countries. The Permanent Mission of Nicaragua, on behalf of its Government, would be grateful if the Office of the Secretary-General would register Nicaragua as a candidate for election to membership in the Human Rights Council. It takes this opportunity to convey to the Office of the Secretary-General the renewed assurances of its highest consideration. 