%%%MILITARY ACTIVITY|DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY|ISRAEL|LEBANON|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|CIVILIAN PERSONS|PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE|

General Assembly Sixtieth session Agenda item 14 The situation in the Middle East Security Council Sixty-first year Identical letters dated 24 July 2006 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I wish to transmit to you herewith (see annex) a list of Israeli acts of aggression against Lebanon on 21 and 22 July 2006 targeting infrastructures and densely populated towns and villages and the areas around them with a variety of air, sea and land weapons. Also attached is a list of persons killed and wounded and of the major material damage caused. I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly under agenda item 14, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Caroline Ziade Chargé d'affaires a.i. :: Targeting of the following bridges: - Al-Mdairej bridge, resulting in the collapse of part of the bridge, but without any casualties - Al-Mechref bridge -- totally destroyed :: Targeting of the following roads: - Nahle highway - Jmailiye -- Maqne road, on the national highway, resulting in its being cut off - Targeting of the Tebnine -- Aita al-Jabal highway, which resulted in the death of one girl and the wounding of two other persons :: Targeting of the Hizbollah Agricultural Extension Centre in the plain of the town of Douris :: Targeting of two houses belonging to the Al-Laqqis family, in addition to a house belonging to the Al-Habash family, the two-storey building belonging to Hizbollah, the Hizbollah martyr building, a three-storey building situated near the Pro pastry shop and a house belonging to the Al-Ahmar family in the Asira quarter, Baalbek :: Targeting of an cattle-breeding farm belonging to the Al-Laqqis family, the Diyab building, the home of Mayor Hasan Abbas and the building surrounding the Al-Sharq swimming pool in the Sheikh Habib quarter (Al-Kassarat intersection). This resulted in the death of two persons and the wounding of 19, some of whom were soldiers :: Targeting of the Al-Mihniyye building (the place where the joint armed forces are stationed in Bint Jbeil), there being no casualties Israeli helicopters and warplanes targeted the following towns: The South Tair Debba, Maaraka, Al-Bazouriye, Ouadi Jilo, Haouch Basama, Aaramta, Al-Rihane, Al-Aabassiye, Al-Souane, Borj Al-Chamali, Chebaa, Al-Chaatiye, Toura, Al-Hamadiye, Al-Qlaila, Al-Malikiye, Khirbet Selm, Al-Mansouri, Maaroub, Aaitaroun, Silaa, Al-Chhabiye, Aaitit, Ain Baal, Deir Qanoun Al-Nahr, Al-Qsaibe, Aadchit, Beit Yahoun, Qadmous, Chabriha, Al-Naqoura, Ain Ata, Barich, Qana, Al-Laboune, Aita Al-Jabal, Bedias, Wadi Al-Kfour, Ibil Al-Saqi, Jouaiya, Al-Mjadel, Maroun Al-Ras, Al-Soultaniye, Deir Ntar. Mount Lebanon Al-Mechref, Al-Mdairej. Bekaa Baalbek, Douris, Al-Asira/Baalbek, Nahle, Al-Jmaliye, Maqne. Towns subjected to artillery fire and marine gunfire Maroun Al-Ras, Yaroun, Aaitaroun, Al-Khiam, Bent Jbail, Blida, Majdel Silm, Ouadi Al-Suluqi, Qana, Hanaouay, Kfar Chouba, Maaroub, Rachaya, Kfar Hamam, Al-Qlaiaa Marjaayoun, Zebqine, Wadi Al-Batm, Saddiqine, Al-Mjadel, Al-Mahzouna, Jouaiya, Haddata, Haris, Chaqra, Fadmous, Rmaich, Kounine, Ain Ebel, Al-Qlaile, El-Hebbariye. Human casualties As a result of the attacks 16 people were killed and 54 injured, bringing the total number of casualties to 263 killed and 941 wounded. Attitudes and activities of the Israeli enemy Enemy aircraft dropped leaflets signed by the State of Israel and directed at the population of the villages situated south of the Litani River, calling on them to vacate the villages immediately and to move north of the river. The Israeli army commander of the northern region did not deny reports referring to the loss of an enemy soldier during the battles that took place yesterday between his forces and elements of the resistance in the area of Maroun Al-Ras and the Israeli settlement Avivim. The enemy Israeli army is mobilizing more of its land forces after the losses incurred in the limited land battles that took place yesterday. Attention is drawn to the following: Foreign nationals have continued to leave Lebanese territory overland to Syria and by sea from the port of Beirut, and United States citizens have been evacuated by boat from the Dbayye coast; patrol boats have also been used to evacuate some foreign nationals and preparations are in hand to evacuate others. An increase has been recorded in the number of refugees from the villages that had been targeted and from the towns and villages threatened with bombardment. This is likely to increase in the light of the continuing attacks and the rise in the number of victims. As a result of the recent Israeli attacks on the Jiyye thermal power plant, fuel has been reported on the shore extending from Jiyye as far as Raoche and Kasrawan and even reaching the coast at Batroun and Al-Hari. There have been leakages from the oil storage tanks in the plants that were targeted by the enemy aircraft. A mass funeral was held for 71 victims close to the Banu Barakat barracks who were killed in the Israeli attacks on the Tyre area; it was attended by about 50 people and wreaths of flowers were laid on behalf of the commander-in-chief of the army. Name Place Nationality Comments Hussein Al-Atrash Baalbek Haydar Al-Faytruni Maryam Mahmud Al-Hurani Aaita al-Chaab Ali Hussein Tabbal Nabatiye Ahmad Rida Ouadi Jilo Fatima Shu'aib Borj Al-Chemali Raghib Muhammad Jawad Rmaich Zainab Muhammad Jawad Hani Alwiye Maroun al-Ras Hasan Rida Muhammad Abdullah Zein Qana Unknown person List of persons injured from 21 July 2006 to 8 a.m. on 22 July 2006 (54 persons) Qasim Ala'uddin Haret Hreik Hussein Ahmad Izziddin Saksakiye Nur[?] Khalil Hasan Bent Jbeil Mustafa Ali Siblini Hussein Ali Ayyub Sami Hussein Bazi Mustafa Subhi Al-Dayikh Bazouriye Private Dani Mahfuz Blida Police Warrant Officer Ali Alabani Internal Security Force Recruit Muhammad Al-Ali MM -- FMT Muhammad Sarrur Ala' Muhammad Al-Hurani Muhammad Al-Hurani Private Musa Hasan Support L Basir Hammud Hasan Ibrahim Hadi Al-Laqqis Ahmad Yasin Al-Masri Murad Murad Asim Al-Laqqis Ali Mustafa Hasan Nasrallah Mahdi Al-Laqqis Ali Hasan Al-Laqqis Muhammad Hasan Al-Tufayli Ali Al-Tufayli Wafa' Al-Tufayli Kahraman Yazbek Ayan [?] Shaqir Ali Al-Laqqis Private Hussein Al-Habash T [?] 13 Mahmud Shaqir Serious condition Zuhayr Hussein Salloum Jawad Muhammad Sa`id Abbas Abboud Taqsh [Taqqish?] Rana Jawad Master Sergeant Hasan Al-Zibawi Muhammad Ali Fadlallah Ainata Ahmad Ali Abboud Muhammad Darwish Ali Nureddin Nimr Haydar Mansur Mustafa Ahmad Ghanim Haouch Basma Sharif Ahmad Al-Qasim Fadi Ali Al-Samra Ali Muhammad Khalil Rahme Amin Ali Kourani Chaqra Ali Khalil Hammud Tariq Ablan Bassam Badreddin Ja`far Dahir Abdullah Muhammad Fneish Deir Qanoun al-Nahr Zeinab Ghassani Iman Ali Kourani Borj al-Chemali Statistical table showing losses of human life caused by Israeli attacks from 21 July 2006 through 0800 hours on 22 July 2006 Date Location Injured Killed 21-22 July 2006 Haret Harik Al-Saksakiye Bent Jbail Al-Bazouriye Including 2 soldiers and 1 member of the State Security Force Including 2 soldiers Al-Nabatiye Including 1 member of the State Security Force Total Total soldiers killed: 0 Total soldiers injured: 6 (4 Army, 2 State Security Force) Overall total to date Total soldiers killed: 20 Total soldiers injured: 144 (129 Army, 14 State Security Force, 1 Customs) It should be noted that there are still victims underneath the rubble in many places. Schedule of evacuations of foreign nationals on 21 July 2006 Via the Port of Beirut 0730 hours The ship Blue Dawn evacuated approximately 200 persons of Canadian nationality. It departed at 1610 hours. 1020 hours The English frigate St. Albans (F-83) docked at Quay 16. 1030 hours The French warship Iera Petra unloaded medical supplies, various equipment and medicines. This included six truckloads of mineral water for the French Embassy, 20 packages of medicine for the Ministry of Health, three small electric generators, medical equipment for the Higher Relief Council (deposited in Warehouse 13 for subsequent delivery to the Council), and a water pump for the European Commission. 1100 hours A British warship docked at Quay 15 to evacuate 240 British nationals. The ship departed on the same date at 1230 hours without incident. The two French ships TCD Siroco and Iera Petra arrived and evacuated approximately 1,500 French nationals. 1130 hours The Greek frigate Ikaria (L175) docked at Quay 5 and unloaded medical supplies (six truckloads). It departed at 1630 hours with 400 persons of European nationalities aboard. 1200 hours The ship Su arrived and evacuated 320 Australian nationals. The ship departed at 1530 hours. 1340 hours The French ship Siroco docked at Quay 14. 1400 hours The ship Alkioni under Greek flag evacuated 200 British nationals. 1430 hours The ship Crete II arrived and evacuated 470 Australian nationals. 1440 hours The Yacht Prince of Girne under the flag of Saint Vincent docked at Quay 7 and departed at 1700 hours. 1500 hours The ship Crete II under Panamanian flag docked at Quay 10. The ship Serenade under United Nations flag docked at Quay 4. It departed at 1710 hours with 170 United Nations employees and their family members aboard. 1625 hours The Canadian ship King Stone docked at Quay 7. 1700 hours The ship Sancwann arrived and evacuated 420 Australian nationals. 2045 hours The ship Rahmah arrived and evacuated 1,459 American nationals. It departed on 22 July 2006 at 0230 hours. Via land border crossings Between 0800 hours on 20 July 2006 and 0800 hours on 21 July 2006, 1,406 cars with passengers of various nationalities passed through the border crossings at Al-Aarida and Al-Aabboudiye into Syrian territory. Between 0800 hours and 1900 hours the following groups of foreigners crossed the Al-Aarida and Al-Aabboudiye border crossings into Syrian territory: 90 Bulgarians, 150 Sri Lankans, 8 Norwegians, 150 Poles, 150 Belgians, 350 Ukrainians, 100 Russians, 25 United Arab Emirates nationals, and a combined 90person group of Lebanese and Jordanians. 