%%%MILITARY ACTIVITY|ISRAEL|LEBANON|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|CIVILIAN PERSONS|DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY|

General Assembly Sixtieth session Agenda item 14 The situation in the Middle East Security Council Sixty-first year Identical letters dated 28 August 2006 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I transmit to you herewith a list of Israeli acts of aggression against Lebanon that took place from 24 to 28 August 2006 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 14, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Caroline Ziade Chargé d'affaires a.i. Subject: Israeli violations and acts of aggression committed against Lebanon from 8 a.m. on 24 August 2006 to 8 a.m. on 25 August 2006 Air violations: Thirteen air violations by reconnaissance aircraft and warplanes belonging to the Israeli enemy were recorded. They were carried out over the various regions of Lebanon and involved a total of 9 reconnaissance aircraft and 8 warplanes. Land violations: The Israeli enemy forces are still stationed at a number of places on the border within Lebanese territory. At 1045 hours, during a movement of forces of the Israeli enemy, the forces apprehended and interrogated Hussein Qasim and Hasan Yasin between the villages of Houla and Meis al-Jabal, after which they released them at 1100 hours. At 1100 hours, a group of 12 infantrymen of the Israeli enemy stationed themselves at Rabb al-Talatine in the house of Fayiz Musa Barakat (aged 60 years), after expelling him from his home. Lebanon from 8 a.m. on 26 August 2006 to 8 a.m. on 27 August 2006 Two air violations by reconnaissance aircraft belonging to the Israeli enemy were recorded. They were carried out over the various regions of Lebanon. Israeli enemy forces advanced between the villages of Chamaa and AlBayadah and established a new observation point alongside the road between the two villages. The road remained open in both directions. No checkpoint was established, nor were any vehicle inspections carried out. As a result of the use by the Israeli enemy of cluster bombs on residential areas during its attacks on Lebanon, numerous explosions of such bombs have been recorded, resulting in the wounding of five persons during the above-mentioned period, as follows: At 1130 hours, as Muhammad Ya`qub was tending to livestock in the area around the town of Houla, he was the victim of a cluster bomb explosion which resulted in his being wounded (his condition is not serious). At 2100 hours, a cluster bomb exploded in Blida/Marjaayoun, as a result of which the following children: Ali Hasan and his sister Sahar, Abbas Abbas and Ahmad Shibli, suffered various wounds (they are not in serious condition). Lebanon from 8 a.m. on 27 August 2006 to 8 a.m. on 28 August 2006 Five air violations by reconnaissance aircraft and warplanes belonging to the Israeli enemy were recorded. They were carried out over the various regions of Lebanon and involved a total of 3 reconnaissance aircraft and 4 warplanes. Israeli enemy forces stationed east of the town of Al-Bayadah near Tallat alHardun and in Marjaayoun near the water storage tank shovelled out areas of the ground, raised earth mounds around them and put up the Israeli flag on them. At 2055 hours, three explosions were heard in the area around the towns of Maroun al-Ras and Aytroun. At 2115 hours Israeli enemy forces, from their post at Rouaisset al-Alam within the Shab`a Farms area, fired a number of rounds from medium-calibre weapons in the direction of the area surrounding the town of Kfar Chouba. As a result of the use by the Israeli enemy of cluster bombs on residential areas during its attacks on Lebanon, numerous explosions of such bombs have been recorded, resulting in the wounding of one person during the above-mentioned period, as follows: A cluster bomb left by the recent Israeli acts of aggression exploded in Majdel Selm, as a result of which Muhammad Milhim suffered slight wounds (his condition is not serious). 