%%%WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|TERRORISM|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|ARMS LIMITATION|COUNTER-TERRORISM|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 90 (v) General and complete disarmament Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Contents Page II. Replies received from Member States Kyrgyzstan Philippines Syrian Arab Republic [Original: English] [23 August 2006] 1. The Kyrgyz Republic does not possess weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. 2. Kyrgyzstan fully meets its obligations as a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In addition, on 18 March 1998, the Kyrgyz Republic signed the Agreement for the application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons with the International Atomic Energy Agency, of which it has been a member State since 2003. The Agreement entered into force in the Republic on 3 February 2004. In the near future, Kyrgyzstan also intends to become a party to the Additional Protocol to said Agreement. 3. Kyrgyzstan is a party to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. 4. Kyrgyzstan also actively cooperates with the Security Council Committee established pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004) by submitting national reports on the implementation of the resolution. 5. To prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, Kyrgyzstan adopted an export control act in 2002 to establish a control system for dual-purpose items, including materials that could be used to manufacture weapons of mass destruction. 6. The International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism has been signed and will be ratified in the near future. 7. Kyrgyzstan cooperates bilaterally with other States to strengthen its border security and export control capabilities. In particular, cooperation with the Government of the United States of America is under way in the framework of the Export Control and Border Security Programme. The Republic is also a party to a Euro-Asian Economic Community agreement on the harmonization of export control procedures. [23 June 2006] The Philippines is engaged in a number of activities, the objectives of which are to enhance the security of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear facilities and related infrastructures, develop and strengthen regulations on weapons of mass destruction proliferation and chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear facilities regulations and other legal structures and enhance operational counter-proliferation activities. The Department of Health is strengthening the security of critical infrastructures by undertaking quarterly security assessments of hospital facilities with emphasis on building structures, laboratories, X-ray departments, utilities and human resources capabilities. Upgrades were completed at the Philippine Nuclear Research Institute (Secondary Standards Dosimetry Laboratory) on 24 February 2006. Draft anti-terrorist legislation is currently being considered in the Upper House (Senate). The assessment and field-testing of guidelines to assess national health capacity to manage health risks of the deliberate use of biological and chemical agents was conducted in February 2005 with the assistance of the World Health Organization. A health emergency preparedness plan is currently being elaborated by the Department of Health. Draft comprehensive nuclear legislation is currently under consideration. The International Atomic Energy Agency, which assisted the Government by reviewing this draft legislation, has also provided support in the formulation of a nuclear security programme. To further the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Philippines is currently drafting enabling legislation and strictly monitoring chemicals controlled under that Convention. To enhance oversight of chemicals in commerce, the Government is developing the Philippine Inventory of Chemicals and Chemical Substances and an end-user list. The Philippines cooperates with the United States in the latter's Second Line of Defense (SLD) Programme, which includes the Megaports Initiative, and international non-proliferation export control programmes. In addition, the Philippines is enhancing customs operational activities and export/import regulations. The Government capacity-building programme on chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear facilities and related weapons of mass destruction concerns includes bilateral training programmes with the United States in health emergency management, training for law enforcement in cooperation with the Australian Government and the Regional Security of Radioactive Sources project under the Global Threat Reduction Initiative funded by Australia and the United States. The Philippines has also participated in international training seminars and workshops on weapons of mass destruction and chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear facilities and has organized local training on emergency medical intervention in mass casualty situations. [Original: Arabic] [30 March 2006] 1. The Syrian Arab Republic does not possess any nuclear weapons, their means of delivery, or related materials, nor does it provide assistance to any party. Legislative decree No. 64, on radiological protection and the security and safety of radiation sources used for peaceful purposes in a variety of fields such as medicine, manufacturing, agriculture, and scientific research, was issued on 3 August 2005. This decree gives the national oversight body wide powers, stressing the need for continued monitoring of any handling of radioactive or nuclear materials, including, inter alia, the design, manufacture, import and export of radioactive sources. The provisions of this decree are consistent with international requirements regarding the need for national legislation to regulate the handling of such materials. It establishes rules and restrictions and lays down strict penalties for violations. The decree also contains provisions for responding to radiological emergencies. Border surveillance 2. In 1987, the Syrian Arab Republic, desiring to combat illegal trafficking, established specialized border stations at all its land, sea and air entry and exit points to monitor movements of nuclear and radioactive materials, in accordance with national rules, legislation and regulations that have the force of law and comply with IAEA international norms and regulations relating, in particular, to the reporting, registration, licensing and monitoring of all radioactive and nuclear materials and equipment used for peaceful purposes that enter and exit the country. 3. The Syrian Arab Republic applies strict domestic legislation in the monitoring of all prohibited or restricted materials coming into Syria via air, land and seaports. Additionally, it has committed itself to a number of international instruments adopted under the auspices of IAEA. Nuclear terrorism 4. The Syrian Arab Republic, like all Arab States, has been a party to the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism since 1998. The Syrian Arab Republic is also a party to the Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on Combating International Terrorism in 1999. In March 2005, the Syrian Arab Republic acceded to the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. 5. In September 2005, the Syrian Arab Republic signed the International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials. The Syrian Arab Republic was one of the first States, since 1985, to call for the convening of an international conference, under the auspices of the United Nations, to discuss the subject of terrorism and to define the meaning of the term. 6. The Syrian Arab Republic does not possess any chemical weapons, their means of delivery or related materials, nor does it provide assistance to any party whatsoever for the purpose of carrying out activities in this area. 7. The Syrian Arab Republic is a party to a number of the conventions on the management of chemicals and hazardous waste. 8. The Syrian Arab Republic completed a national chemical safety profile involving the adoption of a plan of action to improve the management of chemical materials. Biological materials 9. The Syrian Arab Republic does not possess any biological weapons, their means of delivery or related materials, nor does it provide assistance to any party whatsoever for the purpose of carrying out activities in this area. 10. The Syrian Arab Republic does not possess any biological materials, although there are some components that are all used for peaceful industrial or agricultural purposes. The Syrian Arab Republic has introduced a series of measures to regulate the handling of biological materials used in various applications, with a view to preventing them from falling into the hands of non-State actors. 11. With regard to the request for opinions of Member States on steps to address the global threat posed by the acquisition by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction, the Syrian Arab Republic believes that enhanced international cooperation at various regional and international levels has helped in this area. There is also a need to address the roots of terrorism and to strive for peaceful and permanent solutions to various problems whose conflagration leads to the manifestation and continuation of terrorism. 