%%%RIGHT TO DEVELOPMENT|HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|PARTNERSHIP|WORKING GROUPS|PRINCIPLES|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|

Sixty-first session * A/61/150. Item 66 (b) of the provisional agenda* Promotion and protection of human rights: human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms The right to development Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report, submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 60/157, contains information supplementing the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the right to development to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-second session (E/CN.4/2006/24 and Corr.1). 1. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights submitted her annual report on the right to development (E/CN.4/2006/24 and Corr.1) to the Commission on Human Rights in accordance with Commission resolution 1998/72. In that resolution, the Commission invited the High Commissioner to submit a report to the Commission and to provide interim reports to the open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development, in each case covering: (a) The activities of her Office relating to the implementation of the right to development as contained in her mandate; (b) The implementation of resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and the General Assembly with regard to the right to development; (c) Inter-agency coordination within the United Nations system for the implementation of relevant resolutions of the Commission in that regard. 2. The present report contains updated information complementing the aforementioned report of the High Commissioner. II. Updated information complementing the report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the right to development 3. In its resolution 60/157, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to bring that resolution to the attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies, funds and programmes, international development and financial institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations, and to submit a report to the Assembly at its sixty-first session and an interim report to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-second session on the implementation of the resolution, including efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and realization of the right to development. The Assembly also invited the Chairperson of the Working Group on the Right to Development to present a verbal update to the Assembly at its sixty-first session. 4. The Working Group on the Right to Development held its seventh session from 9 to 13 January 2006; it adopted conclusions and recommendations (E/CN.4/2006/26, sect. III), including a set of criteria for the periodic evaluation of global development partnerships from the perspective of the right to development. The Working Group also recommended that the Commission extend the mandate of the Working Group for a further year and the mandate of the high-level task force for a further year to enable it to apply the criteria for periodic evaluation of global development partnerships, on a pilot basis, to selected partnerships, with a view to operationalizing and progressively developing these criteria, thus contributing to mainstreaming the right to development in the policies and operational activities of relevant actors at the national, regional and international levels, including multilateral financial, trade and development institutions. The Working Group's conclusions and recommendations have been endorsed by the new Human Rights Council, which, by its resolution 2006/4, decided to renew the mandate of the Working Group for one year. 5. In accordance with Commission resolution 2003/83, a member of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, Florizelle O'Connor, submitted a concept document (E/CN.4/Sub.2/2005/23) establishing options and their feasibility for the implementation of the right to development. That document was discussed at the fifty-seventh session of the Subcommission, and in its resolution 2005/17 the Subcommission, inter alia, requested Ms. O'Connor to continue her work and to submit to the Subcommission at its fifty-eighth session a working paper, taking into consideration the discussions at the session and, if financial and staff support were available from within existing resources, to meet with people in selected geographic areas to hold discussions and obtain local people's views on development programmes in their communities. 6. The Secretariat submitted to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-second session a report containing a summary of views and ideas with respect to the right to development discussed at the Subcommission's fifty-seventh session (see E/CN.4/2006/25). 