%%%POLITICAL STATUS|TAIWAN (CHINA)|REGIONAL SECURITY|EAST ASIA|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|

Sixty-first session * A/61/150 and Corr.1. Agenda item 106 of the provisional agenda* Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations Letter dated 7 September 2006 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Paraguay to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to write to you to state the position of Paraguay with regard to the requests for the inclusion of two supplementary items in the agenda of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly, entitled "A proactive role for the United Nations in maintaining peace and security in East Asia" and "Question of the representation of the 23 million people of Taiwan in the United Nations", submitted by a number of States Members of the Organization and contained in documents A/61/193 and A/61/194, respectively, issued on 11 August 2005. 1. The Republic of Paraguay maintains full diplomatic, commercial and cultural ties with the Republic of China (Taiwan). It values these relations and respects the progress achieved by Taiwan in all areas, especially in the economic and commercial spheres. 2. In keeping with the principle of universality enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the elements constituting the existence of a State, and other essential circumstances, Paraguay believes that the international community cannot fail to consider the proposals in question, which reflect the aspirations of the 23 million people of Taiwan, as it would for any other State that met the requirements set out in the Charter. In line with this policy, Paraguay supported the admission of both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) into the World Trade Organization. 3. Paraguay believes that consideration should also be given to the proposal contained in document A/61/193, encouraging the countries of East Asia to settle disputes through peaceful means, in conformity with the principles enshrined in the Charter. 5. The Government of Paraguay wishes to confirm that the position outlined above is consistent with its foreign policy on this matter. Accordingly, it supports the requests submitted. I should be grateful if you would have this letter circulated as a document of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly, in connection with the request for inclusion of the "Question of the representation of the 23 million people of Taiwan in the United Nations" and "A proactive role for the United Nations in maintaining peace and security in East Asia" as supplementary items in the provisional agenda. (Signed) Juan A. Buffa Minister Deputy Permanent Representative Chargé d'affaires a.i. 