%%%CONFERENCES|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/52/628/Add.4 2 December 1997 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Fifty-second session Agenda item 97 (d) SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION: INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION AND DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING THE CONVENING OF A UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION AND DEVELOPMENT Report of the Second Committee (Part V)The report of the Committee on this agenda item will be issued in several parts, under the symbol A/52/628 and addenda. Rapporteur: Mr. Rae Kwon CHUNG (Republic of Korea) I. INTRODUCTION 1. The Second Committee held a substantive debate on agenda item 97 (see A/52/628, para. 2). Action on sub-item (d) was taken at the 28th and 46th meetings on 4 November and 2 December 1997. An account of the Committee's consideration of the sub-item is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.2/52/SR.28 and 46). II. CONSIDERATION OF DRAFT RESOLUTIONS A/C.2/52/L.14 AND A/C.2/52/L.35 2. At the 28th meeting, on 4 November, the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled "International migration and development, including the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and development" (A/C.2/52/L.14), which read: "The General Assembly, "Recalling the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development adopted at Cairo, in particular chapter X on international migration,Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex. and the relevant provisions contained in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social DevelopmentReport of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I. and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social DevelopmentIbid., annex II. and in the Platform for ActionReport of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II. adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women, "Recalling also its resolutions 50/123 of 20 December 1995 on international migration and development and 49/127 of 19 December 1994, as well as Economic and Social Council decision 1995/313 of 27 July 1995, "Recalling also that the Economic and Social Council, in the context of its role under the Charter of the United Nations vis-à-vis the General Assembly and in accordance with Assembly resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 46/235 of 13 April 1992, 48/162 of 20 December 1994 and 50/227 of 24 May 1996, should assist the Assembly in promoting an integrated approach to the implementation of the Programme of Action in providing system-wide coordination and guidance in monitoring the implementation, "Recalling that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council should carry out their respective responsibilities, as entrusted to them in the Charter, in the formulation of policies and the provision of guidance to and coordination of United Nations activities in the field of population and development, "Recognizing the importance from an analytical and operational point of view of identifying the existing linkages among the social, economic, political and cultural factors related to international migration and development, and of taking appropriate steps to intensify the analysis of issues involved, "Noting particularly the lack of migration data, the absence of a coherent theory to explain international migration and the very weak understanding of the complex interrelationships between migration and development,See E/CN.9/1997/2, para. 11. English Page "Noting particularly that the role of relevant United Nations organizations that address migration issues should be strengthened so that they can deliver adequate technical support to developing countries to ensure that migration contributes to development, "Noting the critical role of the existing forums within the United Nations system in addressing the issues of international migration and development, including through the Commission on Population and Development, the Commission on Human Rights, the Committee for Development Planning, and the International Labour Organization, "Recalling its resolution 51/148 of 13 December 1996 on cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration, in particular its request to the Secretary-General to foster systematic consultations on matters of common interest, in consultation with the Director-General of the International Organization for Migration, "1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on international migration and development;A/52/314. "2. Calls upon the international community to seek to make the option of remaining in one's country viable for all people; to that end, efforts to achieve sustainable economic and social development, ensuring a better economic balance between developed and developing countries, should be strengthened; "3. Encourages, where relevant, interregional, regional and subregional mechanisms that will address the question of international migration and development; "4. Urges Member States and the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation in the area of international migration and development in order to address the root causes of migration, especially those related to poverty, and to maximize the benefits of international migration to those concerned; "5. Calls upon all relevant organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, within their continuing activities, to address the issue of international migration and development and to provide appropriate support for interregional, regional and subregional processes and activities on international migration and development; "6. Notes that a technical symposium on international migration will be convened in 1998 and, in that regard, requests the Commission on Population and Development to report to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on the outcome of the symposium; "7. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 1999, on the results of its examination in 1998 of the issue of migration and development; "8. Encourages the Administrative Committee on Coordination to report to the General Assembly through the Economic and Social Council on its work in addressing the issue of international migration and development from cross-sectoral, interregional, regional and subregional points of view; "9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a report that takes into account the views of Member States, the International Organization for Migration, the International Labour Organization and other relevant organizations of the United Nations system, as well as relevant organizations outside the United Nations system, recommending ways and means to address the problems related to migration and development, including the possibility of convening an international conference on international migration and development; "10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled 'International migration and development, including the question of the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and development to address migration issues'." 3. At the 46th meeting, on 2 December, the Vice-Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Hans-Peter Glanzer (Austria), introduced a draft resolution entitled "International migration and development" (A/C.2/52/L.35), which he submitted on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution A/C.2/52/L.14. In introducing the draft resolution, the Vice-Chairman orally revised operative paragraph 6 (a) by replacing the words "bearing in mind" with the words "taking into account". 4. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.2/52/L.35, as orally revised (see para. 6). 5. In the light of the adoption of draft resolution A/C.2/52/L.35, draft resolution A/C.2/52/L.14 was withdrawn by its sponsors. III. RECOMMENDATION OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE 6. The Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: International migration and development The General Assembly, Recalling the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development adopted at Cairo, in particular chapter X on international migration,Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex. Reaffirming the continuing validity of the principles set forth in the instruments regarding the international protection of human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex. the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against WomenResolution 34/180, annex. and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,Resolution 44/25, annex. Aware that, in spite of the existence of an already established body of principles, there is a need to make further efforts to ensure the human rights and dignity of all migrants and their families and that it is desirable to improve the situation of all documented migrants and their families, Recalling its resolutions 49/127 of 19 December 1994 and 50/123 of 20 December 1995 on international migration and development, as well as Economic and Social Council decision 1995/313 of 27 July 1995, Recalling also that the Economic and Social Council, in the context of its role under the Charter of the United Nations vis-à-vis the General Assembly and in accordance with Assembly resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 46/235 of 13 April 1992, 48/162 of 20 December 1994 and 50/227 of 24 May 1996, should assist the Assembly in promoting an integrated approach to the implementation of the Programme of Action in providing system-wide coordination and guidance in monitoring the implementation, Recalling further that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council should carry out their respective responsibilities, as entrusted to them in the Charter, in the formulation of policies and the provision of guidance to and coordination of United Nations activities in the field of population and development, Recognizing the importance from an analytical and operational point of view of identifying the existing linkages among the social, economic, political and cultural factors related to international migration and development, and of taking appropriate steps to intensify the analysis of issues involved, Noting particularly the need for more migration data, a coherent theory to explain international migration and a better understanding of the complex interrelationships between migration and development,See E/CN.9/1997/2, para. 11. Noting the role of relevant United Nations organizations in delivering adequate support to developing countries to ensure that migration contributes to development, Noting also the critical role of the existing forums within the United Nations system in addressing the issues of international migration and development, including through the Commission on Population and Development,Recognizing, without prejudice, the Economic and Social Council review of its subsidiary bodies, as initiated under General Assembly resolution 50/227, bearing in mind the other relevant Assembly resolutions. the Commission on Human Rights,16 the Committee for Development Planning,16 the International Labour Organization, and other relevant key organizations, Taking note of the recent regional and subregional conferences on international migration as an example of a government-driven process of consultation and cooperation to address particular problems associated with international migration, Noting that a technical symposium on international migration and development will be convened in 1998 by the Administrative Committee on Coordination at the request of the Commission on Population and Development,16 pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/123, Recalling its resolution 51/148 of 13 December 1996 on cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration, in particular its request therein to the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Director-General of the International Organization for Migration, to foster systematic consultations on matters of common interest, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on international migration and development;A/52/314. 2. Urges Member States and the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation in the area of international migration and development in order to address the root causes of migration, especially those related to poverty, and to maximize the benefits of international migration to those concerned; 3. Encourages, where relevant, interregional, regional and subregional mechanisms to continue to address the question of migration and development; 4. Calls upon the international community to seek to make the option of remaining in one's country viable for all people; to that end, efforts to achieve sustainable economic and social development, ensuring a better economic balance between developed and developing countries, should be strengthened; 5. Calls upon all relevant organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, within their continuing mandated activities, to address the issue of international migration and development and to provide appropriate support for interregional, regional and subregional processes and activities on international migration and development; 6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on international migration and development to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, taking into account: (a) The views of Member States, the International Organization for Migration, the International Labour Organization, other relevant organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant organizations, taking into account various regional processes, and recommending ways and means to address the problems related to migration and development, including the possibility of convening an international conference on international migration and development; (b) The report of the technical symposium on international migration and development, which will be convened in 1998; (c) The report of the Committee for Development Planning16 on its examination of the issue of migration and development; (d) The work of the Administrative Committee on Coordination which addresses the issue of international migration and development from cross-sectoral, interregional, regional and subregional points of view; 7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session a sub-item entitled "International migration and development, including the question of the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and development to address migration issues". 