%%%INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY|DEVELOPMENT|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 50 Information and communication technologies for development Report of the Second Committee Rapporteur: Ms. Vanessa Gomes (Portugal) I. Introduction 1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled "Information and communication technologies for development" and to allocate it to the Second Committee. 2. The Second Committee considered the item at its 12th and 25th meetings, on 12 October and 7 November 2006. An account of the Committee's discussion of the item is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.2/61/SR.12 and 25). Attention is also drawn to the general debate held by the Committee at its 2nd to 6th meetings, from 2 to 4 October (see A/C.2/61/SR.2-6). 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on information and communication technologies for development: progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/295 (A/61/254); (b) Notes by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on policies of United Nations system organizations towards the use of open source software for development (A/61/94) and his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon (A/61/94/Add.1); (c) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 50/130, including the recommendations of the ninth Inter-Agency Round Table on Communication for Development (Rome, 6-9 September 2004) (A/61/165); (d) Policies of United Nations system organizations towards the use of open source software for development: JIU response to comments by the Secretary-General and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (informal paper in English only). 4. At the 12th meeting, on 12 October, the Senior Adviser on Information Management Policy Coordination, United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination; and the Senior Public Information and Liaison Officer, New York Office of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, made introductory statements (see A/C.2/61/SR.12). 5. At the same meeting, the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States made a statement (see A/C.2/61/SR.12). II. Consideration of a draft decision proposed by the Chairperson 6. At its 25th meeting, on 7 November, on the proposal of the Chairperson, the Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that it take note of the report of the Secretary-General on information and communication technologies for development: progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/295 (A/61/254) (see para. 7). III. Recommendation of the Second Committee 7. The Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decision: Report of the Secretary-General on information and communication technologies for development: progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/295 The General Assembly decides to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on information and communication technologies for development: progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/295. 