%%%PLEBISCITES|DNESTR REGION (REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA)|REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA|FOREIGN RELATIONS|RUSSIAN FEDERATION|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 27 Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development Letter dated 16 October 2006 from the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Moldova to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General Upon instructions from my Government I have the honour to transmit herewith the Declaration of the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova concerning the Russian State Duma Declaration on the outcomes of the so-called referendum in Moldova's Transnistrian region (see annex). I should be grateful if this letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly under item 27 of the agenda of the sixty-first session. (Signed) Alexei Tulbure Ambassador Permanent Representative The Russian State Duma has adopted a Declaration on the outcomes of the so-called referendum in Moldova's Transnistrian region. The Parliament of the Republic of Moldova notes with concern that by adopting this declaration, the Russian MPs question Moldova's territorial integrity, the declaration's text running counter not only to the content and spirit of the basic political treaty between Moldova and the Russian Federation, of which Article 5 clearly stipulates that the sides condemn separatist movements, but also to the norms and principles of the international law. The Moldovan Parliament ascertains with regret that the declaration totally differs from the recent statements by Russian President Vladimir Putin, who, referring to the talks on the Transnistrian settlement, clearly expressed his position on the inadmissibility to revise the principles of territorial integrity in the contemporary world. The Russian MPs, without penetrating the essence and details of the Transnistrian conflict settlement process, have subjectively interpreted the Moldovan leadership's actions to restore the country's territorial unity, and took the position of attorneys of one of the conflicting sides. While recognizing the Transnistrian referendum as an act of free expression of citizens' will, the Russian lawmakers lost sight of more important aspects, such as: the inexistence of democratic institutions in Transnistria, the legislation-approved criminal inquiry against people who speak for reintegration with Moldova, and the total control of civil life by repressive services. The State Duma did not take into account that despite the pseudo-referendum's results, most of the Transnistrian residents have long ago expressed their unequivocal attitude towards Moldova, reconfirming by documents their Moldovan citizenship. This is the most obvious proof of their political and civic option. The Transnistrian entrepreneurs also expressed their option when legalizing their business in Moldova's economic area, thus, benefiting from legal protection of their economic interests on the domestic and international markets. The Moldovan Parliament voices hope that the Russian lawmakers will demonstrate more objectivity and competence when working out declarations on Moldova. Only this way, they will bring their contribution to the Transnistrian conflict settlement and the improvement of the Moldovan-Russian relations. The Moldovan Parliament calls on the Russian State Duma to refrain from supporting the separatism, which affects not only these states, but which can also affect Russia itself, with unpredictable consequences for the entire European continent. 12 October 2006 