%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|ISRAEL|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|ZIONISM|POLITICAL VIOLENCE|TERRORISM|

General Assembly Sixty-first session Agenda item 44 Culture of peace Security Council Sixty-first year Identical letters dated 23 October 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council I write to declare Israel's strong protest to yet another litany of highly appalling and offensive statements made by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad last week, publicly calling for the destruction of the State of Israel. As reported by the Iranian Republic News Agency, the President said: :: "The Zionist criminals feel insecure even in their own homes. These people who threaten security are crumbling. Under current conditions, this regime does not have the strength to survive at all." :: "This regime is destined to end and it has no purpose. This regime is like a grounded battle vehicle that needs to be taken out of service." :: "If you support this regime, it will take its supporters deep into a quagmire. I suggest the nations in the region stop their support for this regime. The great nations must stop the Zionist regime and reduce the pressure on the nations in the region and allow them to determine their own destiny." :: "The Zionist regime is doomed." Israel, once again, denounces the hateful comments made by the Iranian President in the strongest terms. His poisonous words constitute a violation of international law and contradict the principles of the United Nations Charter, as outlined in Article 2: "All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State ..." The statement by the Iranian President and the lack of formal protest by the international community undermine stability in the region and international peace and security. Every Member State must, on account of its membership in the United Nations, denounce and reject these hateful words. It is inconceivable that in the twenty-first century, 61 years after the Holocaust, a Member State of the United Nations would openly call for another's annihilation. By allowing the Iranian President to address the General Assembly, the international community has bestowed upon him an aura of legitimacy. Hence, it is incumbent upon the international community to protest this incitement to genocide and explicit racism. Further silence on this matter contradicts the foundations of the United Nations Charter and spirit of purpose of this organization. I refer you to the letter we wrote last year (A/60/449-S/2005/681), stating, at that time, our outrage and concern. Additional letters have been sent to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, President of the Security Council, and Sheikha Haya Rashed Al Khalifa, President of the General Assembly. I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter circulated as a document of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly, under item 44, "Culture of peace", in particular "promotion of religious and cultural understanding, harmony and cooperation", and of the Security Council. (Signed) Dan Gillerman 