%%%FRIENDLY RELATIONS AMONG STATES|PARTNERSHIP|CHINA|AFRICA|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|NORTH-SOUTH RELATIONS|PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|TRADE PROMOTION|CULTURAL EXCHANGES|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|

General Assembly Sixty-first session Agenda items 47, 52 and 62 (a) Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support Security Council Sixty-first year Letter dated 15 November 2006 from the Permanent Representatives of China, the Congo and Ethiopia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General We have the honour to transmit herewith the speeches made by H.E. Mr. Hu Jintao, President of the People's Republic of China, H.E. Mr. Denis Sassou-N'guesso, President of the Republic of Congo, and H.E. Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, and the Declaration of the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (see annex). We would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly, under agenda items 47, 52 and 62 (a), and as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Wang Guangya Ambassador Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of China to the United Nations (Signed) Basile Ikouebe Permanent Representative of the Republic of Congo (Signed) Dawit Yohannes Permanent Representative of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Annex to the letter dated 15 November 2006 from the Permanent Representatives of China, the Congo and Ethiopia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General [Original: Chinese] Address by Hu Jintao, President of the People's Republic of China, at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation Beijing, 4 November 2006 Our meeting today will go down in history. We, leaders of China and African countries, in a common pursuit of friendship, peace, cooperation and development, are gathered in Beijing today to renew friendship, discuss ways of growing China-Africa relations and promote unity and cooperation among developing countries. On behalf of the Chinese Government and people and in my own name, I wish to extend a very warm welcome to you and deep appreciation to you for attending the Summit. I also want to extend, through the African leaders present today, the cordial greetings and best wishes of the Chinese people to the brotherly African people. The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation was jointly set up by China and Africa in October 2000, a major initiative taken to promote traditional China-Africa friendship and cooperation. In the six years since then, two ministerial conferences have been held, first in Beijing and then in Addis Ababa. Today, the Forum serves as an important platform and effective mechanism for conducting collective dialogue, exchanging experience in governance and enhancing mutual trust and cooperation in practical terms between China and African countries. This year marks the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of diplomatic ties between New China and African countries. Though vast oceans keep China and Africa far apart, the friendship between our peoples has a long history and, having been tested by times, is strong and vigorous. In the long course of history, the Chinese and African peoples, with an unyielding and tenacious spirit, created splendid and distinctive ancient civilisations. In the modern era, our peoples launched unremitting and heroic struggle against subjugation, and have written a glorious chapter in the course of pursuing freedom and liberation, upholding human dignity, and striving for economic development and national rejuvenation. The progress and development of China and Africa are a major contribution to the advancement of human civilisation. During the past five decades, the Chinese and African peoples have forged close unity, and our friendship has flourished. China-Africa exchanges and cooperation have grown in all fields and yielded fruitful results. In international affairs, China and Africa enjoy trust and cooperate closely to uphold the legitimate rights and interests of the developing world. In all these years, China has firmly supported Africa in winning liberation and pursuing development. China has trained technical personnel and other professionals in various fields for Africa. It has built the Tanzara Railway and other infrastructural projects and sent medical teams and peacekeepers to Africa. All this testifies to the friendship cherished by the Chinese people towards the African people. We in China will not forget Africa's full support for restoring the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations. Nor will we forget the sincere and ardent wish of African countries and people for China to realise complete and peaceful reunification and achieve the goal of building a modern nation. Today, China-Africa friendship is deeply rooted in the hearts of our two peoples, and our friendship has endured the test of time and changes in the world. This is because we have never strayed from the principle of enhancing friendship, treating each other as equals, extending mutual support and promoting common development in building our ties. -- Friendship provides a solid foundation for reinforcing China- Africa friendly ties. We both value our traditional friendship and are committed to enhancing it. -- Treating each other as equals is crucial for ensuring mutual trust. We both respect the development path independently embarked upon by the other side. We both are serious in addressing each other's concerns and are eager to benefit from each other's practice in development. -- Mutual support is the driving force behind the ever growing China-Africa cooperation. We both wish to see progress in the development endeavour of the other side and sincerely support such endeavour. And we are engaged in comprehensive cooperation. -- Common development is the shared aspiration of the Chinese and African peoples. We are committed to pursuing mutually beneficial cooperation to bring the benefits of development to our peoples. The world today is undergoing profound and complex changes. But peace, development and cooperation remain the calling of the times. There is a growing trend towards multipolarity and economic globalization. Science and technology are making daily advance, regional cooperation is deepening and there is increasing interdependence among nations. All this has created rare development opportunities for the international community. On the other hand, imbalance in global development, widening gap between North and South, the combination of traditional and non-traditional security threats as well as increasing factors of instability and uncertainty standing in the way of peace and development all pose a daunting challenge to developing countries in their pursuit of sustainable development. China is the largest developing country, and Africa is home to the largest number of developing countries. Our combined population accounts for over a third of the world total. Without peace and development in China and Africa, there will be no global peace and development. In this new era, China and Africa share increasing common interests and have a growing mutual need. The forging of a new type of China-Africa strategic partnership is determined by the dynamics of China-Africa cooperation, and it represents our wish to promote global peace and development. Building strong ties between China and Africa will not only promote development of each side, but also help cement unity and cooperation among developing countries and contribute to establishing a just and equitable new international political and economic order. To enhance this new type of strategic partnership, China will strengthen cooperation with Africa in the following fields: First, deepen political relation of equality and mutual trust. We will maintain high-level contacts and mutual visits, establish a regular high-level political dialogue mechanism and conduct strategic dialogue to enhance mutual political trust and traditional friendship and achieve common progress through unity. Second, broaden win-win economic cooperation. We will give full play to our respective strength, enhance economic and trade ties, broaden areas of cooperation, support cooperation between our business communities, upgrade cooperation in human resources development and explore new ways of cooperation so that both sides will share the benefits of development. Third, expand exchange for cultural enrichment. We will strengthen cultural and people-to-people exchanges to increase mutual understanding and friendship between our two peoples and particularly between the younger generation. We will enhance exchanges and cooperation in education, science and technology, culture, public health, sports and tourism to provide intellectual motivation and cultural support for China-Africa cooperation. Fourth, promote balanced and harmonious global development. We will enhance South-South cooperation and promote North-South dialogue. We urge developed countries to honour their promises on market access, aid and debt relief. We should strive to meet the Millennium Development Goals and steer economic globalisation in the direction of creating prosperity for all. Fifth, strengthen cooperation and mutual support in international affairs. We are committed to upholding the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, respecting diversity of the world and promoting democracy in international relations. We call for enhancing international security cooperation based on mutual trust and benefit and addressing each other's concerns through consultation and coordination so that we can jointly respond to threats and challenges to global security. China values its friendship with Africa. To strengthen unity and cooperation with Africa is a key principle guiding China's foreign policy. China will continue to support Africa in implementing the New Partnership for Africa's Development and in its effort to strengthen itself through unity, achieve peace and stability and economic revitalisation in the region and raise its international standing. To forge a new type of China-Africa strategic partnership and strengthen our cooperation in more areas and at a higher level, the Chinese Government will take the following eight steps: Double its 2006 assistance to Africa by 2009. Provide US$3 billion of preferential loans and US$2 billion of preferential buyer's credits to Africa in the next three years. Set up a China-Africa development fund which will reach US$5 billion to encourage Chinese companies to invest in Africa and provide support to them. Build a conference centre for the African Union to support African countries in their efforts to strengthen themselves through unity and support the process of African integration. Cancel debt in the form of all the interest-free government loans that matured at the end of 2005 owed by the heavily indebted poor countries and the least developed countries in Africa that have diplomatic relations with China. Further open up China's market to Africa by increasing from 190 to over 440 the number of export items to China receiving zero-tariff treatment from the least developed countries in Africa having diplomatic ties with China. Establish three to five trade and economic cooperation zones in Africa in the next three years. Over the next three years, train 15,000 African professionals; send 100 senior agricultural experts to Africa; set up 10 special agricultural technology demonstration centres in Africa; build 30 hospitals in Africa and provide RMB 300 million of grant for providing artemisinin and building 30 malaria prevention and treatment centres to fight malaria in Africa; dispatch 300 youth volunteers to Africa; build 100 rural schools in Africa; and increase the number of Chinese government scholarships to African students from the current 2,000 per year to 4,000 per year by 2009. Both China and Africa are cradles of human civilisation and lands of great promise. Common destiny and common goals have brought us together. China will remain a close friend, reliable partner and good brother of Africa. Let's join hands and endeavour to promote development in both China and Africa, improve the well-being of our peoples and build a harmonious world of enduring peace and common prosperity! [Original: French] Statement by the President of the Republic of Congo, Chairperson of the African Union, His Excellency Mr. Denis Sassou-N'guesso at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation On the occasion of this very special meeting, I would like to begin by telling His Excellency the President of the People's Republic of China and the Government and people of China how much their warm welcome and thoughtfulness have touched all the African delegations present at this Forum, which offers a platform for dialogue, cooperation and the strengthening of the strategic partnership between China and Africa. Africa regards this as evidence of the esteem of a people to whom it has always felt particularly drawn. We wish to stress how very grateful we are to our dear friend, His Excellency Mr. Hu Jintao, and the Chinese Government for taking the positive step of convening this historic meeting. As everyone knows, the friendship we are celebrating today has deep roots. Historians believe that the first contacts between the Asian and African continents took place three millenniums ago and that those between China and Africa began in the fourteenth century. But the rapprochement between China and Africa started in the middle of the twentieth century, in Indonesia, at the Bandung Conference, which was held from 18 to 24 April 1955. That first Afro-Asian meeting, which brought together 29 countries, enabled China to lay the foundations of friendship with the African countries. During that meeting, Prime Minister Zhou Enlai, in a memorable speech, hailed the liberation struggles then under way in Africa and condemned apartheid. Once the foundations had been laid in this manner, consolidation was quick to follow, in that a long tour of Africa from 14 December 1963 to 4 February 1964 enabled Prime Minister Zhou Enlai to visit 10 countries. This tour of Africa gave China and Africa an opportunity to become better acquainted and to set in motion many different forms of cooperation, which became exemplary in many respects. It is worth revisiting this shared history in order to gain a better understanding of where we are coming from and a clearer perception of the future. The foundations for this future were laid by three great men, three great friends of Africa, Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping and Jiang Zemin. You, Mr. President, dear friend, are continuing adeptly to strengthen these foundations in the interests of the peoples of China and Africa. Mr. President, you have enabled significant strides to be made in Sino-African cooperation. The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation which brings us together today has been in existence for only six years, but the results achieved over that brief span of time have far-reaching political, economic and sociocultural implications. The first ministerial conference held here, in Beijing, from 10 to 12 October 2000 focused, among other things, on: - the promotion of South/South cooperation; - the improvement of North/South relations; - participation in international affairs on an equal footing; - the establishment of a long-term partnership for the benefit of both parties. We remember that, during that first meeting, the Chinese Government announced its decision to cancel some US$ 10 billion of the debt owed by African countries. As always, the Chinese authorities kept their word, much to the gratification of the African peoples who were the recipients of this great generosity. Three years later, on 25 and 26 November 2003, at the second ministerial conference, held in Addis Ababa, the Chinese Government reiterated its wish to further expand Sino-African cooperation and undertook: - to promote the democratization of international relations through consultations; - to support the idea of multilateralism advocated by Africa; - to accept the challenge of globalization by harmonizing positions in multilateral negotiations concerning world trade; - to increase its assistance to African countries. We can state with certainty that the third meeting of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation will be as successful as the first two meetings. The Declaration of the Beijing Summit and the Beijing Action Plan (2007-2009), which have been submitted by the ministerial conference to the heads of State for consideration, are of major importance. These two texts take account of the organization and structure of our multiform relations with a view to enabling us to attain higher levels of cooperation over the next three years. We welcome the support China intends to give Africa, as stated in these two texts, with respect to: - the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD); - the realization of the Millennium Development Goals; - the resumption of the Doha Round of negotiations at the World Trade Organization. This is a fitting time and place to tell you that Africa fully appreciates the true worth of China's outstanding efforts to promote peace on our continent. These efforts have, in particular, been deployed through effective and active Chinese participation in a variety of peacekeeping operations in several African countries which have experienced and which are still experiencing serious crises. We thank you for this support, which we would like to see extended to another of Africa's daily battles, namely the struggle against desertification and drought. China not only has long experience in this sphere, but also and above all it has the technologies and methodologies from which Africa would be happy to benefit. I am sure that this summit is going to develop and strengthen the strategic partnership between China and Africa, making it broader, more practical and, of course, more fruitful. We have the will and the means to do so. China offers us a striking example. The spectacular progress recorded by your country, Mr. President, commands admiration. Just yesterday China was a poor country, but today, thanks to suitable policies applied methodically and with determination, it is providing powerful assistance for other developing countries. I salute China on behalf of Africa. And I wish our deliberations every success. Long live Sino-African friendship and cooperation. Opening statement by H.E. Ato Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, at the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation I know it is a source of satisfaction to all of us to be here in Beijing for this historic Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. The Summit is a clear demonstration of the utmost determination of Chinese and African leaders to intensify the relations between China and Africa and to raise the Forum to an even higher level. As the current co-chair of this Forum, I would like, on behalf of Africa, to extend my warmest welcome to all participants and express my heartfelt thanks to the Government of the People's Republic of China for its commendable efforts and excellent arrangements to make this Summit a success. The Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation that is being held on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of diplomatic relations between the People's Republic of China and the countries of Africa, is nothing short of a reaffirmation and renewal of the strategic partnership between Africa and China. It is a reaffirmation of our strategic partnership because our partnership is not new. It is a partnership which was forged as early as the era of the anti-colonial struggle in Africa. China has provided selfless support to Africa in its struggle for independence. The post-independence period too was a period when the partnership was further strengthened. The exercise of true independence and our sovereign rights has for us been something that has to be fought for every day. This is the nature of the world we live in. The commitment of China to the principle of the sovereign equality among nations and non-interference in the affairs of others, has provided Africa the opportunity to forge a partnership that is based on trust and mutual confidence. It is therefore very appropriate that 50 years after we began building our strategic partnership in the fight against colonialism and apartheid and for our right to fully exercise our sovereign rights, we should reaffirm the Sino-Africa strategic partnership. Today's summit is not merely about reaffirming our partnership but also about renewing it. The end of colonialism and apartheid in Africa has created a new environment in our continent. Our main challenge now is not fighting colonialism, but fighting poverty and backwardness and achieving economic independence. Our challenge now is to achieve peace and stability and to promote good governance throughout the continent. Africa needs the support of its friends to overcome these challenges. The Sino-Africa strategic partnership too cannot but reflect the changed circumstances in Africa and be geared towards Africa overcoming its current challenges. Our strategic partnership must therefore not only be reaffirmed but also renewed to take into account the changed circumstances in Africa. The peaceful development of China, the extraordinary success of China in economic development and other fields has also created a fundamentally changed circumstance. China has now more means at its disposal to assist Africa to overcome its current economic challenges and is already having a marked impact on Africa's economic future. Sino-Africa strategic partnership must therefore be renewed to take into account the changed circumstances in China and the consequent changes globally. It seems to me natural that our renewed strategic partnership must focus on Africa's economic development as poverty and backwardness are at the root of all of Africa's challenges. The peaceful development of China and the dramatic improvement in its economic capacity and global role and the continuing achievements of China in this regard suggests that economic cooperation should be at the core of the renewed Sino-Africa strategic partnership. In the era of globalization such cooperation must of necessity be based on mutual benefits and on seeking win-win solutions. Africa provides to the growing Chinese economy a reliable field for investment, trade and the utilization of natural resources for mutual benefit. China provides for Africa a source of successful development experience, technology transfer, trade and investment. There is thus a very large area of economic complementarity between Africa and China which makes it possible for us to establish strategic economic partnership based on promoting mutual benefit and win-win solutions. Historically Africa's economic relations have been unbalanced and have not benefited Africa on an equal basis. This is largely related to colonialism and its aftermath. Africa is now eager to overcome these unequal economic ties and transform them into mutually beneficial ones. China too has in the past been a victim of these unequal relations. The peaceful development of China thus provides us all the opportunity to establish a new type of economic partnership -- one that is based on equality and mutual benefit. That is why our peoples have very high expectations from the renewed Sino-Africa strategic partnership and have celebrated and welcomed China's tremendous progress in the economic and other fields. Africa needs peace and stability within itself and in the global environment if it is to overcome the challenges it faces. China too needs a stable and tranquil global environment to continue its peaceful development. This constitutes another solid basis for the renewed Sino-Africa strategic partnership and one that supplements our economic partnership. I am convinced that Africa is fully ready to reaffirm and renew its strategic partnership with China. Our peoples have followed China's achievement with interest and sympathy and are inspired by it. African governments have established friendly ties with China on a bilateral and multilateral basis. Indeed, the fact that we have here today one of the largest gatherings on African leaders in history is a concrete manifestation of the importance of Sino-African strategic partnership to African leaders. I am also equally convinced that the people and government of the People's Republic of China attach great importance to renewing the strategic partnership with Africa. The support that China has given to Africa since the start of the Forum and even before the Forum was established, are concrete manifestations of that. The draft documents that have been prepared for our consideration and the holding of this magnificent summit are practical proofs of China's commitment to the partnership. The summit is therefore destined to succeed in its objectives. It is a summit that history will remember as a turning point in the long-standing friendly relations between Africa and China. In concluding, I would like to reiterate how delighted we have been and what a privilege it has indeed been for us to have had the opportunity to co-chair this important Forum for the past three years. As we welcome the incoming co-chair with the pledge of our fullest cooperation, we also wish to assure the Chinese side that Ethiopia's commitment to the Forum will continue with even greater resolve and determination. [Original: Chinese, English and French] Declaration of the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation We, the Heads of State, Government and delegation of the People's Republic of China and 48 African countries, met in Beijing from 4 to 5 November 2006 for the Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. We applaud the Summit held on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of diplomatic relations between the People's Republic of China and the African countries. For the purpose of promoting "friendship, peace, cooperation and development", we have reviewed the sincere friendship, solidarity and cooperation between China and Africa over the past half century, and had fruitful discussions on the common goals and direction for growing China-Africa cooperation in the new era. Conscious of the fact that thanks to the concerted efforts of both sides, the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation founded in 2000 has become an important platform for collective dialogue and an effective mechanism for pragmatic cooperation between the two sides, we have decided to enhance the role of the Forum and to this end, reaffirmed our commitment to the purposes and objectives set forth in the documents adopted by the Forum. We hold that the world today is undergoing complex and profound changes, that human society is becoming increasingly interdependent, and that the pursuit of peace, development and cooperation has become the trend of the times and the priority of all countries. We declare that the development of our friendly relations and cooperation are in accordance with the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, as well as all the international principles that promote multilateralism and democracy in international relations. We urge that diversity of the world should be respected and upheld, that all countries in the world, big or small, rich or poor, strong or weak, should respect each other, treat each other as equals and live in peace and amity with each other, and that different civilizations and modes of development should draw on each other's experience, promote each other and coexist in harmony. Faced with the growing trend of economic globalization, we call for enhancing South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue and call on the World Trade Organization to resume the Doha Round of negotiations to promote balanced, coordinated and sustainable development of the global economy to enable all countries to share its benefits and realize common development and prosperity. We call for reform of the United Nations and other multilateral international institutions to make them better meet the need of all members of the international community. Through reform, the United Nations should strengthen its role, give full scope to the function of the UN General Assembly and pay greater attention to the issue of development. Priority should be given to increasing the representation and full participation of African countries in the UN Security Council and other UN agencies. We hold that the adherence of China, the world's largest developing country, to peaceful development and the commitment of Africa, a continent with the largest number of developing countries, to stability, development and renaissance are in themselves significant contribution to world peace and development. The African countries are greatly inspired by China's rapid economic development. They extend congratulations to China and wish China even greater achievements in its development endeavors. They reiterate that they adhere to the one China policy and support China's peaceful reunification. China commends Africa's progress in safeguarding regional peace, promoting regional cooperation and accelerating economic and social development, appreciates the active role played by the African countries, the African Union and other regional and sub-regional organizations in this regard, reaffirms its support for the African countries in their efforts to strengthen themselves through unity and independently resolve African problems, supports the African regional and sub-regional organizations in their efforts to promote economic integration, and supports the African countries in implementing the "New Partnership for Africa's Development" (NEPAD) programs. We call on the international community to encourage and support Africa's efforts to pursue peace and development and provide greater assistance to African countries in peaceful resolution of conflicts and post-war reconstruction. In particular, we urge the developed countries to increase official development assistance and honor their commitments to opening market and debt relief, and call on the related international organizations to provide more financial and technical assistance to enhance Africa's capacity in poverty and disaster reduction and prevention and control of desertification, and help Africa realize the UN Millennium Development Goals. Greater attention should be paid to the issue of development facing the least developed countries and the heavily indebted poor countries, as well as the small island and landlocked countries in Africa. We point out that China and Africa enjoy traditional solidarity and cooperation and have always treated each other with sincerity and shared weal and woe. Having stood the test of time and changing international environment, China-Africa friendship is flourishing and enjoys immense popular support. We maintain that in the new era, China and Africa have common development goals and converging interests which offer a broad prospect for cooperation. In the new century, China and the African countries should enhance their traditional friendship and expand mutually beneficial cooperation to achieve common development and prosperity. We hereby solemnly proclaim the establishment of a new type of strategic partnership between China and Africa featuring political equality and mutual trust, economic win-win cooperation and cultural exchanges. For this purpose, we will: -- Increase high-level visits, conduct strategic dialogue, enhance mutual political trust and promote enduring friendship; -- Deepen and broaden mutually beneficial cooperation, encourage and promote two-way trade and investment, explore new modes of cooperation and give top priority to cooperation in agriculture, infrastructure, industry, fishery, IT, public health and personnel training to draw on each other's strengths for the benefit of our peoples; -- Increase exchange of views on governance and development to learn from each other, make common progress and enhance our respective capacity for self-development; -- Increase dialogue between different cultures, promote people-to-people exchanges and interaction, particularly those between the young people, and boost exchanges and cooperation in such areas as culture, science and technology, education, sports, the environment, tourism and women affairs; -- Enhance international cooperation to jointly address global security threats and non-traditional security challenges, and uphold the common interests of the developing world in the spirit of mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination; -- Enhance the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, strengthen collective dialogue and increase coordination and cooperation of the Action Plan with NEPAD and the social and economic development plans of African countries; and -- Properly handle issues and challenges that may arise in the course of cooperation through friendly consultation in keeping with China-Africa friendship and the long-term interests of the two sides. We hold that the establishment of a new type of strategic partnership is both the shared desire and independent choice of China and Africa, serves our common interests, and will help enhance solidarity, mutual support and assistance and unity of the developing countries and contribute to durable peace and harmonious development in the world. We have, in the spirit of this Declaration, formulated and adopted the Beijing Action Plan of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (2007-2009). We commend the Ministers participating in the Third Ministerial Conference of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation for their dedicated efforts and outstanding work, applaud the outcome of the High-Level Dialogue between Chinese and African Leaders and Business Representatives, and express our congratulations on the full success of the Summit. 