%%%PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME PRIORITIES|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|REPORT PREPARATION|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|SUPPORT SERVICES|HUMAN RESOURCES|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INTERGOVERNMENTAL BODIES|PERFORMANCE STANDARDS|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|DEVELOPMENT|AFRICA|HUMAN RIGHTS|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|INTERNATIONAL LAW|DISARMAMENT|DRUG CONTROL|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 118 Programme planning Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Diego Simancas (Mexico) I. Introduction 1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled "Programme planning" and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the item at its 7th, 8th and 36th meetings, on 17 and 18 October and 21 December 2006. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.5/61/SR.7, 8 and 36). 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following documents: 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/61/16). (a) Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the work of its forty-sixth session;1 (b) Proposed strategic framework for the period 2008-2009, part one (A/61/6 (Part One)) and part two (A/61/6 (Prog. 1-13, 14/Rev.1, 15-27)); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on the programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium 2004-2005 (A/61/64); (d) Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the role of evaluation and the application of evaluation findings on programme design, delivery and policy directives (see A/61/83 and Corr.1); (e) Proposed revisions to the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007 (A/61/125). 4. At the 7th meeting, on 17 October 2006, the Chairperson of the Committee for Programme and Coordination introduced the report of that Committee (see A/C.5/61/SR.7). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/61/L.16 5. At its 36th meeting, on 21 December, the Committee had before it a draft resolution entitled "Programme planning" (A/C.5/61/L.16), submitted by the Chairman of the Committee on the basis of informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Pakistan. 6. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/61/L.16 without a vote (see para. 8). 7. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of the United States of America made a statement in explanation of position; after the adoption of the draft resolution, the representatives of Japan and South Africa, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, made statements in explanation of position (see A/C.5/61/SR.36). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 8. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Recalling its resolutions 37/234 of 21 December 1982, 38/227 A of 20 December 1983, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 55/234 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 57/282 of 20 December 2002, 58/268 and 58/269 of 23 December 2003, 59/275 of 23 December 2004 and 60/257 of 8 May 2006, Recalling also the terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, as outlined in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976, Having considered the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the work of its forty-sixth session, the proposed strategic framework for the period 2008-2009: part one: plan outline and part two: biennial programme plan, the proposed revisions to the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007, the report of the Secretary-General on the programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium 2004-2005 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the role of evaluation findings in programme design, delivery and policy directives, 1. Re-emphasizes the role of the plenary and the Main Committees of the General Assembly in reviewing and taking action on the appropriate recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant to their work, in accordance with regulation 4.10 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspect of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation; 2. Requests the General Committee to take fully into account resolutions 56/253, 57/282, 59/275 and 60/257 in the allocation of agenda items to the Main Committees; Proposed strategic framework for the period 2008-2009 3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the proposed biennial programme plan for the period 2008-2009 contained in the report of the Committee on the work of its forty-sixth session, subject to the provisions of the present resolution and the additional modifications contained in the annex hereto; 4. Decides not to take a decision on the content of part one: plan outline of the proposed strategic framework for the period 2008-2009; 5. Also decides that the priorities for the period 2008-2009 shall be the following: (a) Maintenance of international peace and security; (b) Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences; (c) Development of Africa; (d) Promotion of human rights; (e) Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts; (f) Promotion of justice and international law; (g) Disarmament; (h) Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations; 6. Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative of the Member States, as reflected in legislative mandates; 7. Also stresses the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its early stages and throughout the process; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009 on the basis of the above priorities and the biennial programme plan as adopted in the present resolution; Programme performance report 9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium 2004-2005; 10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination regarding the report of the Secretary-General; 11. Stresses that, while future reports on programme performance will be more aligned with the objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement, information on the outputs shall continue to be provided in the reports; 12. Recognizes the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination in monitoring and evaluation, and encourages the Committee, in reviewing performance and evaluation reports, to provide, inter alia, action-oriented recommendations aimed at enhancing the effectiveness and impact of the activities of the Organization; 13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future programme performance reports provide more detailed information on the reasons for the less-than-full implementation of programmed outputs or the postponement or termination thereof; Evaluation 14. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on evaluation, contained in chapter II, section C, of its report; 15. Recalls paragraphs 9 and 10 of its resolution 60/257, and encourages intergovernmental bodies to make use of the findings set out in the programme performance reports of the Secretary-General and evaluation reports in planning and policymaking; 16. Also recalls paragraphs 14 and 15 of its resolution 60/257, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session; 17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session to improve the links between monitoring, evaluation, programme planning and budgeting; Coordination questions 18. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2005-2006, contained in chapter III, section A, of its report, and on the New Partnership for Africa's Development and the report of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in chapter III, section B, of its report; 19. Invites the Economic and Social Council to utilize the relevant conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination when considering related reports of the Chief Executives Board; Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate 20. Recalls its resolutions 58/269, 59/275 and 60/257; 21. Recognizes the efforts of the Committee for Programme and Coordination during its forty-sixth session to improve its working methods and procedures; 22. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination, at its forty-seventh session, within the framework of its mandate, to continue its consideration of the agenda item on improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate. Additional modifications to the proposed biennial programme plan for the period 2008-2009 Programme 10 Trade and development Subprogramme 2 Investment, enterprise and technology Expected accomplishment (c) should read as follows: "Improved opportunities for enterprises in developing countries and countries with economies in transition to enhance their competitiveness through deepened linkages between domestic and foreign firms and better understanding of emerging issues in accounting and reporting standards, corporate responsibility, transparency and good corporate practices". Indicator of achievement (c) should read as follows: "Increased percentage of countries indicating that policy advice and technical assistance provided by UNCTAD were useful in the design of policies aimed at enhancing the competitiveness of their enterprises". Strategy Paragraph 10.9 should read as follows: "This subprogramme is implemented under the responsibility of the Division on Investment, Technology and Enterprise Development. To achieve the objective of the subprogramme, the Division will aim to improve the understanding of issues and policy choices in international investment, enterprise development and technology transfer and will continue to strengthen its role as the major source of comprehensive information and analysis of international investment. It will focus on the development dimension of international investment and technology flows, the interface of global processes and national policymaking and the integration of investment, technology and enterprise-development policies. The Division will also aim to strengthen the capacity of developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, at their request, to formulate and implement integrated policies and to participate in discussions relating to international investment, to support efforts by developing countries to build productive capacities and to respond to technological and scientific changes through science and technology reviews and to promote the transfer of technology and innovation." Subprogramme 3 International trade Indicator of achievement (c) should read as follows: "Increased number of countries in which improvements have been achieved in integrating commodity production, processing and trade into development in line with UNCTAD research and analyses, and policy deliberations and technical assistance". Overall orientation Paragraph 24.3 should read as follows: "The programme is oriented principally towards fully meeting management reform measures, including those approved by the General Assembly, with the support of a communication strategy that ensures that Member States, managers and staff are fully informed of and engaged in the efforts to ensure a more effective and results-oriented Organization." A. Headquarters Subprogramme 1 Management services, administration of justice and services to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly and to the Committee for Programme and Coordination (a) Management services Add a new expected accomplishment as follows: "(c) Improved business processes". Add new indicators of achievement as follows: "(c) (i) An improvement in the timeliness of business processes (reduction in the number of months, weeks or days required) "(ii) Amount of efficiency gains resulting from business process improvements". Human resources management (a) Operational services The objective of the Organization should read as follows: "to support the sound management of human resources in the Organization and, with respect to staffing, to pay due regard to the principle of equitable geographical distribution in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations". Under indicator of achievement (a) (ii), add a new indicator as follows: "(iii) Increased number of nationals from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States, in particular developing countries, in the Secretariat" Paragraph 24.18 should read as follows: "The Management Performance Board now monitors the manner in which senior managers exercise all aspects of the authority that has been delegated to them, including their performance in achieving the objectives contained in human resources action plans. Under the current staff selection system, the head of department/office, having been delegated the authority to select staff, is responsible for the progress made towards achieving the targets for geography and gender balance, which will be presented under executive direction and management, and detailed in that context in the programme budget." 