%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|ECONOMIC RELATIONS|ECONOMIC COOPERATION|AZERBAIJAN|LITHUANIA|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|NAGORNY KARABAKH SITUATION|REGIONAL SECURITY|EUROPEAN SECURITY AND COOPERATION|ORGANIZED CRIME|LAUNDERING OF FUNDS|TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS|DRUG CONTROL|

Sixty-first session Items 17, 46, 52 (a), 54 (e), 106 (o) and 111 of the preliminary list* The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields Sustainable development: implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development Globalization and interdependence: integration of the economies in transition into the world economy Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations: cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit Letter dated 12 June 2006 from the Permanent Representatives of Azerbaijan and Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General Upon instructions from our Governments, we have the honour to transmit herewith the joint declaration by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the President of the Republic of Lithuania signed on 8 June 2006, in Baky, Azerbaijan. We should be grateful if the present letter and its annex were distributed as a document of the General Assembly under items 17, 46, 52 (a), 54 (e), 106 (o) and 111 of the preliminary list. (Signed) Yashar Aliyev Ambassador Permanent Representative Republic of Azerbaijan (Signed) Dalius Cekuolis Republic of Lithuania * A/61/50 and Corr.1. Joint declaration by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the President of the Republic of Lithuania The President of the Republic of Lithuania, Valdas Adamkus, paid an official visit to the Republic of Azerbaijan on 8-9 June 2006 at the invitation of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev. Aiming to enhance the development of political, economic and social relations between the Republic of Lithuania and the Republic of Azerbaijan, With the purpose to promote further development of Azerbaijan's cooperation with the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Expressing their conviction that the present visit of the President of the Republic of Lithuania, Valdas Adamkus, to Azerbaijan would provide an important impetus to the further development of friendship and partnership between the two countries in the future, The Parties declared following: 1. The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the President of the Republic of Lithuania confirmed that they will further develop bilateral political, economic and cultural contacts. 2. The Presidents noted their commitment to develop their relations on the basis of the values such as the rule of law, democracy, human rights and market economy. In this regard, the Lithuanian side welcomed the efforts of Azerbaijan aimed at strengthening the ongoing democratization, promoting the principles of civil society and market economy. 3. The Presidents supported the implementation of additional measures to ensure such a level of trade, economic, tourism, health, scientific, education, culture and technical cooperation between two countries which most fully corresponds with the capacity and potential of their dynamically developing market economies. 4. The Presidents expressed their readiness to assist in implementing effective economic projects between the two countries, creating favourable conditions for cooperation among public and private enterprises and establishment of their joint associations, developing the links between financial and banking structures. 5. They noted with satisfaction the positive influence of the European Neighbourhood Policy for the coming closer of the Republic of Azerbaijan to the European Union and expressed their interest in finalizing the Action Plan for Azerbaijan as soon as possible. 6. The Parties will develop a relationship aimed at assisting the Republic of Azerbaijan in the field of European and Euro-Atlantic integration. In this regard, the President of the Republic of Lithuania confirmed the readiness of Lithuanian public institutions to share their experience in the process of integration of the Republic of Azerbaijan into European and Euro-Atlantic structures in the following areas: :: Strengthening administrative capacity-building, sharing experience in the reform process and training of civil servants on European integration issues :: Conducting joint consultations, conferences and other activities on the issues of European integration :: Sharing experience in the field of harmonization of legislation with that of the European Union; :: Sharing experience in the development of communication strategies to inform society about the European Union and accumulate public support for reforms :: Successful implementation of the Individual Partnership Action Plan between NATO and the Republic of Azerbaijan :: Exchange of experience in the field of military reform by organizing joint meetings, consultations and training :: Adapting national legislation in the field of security and defence to NATO principles and requirements :: Encouraging cooperation between relevant non-governmental organizations 7. The Lithuanian side emphasized the importance of economic reforms for the Republic of Azerbaijan and expressed its support for Azerbaijan's World Trade Organization membership aspirations. 8. The Parties, fully supporting and guided by the principles of the United Nations Charter and the three principles adopted at the Summit Meeting of the States Members of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (Lisbon Summit), emphasized the importance of a peaceful solution of the Armenia-Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict on the basis of the universally recognized principles and norms of the international law, especially the principles of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of the borders of the States. 9. Referring to the continuing efforts within the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe towards peaceful resolution of the Armenia-Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, as well as the Minsk Group activity, the Parties reiterated the importance of taking more substantial and decisive steps in this regard. 10. The Parties reaffirmed the necessity of cooperation in combating organized crime, corruption, illegal migration, human trafficking, money laundering. illegal trafficking of drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors, toxic chemical substances, weapons, explosive materials, as well as hijacking and smuggling. 11. The Parties noted the growing importance of European energy security and also expressed their support for the development of energy transportation projects connecting energy resources of the Caspian Sea region with the European energy network. In this context they noted the international importance of the implementation of the Baky-Tbilisi-Ceyhan main export oil pipeline, the Baky-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline, the Baky-Tbilisi-Akhalkalaki-Kars railway project and other infrastructure projects. 12. The Presidents of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Republic of Lithuania expressed their conviction that bilateral and international cooperation serves as the basis for the consolidation of peace and security. In this regard the Parties will promote regional cooperation between the Baltic and Caspian Sea regions with strong emphasis on the intensification of the regional cooperation between the Baltic States and countries of the South Caucasus. This joint declaration has been signed in Baky, on the 8th of June, 2006, in two original copies, in English. (Signed) Ilham Aliyev President (Signed) Valdas Adamkus 