%%%LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|DECLARATIONS|

President: Ms. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) The meeting was called to order at 9.10 a.m. High-level Meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 Agenda item 56 (continued) Groups of countries in special situations (a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries Report of the Secretary-General (A/61/173) Report of the preparatory meeting of experts for the high-level meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 (A/61/323) Draft resolution (A/61/L.2) The President: I give the floor to the representative of Norway to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.2. Mr. Løvald (Norway): I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.2, entitled "Declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010". This draft is the result of the work of the preparatory meeting of experts which met here at the United Nations from 5 to 7 September 2006. The report of the preparatory meeting has been issued as document A/61/323 and is before the Assembly. I would be grateful if draft resolution A/61/L.2 were adopted by the High-level Meeting by consensus. The President: The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A/61/L.2, entitled "Declaration of the high-level meeting of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/61/L.2? Draft resolution A/61/L.2 was adopted (resolution 61/1). The President: I give the floor to the representative of Benin. Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): The President of the Republic of Benin, who holds the chairmanship of the Bureau of Least Developed Countries, was to be present here in order to give his address. However, due to traffic problems, he cannot attend and therefore has asked me to read out the following statement. "We have now reached the end of the High-level Meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the Programme of Action for the least developed countries for the decade 2001-2010. "In line with our commitments, and in response to the challenges of today's world, we have combined our efforts and worked in a responsible and proactive manner to carry out a rigorous analysis of the implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action. "We have also, most importantly, together charted the course for the next five years by identifying together ways and means of effectively reaching the goals set out in the Brussels Programme of Action within the established time frames. "I would like to pay tribute to all delegations for their commitment and thank them for their efforts. Such hard work was only to be expected, as our debate will influence the fate of millions of people -- the most vulnerable segment of the international community. "I would also like to welcome the adoption of the Declaration, a fitting outcome to our work, which reflects a balanced consensus and will provide us with guidance as we continue the implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action over the next five years. "In this context, I welcome the contribution made by the least developed countries themselves, which, conscious of their primary responsibility with regard to their own development, drafted and adopted, following the Ministerial Conference held from 5 to 8 June 2006 in Cotonou, Benin, the Cotonou Strategy, which sets out the progress achieved and obstacles encountered during the past five years in the implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action, including concrete recommendations on how to overcome those problems, with a view to achieving, in a comprehensive manner and within the time frame established, the seven commitments set out therein. "In our globalized and interdependent world, no initiative can be successful and productive if it is not undertaken in the context of concerted and complementary efforts. I therefore appeal, on behalf of the group of least developed countries, to all the parties involved in implementing the Brussels Programme of Action, to redouble their efforts and to contribute, each in its own way, to ensuring that every human being can live a life in dignity and prosperity, free from hunger and extreme poverty. "Long live international cooperation for development!" The President (spoke in Arabic): We are coming to the end of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010. This meeting has enabled us to provide the international community with information about the progress made towards achieving the Programme's goals and overcoming the challenges that it has faced. The review process has been extensive. We have conducted national, regional and international consultations, culminating in this High-level Meeting. Through that comprehensive review process, we generated a deeper understanding of the issues involved and reaffirmed our commitment to the Brussels Declaration and Programme of Action. The Declaration that we have adopted today reaffirms our commitment to combating poverty. We are optimistic about the commitment of all parties, civil society, non-governmental organizations and the private sector to making efforts to strengthen partnerships that allow the international community to act more effectively with a view to achieving the seven commitments set out in the Programme of Action. The challenges before us remain daunting, and time is of the essence. As the Declaration states, if current trends continue, most of the least developed countries will be able to achieve neither the objectives of the Programme of Action nor the Millennium Development Goals. I therefore call upon all members to rise to the challenge and to redouble their collective efforts to effect a dramatic and urgent change in the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable people in the world. (spoke in English) The General Assembly has thus concluded the High-level Meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 and this stage of its consideration of agenda item 56 (a). The meeting rose at 9.25 a.m. 