%%%HOST COUNTRY RELATIONS|IMMIGRATION OFFICERS|UNITED STATES|DIPLOMATS|VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF)|DIPLOMATIC PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES|AIRPORTS|AIRLINES|FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT|CUSTOMS ESCORTS|TRAFFIC SAFETY|

Sixty-first session Sixth Committee Agenda item 148 Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country Letter dated 25 October 2006 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the I have the honour to request that you circulate the present letter and the attached diplomatic note addressed by this Mission to the Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations as a document of the Sixth Committee under agenda item 148. (Signed) Alejandro D. Wolff United States Mission to the United Nations Diplomatic note The United States Mission to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations and refers to the latter's diplomatic note No. 1361 of 26 September 2006 containing a formal protest relating to the treatment received by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela, Mr. Nicolas Maduro, at Kennedy Airport on 23 September. The United States Mission also refers to the diplomatic note sent to the United States Embassy in Caracas by the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry that appears in the annex to a letter dated 28 September 2006 addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela. This 28 September letter was issued as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 148 (A/61/474). The Permanent Mission's note of 26 September alleges that verbal mistreatment and forced physical detention of the Foreign Minister by United States authorities violated the principles and norms enshrined in the United Nations Charter, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, the United Nations Headquarters Agreement and other international instruments. Because the Foreign Minister purchased three one-way plane tickets for cash at the airport shortly before his flight, he and his family were asked to undergo the same type of additional security screening required of other travellers purchasing tickets at the last minute for cash. Airport records and witnesses at the scene provide absolutely no evidence of verbal mistreatment whatsoever, and the Minister was not detained. He refused to undergo the inspection asked of him; 27 minutes after he entered the inspection area, an American Airlines manager decided that the airline would allow the Minister and his family to board the aircraft without the second inspection. The United States Mission wishes to emphasize that nothing in any of the agreements, conventions or instruments cited in the note from the Permanent Mission of Venezuela exempts foreign ministers, diplomatic envoys or any travellers from security screening at airports in the United States. Such screening is vital to ensure the safety of the flying public, including cabinet ministers and other high-level officials of any Government. Both the note from the Permanent Mission and the note addressed to the United States Embassy in Caracas call on the host country to take appropriate measures to prevent similar situations in the future. As the Permanent Mission is aware, the host country announced the Airport Escorts Courtesies Programme in February 2004. Pursuant to this programme, permanent missions to the United Nations may request the assistance of a State Department representative who will escort cabinet-level visitors, their spouses and their children under 12 years of age around security screening checkpoints when departing from United States airports. It is regrettable that the Permanent Mission of Venezuela did not request an escort for Foreign Minister Maduro on 23 September. Had it done so, the Foreign Minister would not have experienced any delay whatsoever. The United States Mission is pleased to note that when Foreign Minister Maduro returned to New York several days later, the Permanent Mission did request a security detail for him, and accordingly one was provided. The Minister had no problems on arrival or departure. The United States Mission to the United Nations avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations the assurances of its highest consideration. New York, 17 October 2006 