%%%TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|WORK PROGRAMME|CONSULTATIONS|

Sixth Committee Summary record of the 23rd meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 21 November 2006, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Gómez Robledo (Mexico) Contents Agenda item 100: Measures to eliminate international terrorism (continued) Agenda item 110: Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (continued) Agenda item 5: Election of the officers of the Main Committees Closure of the work of the Sixth Committee during the main part of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m. Agenda item 100: Measures to eliminate international terrorism (continued) (A/C.6/61/L.17) 1. Mr. Adsett (Canada), introducing draft resolution A/C.6/61/L.17, explained that it was an updated version of the resolution adopted the previous year on the same subject (A/RES/60/43). A new second preambular paragraph reaffirmed the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006. The twenty-first preambular paragraph took note of recent developments and initiatives at the international, regional and subregional levels, including initiatives by a number of organizations. The twenty-fourth preambular paragraph had been updated to include a reference to the Fourteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in September 2006. Paragraph 2 called upon all Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and subregional organizations to implement the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Paragraph 3 recalled the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation of the Strategy. Paragraph 19 welcomed the publication by the Secretariat of the second edition of International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism. Paragraph 22 set forth the General Assembly decision that the Ad Hoc Committee should continue its elaboration of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and should continue to discuss the question of convening a high-level conference on the question under the auspices of the United Nations. According to paragraph 23, the Ad Hoc Committee would meet on 5, 6 and 15 February 2007 for that purpose. Within the two-week period 5-16 February 2007, meetings would be scheduled so as to allow delegations sufficient flexibility for any informal consultations that might be convened to facilitate discussion of issues within the Ad Hoc Committee's mandate. 2. The text of the draft resolution had been produced after numerous and extensive consultations. Having drawn attention to a number of minor editorial changes still to be made to the text of the draft resolution, he recommended its adoption without a vote. 3. Mr. Al-Obaidli (Qatar), supported by Mr. AlNaqbi (United Arab Emirates) said the list of organizations in the twenty-first preambular paragraph should include the Gulf Cooperation Council. 4. Mr. Dolatyar (Islamic Republic of Iran) said his delegation had not seen the list of organizations in the twenty-first preambular paragraph before the text of the draft resolution was finalized. It appeared that some of the organizations were of a military nature. He would therefore need to consult with other delegations before approving the text. 5. The Chairman said that since a similar request had been received from another quarter, he would be willing to suspend the meeting for a short interval to permit consultations to be held. The meeting was suspended at 10.35 a.m. and resumed at 10.45 a.m. 6. Mr. Dolatyar (Islamic Republic of Iran) recalled that the purpose of including a paragraph on initiatives by regional organizations was to help in approaching the question of terrorism in a comprehensive manner and in conditions conducive to the suppression of terrorism. Including initiatives by organizations of a military nature would not be helpful for that purpose, and could be misinterpreted. In the discussion he had just held with some other delegations, it had been agreed that none of them would stand in the way of a consensus on the draft resolution, but that they would have to dissociate themselves from some of the wording used in the twenty-first preambular paragraph. 7. Mr. Lamine (Algeria) said that not all the organizations mentioned in the twenty-first preambular paragraph were engaged in preventing and suppressing terrorism. 8. Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) said the inclusion of a "group" or "groups" in that paragraph would in effect mean that any entity at all could be designated as having taken initiatives to prevent and suppress terrorism. He recalled that when the text of the draft resolution was being prepared, delegations had been invited to suggest organizations for inclusion in the paragraph in question. However, organizations with a military function and without any legislative authority should not be included. His delegation would not oppose a consensus decision on the draft resolution, but he emphasized that the phrase "taking note" in the twenty-first preambular paragraph was entirely neutral and should not be construed as an endorsement of what followed. Indeed, that was the construction given to that phrase by the General Assembly itself. Accordingly, mention of certain organizations did not confer any legitimacy on their actions. 9. All the organizations mentioned in the paragraph should be given their full official titles and should appear in alphabetical order in every language version of the text, including the Arabic version. 10. Concerning the publication mentioned in paragraph 19, it was important to publish it in all the official languages, at least in any edition subsequent to the second. The General Assembly, in a recent resolution on the pattern of conferences (A/RES/58/250), had given the Secretary-General a mandate to follow the rules concerning simultaneous distribution of documents in all official languages with respect to the posting of parliamentary documentation. 11. Mr. Samy (Egypt) expressed regret that he had been unable to review beforehand the list of organizations contained in the twenty-first preambular paragraph; that list should not set a precedent. At the Committee's next session, clear criteria should be established for the purpose and military organizations should not be included in the list. 12. Ms. Ramos Rodríguez (Cuba) said that governmental organizations that had taken action to combat terrorism should have been included in the list, which she too would have wished to see in advance. She noted the neutral language used but nevertheless expressed reservations regarding the inclusion of military organizations and agreed that it should not set a precedent. Moreover, inclusion of an organization in the list did not imply any recognition of its contribution to the fight against terrorism. 13. Mr. Shah (Pakistan) said that the paragraph in question contained inconsistencies but that all delegations had moved forward in a positive spirit in order to achieve a consensus on the draft resolution. The concerns expressed in that regard should not, therefore, stand in the way of such a consensus. 14. Draft resolution A/C.6/61/L.17, as orally revised and amended, was adopted. 15. Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia), speaking in explanation of position, said that mention was made in the twenty-fourth preambular paragraph of international initiatives in response to terrorism. His delegation had proposed such an initiative, namely, the elaboration of an international code of conduct to combat terrorism under the auspices of the United Nations. Member States would be invited to accede freely to the proposed code of conduct, which would set out a number of relevant internationally recognized rules and principles. The African Union, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference supported that initiative. Agenda item 110: Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (A/C.6/61/L.19) 16. The Chairman said that the Bureau had prepared a programme of work for the Committee at its sixty-second session, contained in draft decision A/C.6/61/L.19. The programme of work was merely provisional and was intended to help delegations and the Secretariat to prepare for the next session; it might need to be adjusted in the light of progress made during the Committee's resumed session in March 2007. 17. Draft decision A/C.6/61/L.19 was adopted. 18. Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in explanation of position, stressed that, while adjustments could be made to the programme of work in the light of progress during the resumed session, that programme of work had to be adopted at the beginning of the Committee's work. The Committee's deliberations on the regularly recurring item of the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly were somewhat opaque. All draft texts should be coordinated by the Chairman or his representative. Some draft resolutions had, however, been coordinated at the national level by delegations, which ran counter to the principle of consensus. The Fifth Committee maintained full transparency in its work and its example should therefore be followed. 19. The Chairman said that draft decision A/C.6/61/L.19 had been available in all language versions since 10 November. He reiterated that it contained a provisional programme of work and that, in accordance with the Committee's customary practice, the next Bureau, to be elected in June 2007, would make any necessary adjustments. The Committee generally worked on the basis of consensus, not only in regard to matters of organization and scheduling but also on substantive issues, with every care to ensure transparency; the current session was no exception. Draft resolutions could be submitted equally by delegations, the Chairman or any other member of the Bureau. 20. Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) recognized the Chairman's transparent conduct of the Committee's deliberations. He had merely wished to stress that the programme of work would need to be formally adopted at the next session, following consultations among the regional groups. While draft resolutions could be submitted by individual delegations, they had to be coordinated by the Chairman or another member of the Bureau in an open manner, and not at the national level. True consensus required that all delegations be consulted. Agenda item 5: Election of the officers of the Main Committees 21. The Chairman recalled that, in accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, as amended by General Assembly resolutions 56/509 and 58/126, the Main Committees should elect a Chairman and full Bureau three months before the opening of the next session. He therefore suggested that the regional groups should hold consultations at least three months before the opening of the sixty-second session of the General Assembly so as to enable the Committee to elect its officers at the appropriate time. 22. It was so decided. Closure of the work of the Sixth Committee during the main part of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly 23. The Chairman declared that the Committee had completed its work for the main part of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly. The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m. 