%%%WORKING CONDITIONS|JOB SATISFACTION|EQUAL OPPORTUNITY|RECOMMENDATIONS|

Substantive session of 2006 New York, 3-28 July 2006 * E/2006/100. Item 2 of the provisional agenda* Creating an environment at the national and international levels conducive to generating full and productive employment and decent work for all, and its impact on sustainable development Statement submitted by International Association of Applied Psychology, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. Statement The development of an environment conducive to generating full and productive employment and decent work for all is a complex matter involving economic, social, political and psychological innovation. The process will involve at a minimum the creation of new institutions, and changing old ones so as to turn conflict into cooperation for the common good. The ultimate outcome is a world community of productive, motivated people, fully employed and receiving fair wages in a healthy environment under conditions which permit them to strive to fulfil their potential and contribute to the society in which they live. Research shows that organizations which foster the conditions of equity, opportunity to achieve, and camaraderie with co-workers have employees who are more satisfied with their jobs, more enthusiastic, more motivated and more productive than employees in organizations which neglect one or more of these elements. Data also show that such organizations are financially more successful than organizations with less satisfied employees. We suggest that these elements -- providing equity, opportunities for achievement, and social relationships -- be a part of any model advocated by ECOSOC to achieve the objectives set forth in the theme of the high-level session. Equity: Equity has three components, financial, physical and psychological. Financially, employees deserve to be fairly compensated for their work. Physical equity means that employees are working in a safe environment and are not in jeopardy from accidents or illness. Psychological equity means that employees are given the dignity and respect due another human being. Achievement: When organizations align their goals with the needs of people for growth and development, they find that their employees are willing to expend vast amounts of energy, time, emotion and intellectual capacity to achieve those goals. An organization sets up an environment for achievement when it shares its goals with the workers, includes them in decision making procedures, respects and utilizes their abilities, and provides them opportunities for further training and development. Under these conditions the individual identifies with the organization and seeks to promote their mutual goals. Camaraderie: Humans are basically social animals. We seek out other people, and our involvement with them provides a large measure of our satisfaction. This is true in the workplace as well. Data indicate that productivity increases when people work in groups or teams. In conclusion, we believe that full and productive employment, compatible with sustainable development, is generated by creating a work and life environment that fosters equity, achievement, and camaraderie. Further, in addition to the importance of organizational psychology in bringing about intra-organizational change, there is a need for the inclusion of social, political, environmental and economic psychology in the development of the kind of environment set forth in the high-level segment statement. 