%%%MINORITIES|EMPLOYMENT CREATION|POVERTY MITIGATION|EMPOWERMENT|

Substantive session of 2006 New York, 3-28 July 2006 Item 2 of the provisional agenda* Creating an environment at the national and international levels conducive to generating full and productive employment and decent work for all and its impact on sustainable development * E/2006/100. Statement submitted by the Mulchand and Parpati Thadhani Foundation, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. In keeping with the MPTF Mission of SOCIO-ECONOMIC Empowerment of the marginalized people -- disadvantaged by poverty, capacity deprivation, gender biases and health related disabilities, there is a need to create an environment conducive to full and productive employment for all. It is the position of MPTF that the inability of women to work themselves out of poverty limits the educational and life prospects of their children which leads to inter-generational transmission of poverty. The discriminations based on stereotypes related to gender and age keep them in low productive and poorly paid activities, mainly in the informal economy. Sometimes the wages are next to nil. The MPTF with its Human Rights Based Approach to Development Activities for poor, focuses on Right to Livelihood and Food Security issues, as well as promotes Education, Skills Development, and Health Promotion for the disadvantaged people in the Indian Subcontinent. Poor women, children and disabled are particularly vulnerable and unless helped through participatory process, would remain bound in the vicious cycle of capacity deprivation, ill-health and inability to sustain themselves by income generation activities. Thus through formation of Self- Help-Groups, Micro-credit, enterprise, formation of cooperatives and promotion of educational activities of Children (who have potential to become child labourers), the MPTF focuses on the interplay between healthy living, livelihood activities and food security. Our projects in rural and urban slums support such activities, incorporating Human Rights Education/Learning and involve networking and partnership-building, with local, regional, national, international and Government agencies. In essence unless there is an Integrated Approach to Empowerment of the Marginalized -- with Human Rights Issues, Policy issues, Participatory Processes, and Influencing Communities at Large -- no Impact can be made on sustainable Activities and Development. In order to achieve results pertaining to the MDG(s), Proactive Government Interventions to bring people out of poverty by enabling them to earn decent livelihood is a must. NGO (s) have a strong role to play in this matter. 