%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2007 regular session 22 January-2 February 2007 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2002-2005 submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Centre Europe-Tiers Monde International Center for Research on Women Native American Rights Fund Rehabilitation International Society for International Development 1. CENTRE EUROPE-TIERS MONDE (General consultative status granted in 1988) PROFILE OF THE ORGANIZATION Centre Europe -- Tiers Monde (CETIM) was created in 1970 within the framework of the Association du Foyer John Knox and became independent on 17 June 1975. It is an international non-governmental organization that has no affiliation with any other NGO enjoying consultative status, although it is connected to a very extensive network of partners. CETIM endeavours, through its publications, its awareness-raising campaigns and its statements in the various United Nations bodies, to promote discussion on economic, social, civil, political and cultural development in the North as well as in the South. The Centre's sources of financing have undergone no major changes. In conformity with its by-laws, these sources are dues paid by its members, contributions and various donations and grants. QUADRENNIAL REPORT OF CENTRE EUROPE-TIERS MONDE, Over the period 2002-2005, CETIM participated in the activities of various United Nations bodies (Commission on Human Rights; Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights; Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development), presenting both written and oral statements. It has cooperated with the United Nations and helped to implement decisions of United Nations organs by communicating its comments and observations at the request of the various United Nations bodies, and also by organizing conferences and seminars, by publishing books and pamphlets on issues discussed by those bodies, and by carrying out lobbying activities. CETIM was also actively involved in the process of appointing various rapporteurs and experts and in developing their mandates. Commission on Human Rights CETIM participated in the work of the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-eighth, fifty-ninth, sixtieth and sixty-first sessions, held in Geneva. Its written and oral statements (51) dealt with external debt, the right to development, racism, transnational corporations, good governance, the "war on terror", the situation of migrant workers, and the question of a draft optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The written statements submitted by the Centre included the following: E/CN.4/2002/NGO/21, E/CN.4/2002/NGO/98, E/CN.4/2003/NGO/210, E/CN.4/2003/NGO/175, E/CN.4/2004/NGO/122, E/CN.4/2004/NGO/123, E/CN.4/2005/NGO/282 and E/CN.4/2005/NGO/283. CETIM also organized conferences on, inter alia, the rights of indigenous peoples, the impact of anti-terrorist laws in Europe and in the United States of America on the enjoyment of human rights, Iraq, the right to food, violations of the rights of farmers, globalization, and transnational corporations and human rights. The Centre contributed actively to the creation of a working group to consider the development of an optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the appointment of a Special Rapporteur on the promotion of the realization of the right to drinking water supply and sanitation. CETIM also contributed actively to the work of these bodies and to that of the Working Group on the Right to Development. In addition, it has supported the regular renewal of the mandates of the latter group and of the Working Group on a draft optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. During the meetings of the latter Working Group, CETIM made several oral statements and submitted several written ones, including the following: E/CN.4/2004/WG.18/CRP.1, E/CN.4/2004/WG.23/CRP.5 and E/CN.4/2004/WG.23/CRP.6. Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights CETIM has collaborated very actively with the independent experts of this body and has contributed actively to their work over the period 2002-2005 (fifty-fourth, fifty-fifth, fifty-sixth and fifty-seventh sessions) in Geneva. Its numerous written and oral statements (34) have dealt with, among other topics, the right to water, the activities of transnational corporations and their impact on human rights, trade union rights in Colombia, the impact of bilateral trade agreements on the enjoyment of human rights and United Nations reform. These statements included the following: E/CN.4/Sub.2/2002/NGO/10, E/CN.4/Sub.2/2002/NGO/11, E/CN.4/Sub.2/2003/NGO/21, E/CN.4/Sub.2/2004/NGO/10, E/CN.4/Sub.2/2005/NGO/7 and E/CN.4/Sub.2/2005/NGO/22. CETIM has continued to take an interest in the work of the sessional working group on the working methods and activities of transnational corporations, contributing actively to its meetings in 2002, 2003 and 2004. CETIM organized a working seminar at the Palais Wilson in Geneva (6 and 7 March 2003), with the participation of five experts from the working group, legal specialists, representatives of CETIM and of the American Association of Jurists (AAJ) and several other NGOs, for the purpose of discussing and proposing amendments to the latest version of the draft norms on the responsibilities of transnational corporations and other business enterprises with regard to human rights, drawn up by the working group. CETIM also presented several written and oral statements, produced publications and organized conferences on this topic. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights CETIM participated in only two sessions of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: the twenty-ninth and the thirty-first, held in Geneva in 2001 and 2003, respectively. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) CETIM took part in two meetings organized by UNCTAD on the following topics: (a) Audiovisual services in the context of globalization: sustaining cultural diversity through trade and development (Geneva, 12 November 2002); and (b) Escaping the poverty trap: national and international policies for more effective poverty reduction in least developed countries (Geneva, 2-4 December 2002). Participation in other meetings and conferences CETIM participated in a seminar organized by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the interdependence between democracy and human rights, held in Geneva on 25 and 26 November 2002. CETIM also took part in a meeting of experts on human rights and the environment, organized by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and held in Geneva on 16 January 2002. CETIM personnel also attended a briefing on United Nations - civil society relations, given by Mr. John Clark, Director of the Secretariat of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations - Civil Society Relations, and held in Geneva on 17 September 2003. OTHER CETIM ACTIVITIES IN THE AREA OF HUMAN RIGHTS Informational publications Since 2005, under its human rights programme, CETIM has published a series of informational books and booklets, some of them dealing with recognized economic, social and cultural rights, and others with the issues at stake in discussions on the development of new legal instruments within the framework of the United Nations human rights bodies. Available in three languages (English, French and Spanish), these publications are designed to help enlighten personnel from social organizations and movements, especially from the South, and to inform them of the issues being debated within the various human rights bodies. They have also been widely disseminated among the permanent missions in Geneva. The following titles were published in 2005: The right to food, Transnational corporations and human rights, and The case for a protocol to the ICESCR. They are available in hard copy and electronic format on the CETIM website. 2. INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON WOMEN (General consultative status granted in 1998) PART I. Introduction Since 1976, the International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) has worked toward the interconnected goals of building the power and participation of women and ending poverty throughout the developing world. ICRW's groundbreaking research identifies solutions to improve the lives of women and girls, and our advocacy with experts, leaders and policymakers turns those insights into action. Our research helps organizations base their decisions in reality, and provides guidance and "actionable insight" to strengthen their programs. We work with women and whole communities, partnering with other organizations to bring about social change in the following areas: adolescence, HIV and AIDS, nutrition and food security, poverty reduction, reproductive health and population, violence against women and women s rights. ICRW is headquartered in Washington, D.C. and has a country office in New Delhi, India, as well as project offices in Andhra Pradesh, India, and Kampala, Uganda. PART II. Contribution of ICRW to the work of the United Nations. i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council. Beginning in 2004, ICRW's President served at the invitation of the Secretary General as Co-Chair of the High Level Panel on Youth Employment, ILO, and helped to develop gender-responsive recommendations for fostering employment opportunities for young women and men. In addition, from 2002 to 2005 ICRW participated in a number of United Nations meetings and conferences. 1. Roundtable on "Education and Literacy," organized by UNESCO and UNICEF at the High Level Segment of ECOSOC on 29 June 2005 at United Nations New York. ICRW's President was a speaker and panelist. 2. "Informal Interactive Hearings of the General Assembly with NGOs, civil society organizations and the private sector," United Nations New York 23-24 June 2005. ICRW's President contributed a statement to the Hearings (A/RES/59/291) on the seven priorities identified by the Millennium Project task force as essential for achieving the goal of gender equality and the empowerment of women. 3. Roundtable on "Eradication of Poverty and Hunger," organized by FAO/IFAD/WFP on 16 March 2005 at the United Nations Headquarters in New York preparatory event for the High Level Segment of the Council. ICRW's President was a speaker and panelist. 4. "Women and AIDS U.S. Tour: Empower Women, Save Lives," organized by the Global Coalition on Women and AIDS, the Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), in New York, Chicago and Washington DC, 2-8 March 2005. ICRW's President was a leader and speaker. 5. "Sixteenth UNAIDS' Program Coordinating Board (PCB) Meeting, Montego Bay, Jamaica, 14 December 2004. ICRW's President presented a paper on Women, Girls and HIV: The paradox of low risk and high vulnerability. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies. ICRW has undertaken numerous projects in cooperation with United Nations bodies. On December 22, 2003, the General Assembly of the United Nations asked the Secretary-General to conduct an in-depth study of the forms, consequences and costs of violence against women. Acting in its consultative status to the United Nations, ICRW wrote a chapter of the report for the Division for the Advancement of Women which was tasked with preparation of the study. ICRW's chapter, "Forms, Consequences and Costs of Violence Against Women," highlights the continuum of violence against women throughout their life span, the various types of violence perpetrated by the family, community and the state, the implications of violence for women's development, the economic and social costs of violence against women, and the barriers for governments in acknowledging and addressing violence against women. From 2002 to 2005, ICRW's President served as Coordinator of the Task Force on Education and Gender for the Millennium Project established by the United Nations Secretary-General and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Administrator. She co-authored with two ICRW staff of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) Task Force 3 report Taking Action: Achieving Gender Equality and Empowering Women. Working with experts from around the world, ICRW identified seven priorities for meeting these goals, presented them to the United Nations General Assembly, and succeeded in having all seven adopted at the September 2005 World Summit. Women's organizations worldwide now have a mandate to hold their governments accountable for keeping their promise to improve women's lives. ICRW worked as a convening agency of the Global Coalition for Women and AIDS (sponsored by UNAIDS), taking the lead on the issue of property and inheritance rights for women and girls. In partnership with the Global Coalition on Women and AIDS and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, ICRW implemented the "Reducing Women and Girls' Vulnerability to HIV/AIDS through Strengthening their Property and Inheritance Rights Small Grants Program." The property rights program provides one-year, $25,000 grants to organizations in Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, South Africa, and Zimbabwe to examine the links between HIV and AIDS and women and girls' property and inheritance rights; to test and document strategies to strengthen those linkages; and to share results. ICRW worked with United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) to determine the costs of violence against women. In collaboration with UNFPA's Gender and Human Rights Branch and with technical input from UNFPA's New York office, Country Support Teams, Geographical Divisions and Country Offices as well as other in-country organizations, ICRW began conducting a quantitative and qualitative study to estimate the costs of domestic violence in Bangladesh, Morocco and Uganda using methodologies developed by ICRW with UNFPA funding in 2004. The goal of the project is to: a) pilot a replicable methodology for effectively estimating the costs of domestic violence at household and community levels; and b) build the capacity of the in-country partner organizations to develop estimates of direct and indirect costs of violence against women. In addition to developing estimates in the three countries, ICRW will disseminate a manual on the methodology and an advocacy booklet to raise awareness of the model, its applicability and pilot study results. While there are numerous challenges to costing the impact of violence in developing countries, it is a critical step towards galvanizing country support for address violence against women, developing realistic strategies and ensuring allocation of adequate resources. iii) Initiatives undertaken by ICRW in support of internationally agreed development goals. The following are selected highlights of ICRW's work to support the Millennium Development Goals: Reducing malnutrition and hunger: ICRW is the secretariat of the Nutrition and Gender Initiative. The Initiative creates strategies to reduce malnutrition throughout the life-cycle by identifying pathways to improve birth weights in infants, prevent malnutrition in infancy, and improve the nutritional status of women and adolescent girls. The strategies have a strong gender focus and seek to understand how to empower women by enhancing their roles, social status and decision-making capabilities and how this can lead to improvements in nutritional status. The Initiative works in West Africa and South Asia, both areas of great need. Improving reproductive health services for girls: ICRW initiated multiple programs to address young girls' lack of decision making power and access to basic and reproductive health services. In India and Nepal, ICRW tested participatory approaches to improve adolescent health and well-being. Based on these findings, ICRW formed the Development Initiative on Supporting Healthy Adolescents (DISHA) in collaboration with six partners in Bihar and Jharkhand, India. DISHA has designed and implemented innovative programs in over 200 communities to address health, socio-cultural and economic factors that have an impact on youth reproductive health. Ending child marriage: Drawing on its extensive research findings, ICRW has successfully brought to the attention of the United States Department of State's Senior Coordinator for Women's Issues the multiple ways in which the marriage of young girls violates their human rights and also impedes economic and social development. At ICRW's urging, in March 2005 a State Department Cable was issued to all United States Embassies and Missions requiring them to report on the scope and consequences of child marriage in their countries. This All Departments and Consulates Cable was the first ever focused on the issue of child marriage. State Department staff in 178 missions have responded to the cable, with 70 indicating that child marriage is an unaddressed problem. This has prompted the State Department to begin to report on child marriage as a human rights violation in its annual country reports, which will greatly heighten its visibility and hasten a response. Reducing the stigma of HIV and AIDS: In 2003, ICRW's work on HIV/AIDS-related stigma and discrimination led to the design and introduction of a stigma-reduction toolkit published in collaboration with the Academy for Educational Development. The toolkit is a leading tool in ICRW's efforts to field test and validate stigma indicators; it created a framework for assessing the impact and effectiveness of existing stigma reduction programs, provided recommendations for interventions, and aided in the creation of new policies and programs worldwide. Created for use at the community level, the toolkit has been distributed widely in many African countries, and has since been scaled up, translated in several languages and adapted for use in other world regions. 3. NATIVE AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND (Special consultative status granted in 2002) The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) is a non governmental organization that was granted special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council in July of 2002. This report covers NARF's activities within the United Nations for the period of 2002 through 2005 and is submitted to comply with Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. PART I. The Native American Rights Fund represents United States indigenous peoples. The five priorities are: 1) Preservation of tribal existence - The future existence of the Indian tribes in the United States depends upon indigenous peoples enjoying the right of self-determination necessary to preserve traditional customs and ways of life. 2) Protection of tribal natural resources - Resource protection includes securing land rights; water rights; hunting, fishing and gathering rights; environmental protection; timber rights; and prudent/sustainable development of natural resources. 3) Promotion of human rights - NARF focuses on securing collective and individual human rights, for Indian peoples and persons at the domestic and international level. 4) Accountability of governments to tribes - NARF works to hold all levels of government accountable for proper recognition and enforcement of laws and regulations which govern the lives of Indian peoples. In the international context, this means getting states to live up to international obligations. 5) Development of Indian law and educating the public about Indian law, interests, rights and issues - NARF works to create favorable precedent in courts and in international fora, and to educate the general public about indigenous peoples. These priorities all relate directly to United Nations work with indigenous peoples. This work is specified in more detail in Part II. Name or contact information of the organization - No Change. Classification of consultative status - No change. Area of activity - No change. Geographical distribution of the membership - We are not a membership organization , but our representation on our Board of Directors does change. Constitution or by-laws - No change. Any new organizational affiliations - N/A. PART II NARF participated extensively in work in the United Nations during the period 2002-2005. Most of NARF's work has been in connection with the meetings of the Open-ended Intersessional Working Group on the Draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (WGDD), under the auspices of the Commission on Human Rights. From the time our consultative status was granted, and through the entire reporting period, NARF attended every drafting session of the WGDD in Geneva. NARF also attended other meetings and conferences involving our work at the United Nations. The dates of our attendance are as follows: A. Meetings of the WGDD NARF attended the following Meetings of the Open-ended intersessional Working Group on the Draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples where NARF lobbied in favor of a strong Declaration and made pertinent written and oral interventions: Geneva, Switzerland, 213 December 2002; Geneva, Switzerland, 15-26 September 2003; Geneva, Switzerland, 1324 September 2004; Geneva, Switzerland, 29 November - 3 December 2004; Geneva, Switzerland, 5-16 December 2005. * NARF attended indigenous caucus meetings prior to and during each WGDD session to discuss strategy and substantive issues related to securing a strong Declaration. B. Other Indigenous Meetings NARF attended a meeting of indigenous peoples and experts in Copenhagen, Denmark, 2-5 May 2003 to discuss strategy for the next meeting of the WGDD, particularly on issues of self-determination. C. Other United Nations Meetings NARF attended the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, New York City, New York, United States. 12-21 May 2003 to monitor indigenous issues worldwide. D. Presentations on United Nations Issues NARF gave presentations at the following meetings of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) to educate indigenous peoples of the United States on the United Nation's Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: San Diego, California, 12-13 November 2002; Phoenix, Arizona, 16-18 June 2003; Albuquerque, New Mexico, 18 January 2003; Mohegan Sun, Connecticut, 20 June 2004; Tulsa, Oklahoma, 31 October- 2 November 2005. Qualitative Synopsis of achievements during the reporting period 2002-2005 As indicated in Part I, the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples deals with all those areas of priority for which our organization was founded - self-determination, human rights, rights to lands, territories and natural resources, collective rights, and treaties. In connection with our work on the Declaration from 2002-2005, NARF gave presentations on several occasions to the National Congress of American Indians on the Declaration. This has resulted in resolutions from the National Congress of American Indians, the largest tribal membership organization in the United States, passing resolutions supporting the Declaration. We have lobbied States to support indigenous positions on key issues in the declaration and have made pertinent written and oral interventions at the WGDD and engaged in strategy sessions in indigenous caucus meetings. NARF's contribution was a small part of the enormous effort by indigenous peoples and States which led to the adoption of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples on 29 June 2006 by the Human Rights Council. NARF was there and signed onto the North American Caucus statement supporting adoption along with the National Congress of American Indians. 4. REHABILITATION INTERNATIONAL (Special consultative status granted in 1978) 1- Aim and purpose of RI. RI develops and promotes initiatives to protect the rights of people with disabilities and improve rehabilitation and other crucial services for people with disabilities and their families. RI also works toward increasing international collaboration and advocates for policies and legislation recognizing the rights of those people and their families, including the establishment of a UN Convention on the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities. As a federation of local, national and international organizations and agencies, RI provides an open forum for the exchange of experience and information on research and practice. 2- Significant changes in RI. Though RI's aims and purposes remained the same, the RI Constitution was amended (approved by the General Assembly on 29-30 September 2003) to reflect the growing importance of the Standing Commissions and to strengthen RI's internal governance: (i) the Executive Committee was expanded to include Commission Chairs; (ii) a new position of President-Elect was be added; (iii) the length of time that Past Presidents would stay on the Executive Committee was shortened; (iv) the Executive Committee rather than the Assembly would fill certain vacancies on the Executive Committee; and (v) the election procedure for the Chair and vice Chair of a Standing Commission was simplified. The Constitution was also amended (approved by Governing Assembly 19-20 June 2004) (i) to expand the eligibility of federations of organizations to become an RI National Member Organization; (ii) references to "persons with disabilities" was changed to "people with disabilities" to reflect the terminology preferred by the International Disability Alliance, (iii) the election protocol for the new office of President Elect was specified; (iv) a recommendation was added that at least 50% of the Executive Committee be composed of persons with disabilities, their parents or legal guardians; (v) the role of the President Elect and Past President was clarified; (vi) an Audit Committee was created; (vii) the procedure was simplified for the appointment of Commission members; and (viii) the role of the local organizing committee for the World Congress was specified. Finally, the most recent changes (adopted by the Governing Assembly 12-13 November 2005)are : (i) "Rehabilitation International" to be in the headline, (ii) RI's purpose was elaborated to include the promotion of "rights." and references to "prevention" were expanded to "prevention of causes of disability," (iii) the Secretary General's role was clarified, (iv) the appointment process of National Membership Organizations and a National Secretary were modified to consult country members, and (v) Commission chairs will now set a Secretariat, unless otherwise agreed. PART II. Contribution of RI to the work of the United Nations I) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. 1. RI has been actively engaged in the International Disability Caucus (IDC), the representative voice of people with disabilities in the draft of the International Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities. RI took part in the Ad Hoc Committee on the Convention: - Second Session, 16- 27 June 2003, United Nations headquarters, New York: As a member of the International Disability Alliance (IDA), RI helped create the International Disability Alliance's Statement submitted to the Ad Hoc Committee in June 2003 welcoming the development of a new Convention on the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. RI created also a report, Towards a UN Disability Convention. - Third Session 24 May - 4 June 2004: RI presented a position paper, The Right to (Re)habilitation, - Fifth, 24 January-4 February 2005, and Sixth Sessions, 1-12 August 2005: RI produced daily summaries (posted on the UN website) and weekly summaries (posted on the RI website) of those Sessions. In addition, RI hosted three side events at the United Nations on rehabilitation, independent living and children with disabilities, during the Third (24 May to June 2004) and Fourth Sessions (23 August to 3 September 2004). 2. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Flagship on the Right to Education meetings, 12-13 November 2003 Kampala, Uganda; February 2005; 20-21 May 2005 Cairo, Egypt; August 2005 New York, United States of America: The chair of RI's Education Commission is an active participant, including in a working group on teacher training. 4. World Bank Conference : Disability and Inclusive Development: Sharing, Learning, and Building Alliances, 30 November 2004, Washington D.C., United States: This conference aimed to bring UN agencies and others together to address disability and developmental issues. RI's President spoke on a panel at the conference addressing urban infrastructure and transport. 3. Rights of Persons with Disabilities: Action in Development, panel organized by Department for Economic and Social Affairs, 2 December 2005, New York, United States: RI's Secretary General spoke on behalf of IDA for the International Day for Persons with Disabilities. 5. World Health Organization Disability and Rehabilitation Team (WHO DAR) meetings: International Consultation on Reviewing on Community Based Rehabilitation (CBR), 25-28 May 2003, Helsinki, (Finland). RI participated also to the consultation hosted by WHO on Guidelines for Medical Rehabilitation, 27-28 October 2005, to discuss strategies to reach more people with appropriate rehabilitation. II) Cooperation with the United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters. 1. Partnership with the United Nations International Children's Fund (UNICEF) to publish two volumes of the newsletter One in Ten. One was on children with disabilities in Africa and the other concerned children with disabilities and violence. 2. Discussion with the WHO DAR team coordinator, 13-14 April 2002, about issues such as upgrading professional skills for rehabilitation for people with chronic conditions. 3. Seminar and Art Exhibit in celebration of the UN International Day of Persons with Disabilities, 3 December 2003, New York, in partnership with UN DESA, the UN Mission of Ecuador, VSA arts (formerly Very Special Arts), including an international exhibition of artwork done by persons with disabilities to run for a month, a panel discussion and a reception. 4. Seminar, October 2004, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso to promote the African Decade of Disabled Persons, in collaboration with UN DESA and Inclusion International. 5. Paralympics Movement Project , December 2004, Athens, Greece : in collaboration with UN DESA and the International Paralympics Committee for the Promotion of Human Rights for Persons with Disabilities and to produce toolkits on disability rights to be distributed to athletes. 6. Workshop for Women with Disabilities in the Arab Region 10-11 November 2005 Manama, Bahrain: in partnership with the UN Special Rapporteur for Disabilities and with the support from the UN DESA, RI provided a forum for discussions and networking of disabled women. III) Initiatives undertaken to support the Millennium Development Goals. Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education; Target: Ensure that all boys and girls complete a full course of primary schooling : Met with fifteen organizations, 22-23 April 2002, Paris, France to establish the Education for All Flagship on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: Towards Inclusion. Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. Target: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS. In partnership with RI member Disabled Organization for Legal Affairs and Social Economic Development (DOLASED), RI has begun a project to raise the voice of people with disabilities in Africa. This project focuses on the development of educational materials and training for youth with disabilities on the issue of HIV/AIDS and disability rights. The project is being conducted in Tanzania and Mozambique. This project aims to promote the African Decade of People with Disabilities. Goal 8. Develop a global partnership for development - Target: In cooperation with the developing countries, develop decent and productive work for youth; Target: In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies -- especially information and communications technologies. Intergenerational Enterprises for the Production of Assistive Technology for the Elderly & People with Disabilities Project, in collaboration with The Swedish Handicap Institute, to increase independence by improving access to assistive technology and devices, while creating new ventures employing low-income older, disabled citizens and unemployed youth in the production, distribution and maintenance of these devices. Sixth International Abilympics, co-hosted by RI, 23-29 November 2003, New Delhi, India to encourage people with disabilities to develop employment related skills. Raising the Voice of the African Decade Project, February 2004, Durban, South Africa: funded by the Swedish International Development Agency, to increase leadership skills and participation of African women and youth with disabilities. SOCIETY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (General consultative status granted in 1981) Part I. Introduction i) the aims and purposes of the organization and its main course of action The Society for International Development (SID) is an international non-governmental network of individuals and organizations founded in 1957 to promote social justice and foster democratic participation. Through locally driven international programs and activities, SID strengthens collective empowerment and facilitates dialogue and knowledge sharing worldwide. In addressing issues from a multicultural perspective, the Society emphasizes systemic and long-term approaches with a central focus on social and institutional transformation. Part II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Ecosoc and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings The Society for International Development: Worked closely on the follow-up of the 1996 World Food Summit (WFS) process and participated in the civil society preparations towards the World Food Summit held in 2002. An assessment of the WFS process was made available in "Development vol. 44.4 on `Food Security and Livelihoods". Attended the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) held in Johannesburg in August/September 2002. Attended the second World Social Forum (WSFII) in Port Alegre, Brazil in 2002. Attended the European Social Forum held in Florence, Italy in 2002 Attended the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) held in Geneva, Switzerland in February 2003 Attended the UNIDO Industrial Development Board held in Vienna, Austria from 25-27 May 2004. Attended the 49th Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) held in New York from 28 February to 11 March 2005. Attended the 58th DPI-NGO Conference on "Our Challenge: Voices for Peace, Partnerships and Renewal" held in New York on 7-9 September 2005. The attendance of these meetings allowed to strengthen the link between SID and the United Nations goals as explained in the next section. ii) Cooperation with the United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters SID in partnership with UNESCO published in English and Spanish in the SID journal (Volume 45 n. 4) Development on "Creating Global Communication: Development and the Information and Communication Technologies". 1,000 copies were distributed at the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) held in Geneva, Switzerland in February 2003. Moreover, within the framework of the SID Women on the Net Programme (WoN) and in co-operation with the UNESCO Communication Development Division, the Society for International Development together with it's partners: Zanzibar, United Republic of Tanzania and the Centre for Women's Development Studies (CWDS) New Delhi, India conducted a series of training regarding Women on the Net Programme workshops in December 2002 and January 2003 for rural and poor urban women's groups working for gender equality and women's human rights. United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) SID in partnership with UNFPA organized three regional meetings in 2002 within the framework of the SID Reproductive Health Programme: The Latin American and the Caribbean Regional Dialogue on "Reproductive Rights, Violence Against Women: Boys and Men's Roles and Responsibilities" hosted by CEPIA and held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on 3-4 May 2002; The South East Asia and the Pacific dialogue on "Reproductive Rights, Political Mobilization and the Law" held in Melbourne, Australia on 16-18 July 2002; and the South Asia Regional Dialogue on "Political Disruption, Women's Empowerment and Health" held in Nagarkot and Kathmandu, Nepal on 27-29 November 2002. The last of the SID-UNFPA dialogues, combined with the SID South Asia Regional Planning Meeting on "Women's Empowerment and Sustainable Livelihoods" from 30 November - 1 December 2002. The most recent South Asian Dialogue was organized by the SID-Nepal Chapter and with the support of UNFPA and UNIFEM-New Delhi on 17 November 2003. The Minister of Health and Communication, Surua Bahadur Thapa opened the meeting and underlined the importance of reproductive health for poor women. Former President of SID, Dr Nafis Sadik gave a keynote address outlining the many difficulties facing South Asian women. The local head of UNDP, Mathew Kehane, emphasized the importance of human rights and Wasim Zaman from UNFPA focused on the links among the main agreements reached by the UN in Cairo, Beijing and CEDAW, while Soumi Sakai spoke about the Millennium Development Goals helping to end maternal mortality. The Head of UNIFEM Chandani Joshni asked for practical solutions particularly in relation to women being heard in the peace process. Sadig Rasheed, speaking as member of SID's International Executive Committee, underlined that policy needs to stress women's agency, holistic approach and social movements to support reproductive rights and women's health in its broader complexity. SID within the framework of it's "Sustainable Livelihoods and Food Security Programme" has been closely working on the follow up of the 1996 World Food Summit (WFS) process and participating in the civil society preparations towards the World Food Summit: six years later (WFS:syl) review scheduled for June 2002. SID regularly participated in the sessions of the FAO Committee on World Food Security (CFS), which monitored the implementation of the 1996 WFS Plan of Action from the perspective of FAO member States. Establishment of contact with official delegates also resulted in a lively debate on the assessment of the WFS process and was made available in the publication of development vol. 44.4 on "Food Security and Livelihoods". Engagement in the work of the Global Forum on Sustainable Food and Nutritional Security has been complemented by identification of SID as Focal point for `Food Security and Democracy' in the works of the NGOs-Civil Society Group (NGOs-CSO) for the WFS:syl. SID was involved in the activities of the International NGOs/CSOs Planning Committee (IPC), which was structured around regional, constituencies and thematic focal points. The IPC provided key inputs to the agenda of NGOs consultations, held in parallel to FAO Regional Conferences. 4. OTHER RELEVANT ACTIVITIES SID has been actively implementing UN resolutions, furthering the debates lead by the UN system, and co-organising activities with the different bodies and agencies. (a) SID's journal Development dealing with United Nations topics and goals Vol. 45.2 "Is Another World Possible? World development for peace and freedom" takes up a nuanced reading of why September 11th happened and civil society responses to it. Intellectuals such as Lourdes Arizpe, David Korten, Amartya Sen, Rosalind P. Petchesky, Johann Galtung and Mahmood Mamdani give such a reading of the geo-political shifts of September 11th. Their reflections complement civil society leaders writing in the journal such as Arundhati Roy, Naomi Klein, Susan George, Nicola Bullard, Peggy Antrobus and Fatma Alloo. Together they point to the questions that need to be asked about the lack of institutional responses to September 11th and the vision that civil society groups are presenting in fora like Durban and Porto Alegre. Vol. 48.3 "Peace building through justice" was launched at the 58th DPI-NGO Conference (held in New York 2005) just before the World Summit. The Midday workshop was chaired by Governing Council Member, Sadig Rasheed with contributors to the journal John Tirman (The United States of America), Executive Director of the Center for International Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Necla Tschirgi (Turkey), Vice President of the International Peace Academy and Sanam Naraghi-Anderlini (Islamic Republic of Iran) Advisor for Women, Peace & Security. They presented their papers together with May Rihani (The United States of America), Senior Vice-President and Director of Gender Programs from AED and Development Editor Wendy Harcourt. b) The SID project on the Future of Asylum and Migration The launch of the Declaration of The Hague on the Future of Refugee and Migration Policy which took place in The Hague, The Netherlands, 22nd November 2002. A major shift of focus with regards to asylum and migration is necessary. This was the reason why in November 1999 the Netherlands Chapter of the Society for International Development (SID NL) started an international multidisciplinary Project on the Future of Asylum and Migration. The Project produced the Declaration of The Hague on the `Future of Refugee and Migration Policy' as a first result. During its launch, the Declaration was offered to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, in the morning of 22 November 2002 at the Peace Palace in The Hague, Netherlands. The Project will reach its successful conclusion with the establishment of a `Club of The Hague' to follow up on the Declaration. (c) The SID's Global Women's Empowerment Programme during 2003 and 2004 formed a rich panorama of outreach, alliance building and partnership in support of the ICPD program of action and the Millennium Development Goals in particular the goals 3,4 and 5 relating to gender equality, maternal and child health. The ground laid in the 2002 dialogues was well placed as shown by the success of the media launches of Development Vol. 46.2 on "Globalization, reproductive rights and health". (d) The SID's Resource based Conflicts in Eastern and Southern Africa: Politics, Policy and Law. SID put in place a process that was designed to bring together representatives of key civil society groups, community leaders, policy makers, representatives of the international community and academia to try and deepen understanding of resource conflicts in Eastern and Southern Africa. A three day conference brought together some 50 interested stakeholders from Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Sudan, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Zimbabwe and South Africa. The conference held in Nairobi at the end of May 2004, was a first step to building a body of shared knowledge on what is actually going on with respect to a number of resource based conflicts. (e) "Italy's "Development Cooperation Days 2005" began on October 28th in Florence with a conference on the theme "Reaching the MDGs 2005-2015: Challenges in the South". With more than 100 events scheduled to take place all over Italy, this initiative promoted by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs offers important opportunities to raise the interest of the Italian community on development issues as well as to reflect on development cooperation policies and operations. SID is one of the key partners of the initiative and acts as co-organisers of a number of key events. 