%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2007 regular session 22 January-2 February 2007 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period from 2002 to 2005 submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page 1. Association internationale des mouvements familiaux de formation rurale 2. Centre for Women, the Earth, the Divine 3. Friends World Committee for Consultation 4. Indonesian National Council on Social Welfare 5. International Health Awareness Network (Special consultative status since 1998) I. Introduction i. Aims and purposes of the organization Following the World General Assembly, held on Thursday, 5 May 2005 in Foz do Iguaçu, Paraná, Brazil, the new Board of Directors of the Association internationale des mouvements familiaux de formation rurale (AIMFR) was registered with the Paris Prefecture of Police, Bureau of Associations, on 18 July 2005. The Prefecture confirmed this registration on 26 July 2005. AIMFR is a foreign association authorized by the Minister of the Interior (Associations Act of 1 July 1901). It represents 1,200 rural training centres located in more than 40 countries on five continents. The training methodology is specific in that participants alternate between life experience and classroom training: "Life is a better teacher than school!" This method is specifically geared to the rural environment and offers training at the secondary, upper secondary and university levels. In general, the sequence involves two weeks of work in a rural setting, followed by two weeks of training at a training centre, regardless of the level of training and the specialization chosen: agriculture, horticulture, the hotel business, rural tourism, commerce, mechanics, carpentry, construction, electronics, personal services, etc. Each rural training centre has a legal structure that must be recognized by the Government of the country in which it is located. Its financial and educational management are the responsibility of the participating families, as most of the trainees are young people. At the international level, AIMFR brings together all the national entities representing the initiatives being undertaken in each country. Thus, AIMFR is the democratic structure of all the national entities that have legally recognized it. Since the 2000 session of the General Assembly and the quadrennial report for 1999-2002, there have been no significant changes in the Association's international structure. With respect to the membership, there has been a considerable increase in the number of rural training centres: from 217 to 240 in Brazil, from 26 to 36 in Guatemala, from 7 to 12 in Peru and to 7 in Mozambique, to cite only a few examples. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations In the period 2002-2005, in both New York and Rome, and within its limited financial means, AIMFR strove to participate to the extent possible in various United Nations initiatives. For example, we tried to attend meetings at least once a year and made every effort to take part in two meetings of United Nations specialized agencies in New York, as mentioned in the section on cooperation with the United Nations. Our primary aim is to establish contacts, both with official representatives of Member States and with representatives of other non-governmental organizations. At each event, we obtained a number of publications issued by United Nations departments. i. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council, conferences and other United Nations meetings These activities primarily took the form of participation in the various debates and presentations given by experts and representatives of Member States, reading of the available documents and contributions to some of the statements made by representatives of other non-governmental organizations. 1. A representative of AIMFR participated in the session of the Commission on Sustainable Development held in New York from 28 January to 8 February 2002. The Association's interest in this subject area is relevant, given the specific aims of our organization: the structural training of young people. The Association's teaching expertise, based on the day-to-day work experiences of young adults in their own communities and the exchange and deepening of these experiences during periods of formal training, represents an exceptional methodology. In this connection, the Association's representative met with members of a number of official delegations to the Economic and Social Council, including Chile, Uruguay, Cameroon, Cuba and Spain, and told them about our experiences. 2. Commission for Social Development session, New York, 10-21 February 2003. The Association's representative was in New York from 7 to 11 February 2003 and participated in some of these meetings. As at other sessions, he took the opportunity to obtain a great deal of documentation and to purchase recent publications at the United Nations bookshop. Indeed, we have created, in both Paris and Brussels, a large, up-to-date library on those issues dealt with by the United Nations that refer particularly to social and economic developments in the world. Studies on the future programmes and plans of the United Nations are also of great interest to AIMFR. 3. The following year, the Association's representative attended the forty-second session of the Commission for Social Development, held in New York from 4 to 13 February 2004. His participation in various meetings enabled him to hear the viewpoints of a number of countries members of the Economic and Social Council. At this session, he met with representatives of some of the countries with which AIMFR is working so as to inform them of our presence and hear their views on some of the work being done. These countries were Portugal, France, Argentina and the Philippines. 4. In 2005 the Association's representative attended the fifty-eighth annual conference of non-governmental organizations, held in New York from 7 to 9 September. On that occasion we obtained many publications issued by United Nations departments, including reports on the world situation in 2004 and world developments in relation to families, as well as some interesting material on preparations for the International Year of Microcredit. ii. Cooperation with the United Nations During the period under review, AIMFR participated in the following meetings: 1. United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF): Executive Board, 19-22 January 2004, New York. 2. Joint meeting of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)/United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Executive Board, 25 January 2004, New York. 3. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy: FAO Council sessions, 13-17 May 2002, 23-28 June 2003, 26-28 November 2003, 22-27 November 2004, 16-18 and 28 November 2005. As in the case of the UNDP meetings, the Association's representative attended and participated in the above-mentioned FAO Council sessions. Important contacts were made, both with experts and representatives of member countries and with other non-governmental organizations in consultative status with FAO. All these meetings in cooperation with the United Nations are very interesting to AIMFR and essential in terms of information and documentation. As in the case of the Economic and Social Council meetings, our representative obtained many documents and publications from FAO for use in our work. In our bulletin "Lettre de l'Aimfr", we provide information on the Association's participation in these events. iii. Initiatives undertaken in support of the Millennium Development Goals AIMFR also participated in the General Assembly's Millennium Development event, held in New York from 14 to 16 September 2005, and greatly appreciated the various presentations. The initiatives of United Nations bodies remain an important source of information and documentation for all our members in the various countries in which AIMFR is active. (Special Consultative Status granted in 1998) PART I. Introduction The Center for Women, the Earth, the Divine (C:WED), is dedicated to exploring the parallels that exist between the imaging and treatment of women and of the Earth, and how our images of the Divine are related to these parallels. We began by exploring these relationships within the context of our own tradition -- the Christian. While we continue our exploration in this tradition, we have also engaged people of other traditions such as the Buddhist, Goddess, Hindu, Indigenous, Jewish and Muslim. Our work is made available through talks, workshops, retreats, and writings including books, articles and a seasonal newsletter, "Weaving the Connections". The immediate purpose of C:WED is educational, while the ultimate goal is the healing of the Earth. PART II Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. In preparation for the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), representatives of C:WED participated in the Second Session of the Preparatory Commission held at the United Nations in New York on 4-8 February 2002. In addition to attending the regularly scheduled government sessions and side events throughout the week, on the first day, the representatives offered a panel entitled: "Earth Values: Strategies for Saving the Earth". Using the Secretary General's Summary as well as regional reports as background, panelists representing the five United Nations regions spoke on the values particular to their individual regions. Representatives of C:WED attended the Third Session of the Preparatory Commission for WSSD held at the United Nations in New York on 25 March-4 April 2002. As well as attending the official government sessions, representatives distributed the mission statement of the Earth Values Caucus (EVC), lobbied using our input to the Chair's statement, and distributed the paper on Earth's Code of Conduct to many governments and non-government people including chairperson Salim. Attendees also sponsored or co-sponsored three events -- on the Earth Charter presented by Ambassadors, a video on sustainable economy and a panel on changing the global corporate paradigm. On 27 May-7 June 2002, the president of C:WED participated in the Fourth Session of the Preparatory Commission for WSSD, held in Bali, Indonesia. From 26-August-4 September 2002, C:WED attended the WSSD held in Johannesburg, South Africa, and sponsored or co-sponsored three side events including one making the connections between sex trafficking and the violation of Earth values. C:WED worked to implement and evaluate the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, Agenda 21, and the Programme for Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the foci of the Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD). At the Eleventh CSD, held in New York from 26 April-9 May 2003, the president scheduled and facilitated six meetings for this purpose. At the Twelfth CSD (New York, 19-30 April 2004) the president continued her role of facilitating discussion on the thematic cluster of water, sanitation, and human settlement. At the Thirteenth CSD (New York, 11-29 April 2005) these thematic discussions were continued. In addition, the video "Thirst" was shown. During this same session (CSD13), C-WED worked with the United Nations Environment Programme to distribute and facilitate the understanding of the Secretary General's Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. C:WED has sent representatives to all of the Commission on the Status of Women sessions held in New York from 2002-2005. As participants, students have been included in order to broaden their understanding of the United Nations and its work. The C:WED representative in Vienna attended the monthly meetings of the Vienna NGO Committee on the Status of Women which are held there. This committee holds regular briefings that has included such topics as: "HIV/AIDS in Nambia" (4 April 2002); briefing on Afghanistan (21 November 2002); "Women and the European Convention(6 February 2003); "Millennium Goals" ( 8 May 2003); "Women in Mozambique" (18 March 2004); "AIDS in Thailand" (29 April 2004); "Women's Rights in Our Eastern Neighbor Countries" (17 March 2005); "Role of Women in Terrorist Organizations" (9 June 2005). In addition, each year (2002-2005) the Committee has developed statements relating to the topics under consideration at the annual meeting of the Commission on the Status of Women held in New York. These statements have been signed by C:WED and submitted to the Commission. iii. Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular , the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) In 2001, the president of C:WED founded, and continues to co-chair, the Earth Values Caucus (EVC). In addition to communicating regularly with a global list serve of 160 members, EVC holds monthly open meeting at the United Nations in New York. The primary focus of EVC is MDG7: Ensuring Environmental Sustainability. C:WED, working within the umbrella organization of the EVC, developed a day long conference "Water of Life", held on 16 October 2003 in New York. At the morning Department of Public Information (DPI) regular briefing, working with DPI and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), EVC co-sponsored a panel on the stewardship approach to water. Paul Hoeffel, Chief of the NGO section, DPI, moderated the panel of speakers featuring Marcia Brewster (DESA), Ambassador Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo, Permanent Representative of the Republic of South Africa, and John Todd, co-founder of Ocean Arks International. The afternoon session "Water of Life: Fresh Perspectives on the World's Water Crisis", co-sponsored by the Values Caucus, the Spiritual Caucus, the Fresh Water Caucus and EVC, featured presenters as well as interactive sessions with the attendees. (MDG 7 and 1: Eradicating Extreme Poverty and Hunger). At the Annual NGO/DPI Conference (8 September 2004), the president of C:WED facilitated an official workshop on "Earth Values in Action". The presenters were: May East, who spoke on eco-feminism from a developing world perspective; Mitchell Capitan, who spoke on the devastating effects of uranium mining to life and health in his local Navajo community, and Suzanne Golas, who spoke on local efforts regarding water in developed countries. Each presentation was followed by interaction with the audience. (MDGs 1 and 7). iv. Activities in Support of Global Principles C:WED served on the Coordinating Council of the Values Caucus from 2002-2005.Through workshops and informal gatherings, this caucus works with governments, agencies and NGO's to give input and promote discussion of the value systems that underlie our actions. C:WED continues to serve on the Universal Ethics and Global Concerns sub-committee of the Spirituality, Ethics and Global Concerns Committee. Through study, input from invited experts and discussions, this committee is working to develop a universal code of ethics. In preparation for the WSSD, C:WED worked within the EVC to develop an "Earth's Code of Conduct". This Code consists of five sections: 1-Call for Earth Values; 2-Destructive Assumptions of Present Global Activity; 3-Earth's Code of Conduct; 4-Guidelines for Sustainable Development; 5-Conclusion. This Code continues to be distributed within the United Nations system at appropriate venues. C:WED continues to publish a quarterly newsletter: "Weaving the Connections". In order to promote the work and principles of the United Nations, the newsletter regularly contains articles for this purpose. Between 2002-2005, "Weaving the Connections" has included articles on the following United Nations related subjects: the Human Rights Commission; women and poverty; preparations for WSSD as well as the WSSSD itself; media, information and communication techniques; International Women's Day; women and conflict; DPI workshops; water related issues. The newsletter is mailed to C:WED's 277 members who reside mainly in the United States of America but also in Austria, Canada, Chile, Peru and Philippines. "Weaving the Connections" is also available on C:WED's website. 3. FRIENDS WORLD COMMITTEE FOR CONSULTATION (General Consultative Status granted in 2002) Introduction Aims and purposes of the organization and its main course of action: This report outlines the work undertaken on behalf of Quakers (the Religious Society of Friends) by Friends World Committee for Consultation (FWCC) through its standing offices in New York and Geneva and through other representatives. The central principle of the work is facilitation of international activity which promotes a more peaceful and humane world through the United Nations and other international organizations. FWCC was established in 1937 as a means of communication and combined action for Yearly Meetings (autonomous groups) of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers). FWCC maintains representatives in New York and Geneva, and also appoints other representatives to conferences and similar events, as a means of implementing the Quaker religious commitment to peace, social justice and the fullness of humanity. The New York office is managed and substantially funded by American Friends Service Committee, an independent Quaker organization in the United States of America, and the Geneva office by Quaker Peace and Social Witness, a part of the Britain Yearly Meeting. Broader reports can be found in Friends World News, which incorporate FWCC annual reports for 2002 - 2005. Constitution: In 2004, the Constitution of FWCC was amended to reflect changes mandated by the Charity Commission of England and Wales to bring the document in line with its regulatory requirements. The basic purposes and functions of the organization were not changed. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings: Throughout the reporting period (2002 - 2005), FWCC representatives regularly participated in: ECOSOC bodies (and their subsidiary bodies where relevant to our core work): Meetings of the Economic and Social Council Annual Meetings of the Commission on Human Rights Meetings of the United Nations on the Prevention of Crime and Criminal Justice Meetings of the United Nations Forum on Indigenous People Other (including their subsidiary bodies where relevant to our core work): Observed meetings of the United Nations General Assembly and UN Security Council; and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) executive board Participated in meetings of Human Rights Treaty bodies Observed the plenary sessions of the Conference on Disarmament Participated in the annual meetings of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction Observed annual meetings of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner for Refugees Participated in meetings of United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), and the International Labour Conference. Specific examples of FWCC participation in ECOSOC meetings: Commission on Human Rights, Geneva, Switzerland, 58th Session, 18 March-26 April 2002; 59th Session, 17 March-25 April 2003; 60th Session, 15 March-23 April; 61st Session 14 March-22 April. FWCC written and oral statements covered women in prison and children of imprisoned mothers, conscientious objection to military service, child soldiers, mass exoduses and displaced persons, indigenous issues, rights of non-citizens, freedom of religion and belief, standing invitations to thematic human rights mechanisms and United Nations reform. 11th United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, 14-25 April 2005, Bangkok, Thailand. FWCC attended the congress and participated actively in key dimensions of the Congress's work. Specific examples of FWCC participation in other United Nations processes: Informal Interactive Hearings of the General Assembly with Non-governmental Organizations, Civil Society Organizations and the Private Sector, 23-24 June, 2005, New York, United States of America. FWCC participated in the meetings as an observer. Biennial Meetings of States on the Program of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, 7-11 July 2003 and 11-17 July 2005 in New York, United States of America. FWCC attended and held lunch-time workshops on issues related to small arms demand. World Summit on Sustainable Development, 26 August-4 September, 2002, Johannesburg, South Africa. FWCC organized events coinciding with the preparatory committee meetings and attended the Summit. International Conference on Financing for Development, 18 - 22 March 2002, Monterrey, Mexico. FWCC attended the conference and gave a statement on "Partnerships" (joint statement with the Sisters of Mercy). Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters: the offices in both Geneva and New York have organized a wide variety of colloquia, conferences, lunchtime and other informal meetings for United Nations staff, diplomats and Non-governmental Organization representatives. Some of these were preparatory or offered as a follow-up to the conferences attended. Others related to the following topics which FWCC representatives have been monitoring and analyzing: Human Rights and Refugees Project areas included women in prison and children of imprisoned mothers, conscientious objection to military service, child soldiers, refugee protection, the rights of indigenous peoples and reform of the United Nations human rights system. Criminal Justice, in particular restorative justice; women in prison and children of imprisoned mothers. The FWCC Representative for Human Rights and Refugees, undertook joint research with the International Labour Office (ILO), results published as "Young Soldiers: Why they choose to fight" (ILO, Geneva, 2004). Disarmament and Peace Project areas included Mine Action; Small Arms and Development; Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of Ex-combatants; Explosive Remnants of War; and Post-conflict Peacebuilding. FWCC has played a leadership role in the "Geneva Process", a series of dialogues among governments, United Nations agencies, and Non-governmental Organizations on the implementation of the United Nations Program of Action on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. FWCC, with its Geneva Forum partners (the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and the Graduate Institute of International Studies) has organized residential colloquia for diplomats, United Nations agencies, Non-governmental Organizations focusing on small arms and other disarmament issues, e.g., "Implementing the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms: What needs to be done?" 7 - 8 February 2002, Jongny-sur-Vevey, Swizerland; "6th Consultation with UN Agencies and Intergovernmental Organisations on Small Arms-related Work," 29 January 2003, Geneva, Switzerland; "The Role of Regional Organisations in Stemming the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons," 29 - 30 January 2004, Jongny-sur-Vevey, Switzerland; "Incapacitating Biochemical Weapons: Scientific, Military, Legal and Policy Perspectives and Prospects" (co-organised with the Centre for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation), 11 June 2005, Geneva, Switzerland. Economic Issues Project areas cover trade and development issues related to intellectual property and services. At WIPO we focus on the development agenda, reform of the organization and genetic resources e.g. the 2003 publication "Multilateral Agreements and a Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS) plus World: The World Intellectual Property Organization". At UNCTAD the focus has been on trade issues related to the World Trade Organization e.g. UNCTAD staff participated in a weekend workshop in July 2005 on "General Agreement on Trade in Services Mode 4 in the Doha Development Round: Making progress on market access, regulatory and other issues in Hong Kong and beyond". Emerging Conflicts and Crises FWCC followed the work of the Security Council and the way in which big emergencies were addressed within the multilateral framework of the United Nations. Regular meetings were held with Missions, Secretariat and Non-governmental Organization colleagues. FWCC worked to increase United Nations response and international community attention to crises which do not receive enough attention in proportion to the scale of the emergency, by requesting that the UN community provide protection and basic services to civilians in crises, offer good offices to assist in the de-escalation of crises and shine its spotlight on areas neglected by the broader global community. Work included collaboration with the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and partners at Permanent Missions to the United Nations. Environment and Sustainable Development FWCC briefly focused on water, conflict prevention and cooperation. Work included close collaboration with UNDP (United Nations Development Program) and the publication of a book entitled Years of Fresh Water (QUNO, New York 2004). Prevention of Violent Conflict FWCC played an active leadership role in planning for the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict Global Conference on "Civil Society Forging Partnerships to Prevent Violent Conflict and Build Peace: From Reaction to Prevention" held 19-21 July, 2005, at United Nations Headquarters, New York, USA. The United Nations World Summit in September 2005 initiated new work for FWCC around the evolution of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission. Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals, which now form the basis of the global agenda for the 21st Century: While FWCC does not work directly on the Millennium Development Goals, much of the work relates to their achievement. Examples include: FWCC work on child soldiers relates to Goal 2; FWCC work on fresh water rates to Goal 7. Overall, FWCC's work on disarmament, violent conflict prevention, and peacebuilding concentrate on creating the conditions for the realization of the MDGs and their sustainability. Activities in Support of Global Principles. N/A (Special Consultative Status granted in 2002) Introduction: Indonesian National Council on Social Welfare (INCSW) was established in 1967, is a non-government, non-profit and independent national level organization working in the field of social welfare and social development. Since its last National Congress in 2005, the INCSW has formulated its vision to develop prosperous and justice Indonesian society through development of social welfare development and social services undertaken by and for all. The national congress also stipulated two main missions for the Council, i.e. to encourage full participation of all citizens in the improvement of social welfare, and in the empowerment of all through social development efforts. The National Congress in 2005 has also adopted five working programs, namely: To develop national commitment and concern for the development of welfare of nation's children. To encourage policy reforms and laws in the field of social welfare and social development through review and evaluation of existing legislations, and if necessary to propose for amendments or development of new laws or legislations. To develop net workings, improve link with social institutions, or cooperate with existing services for the benefit of social welfare and social development undertaking. To improve quality of the existing services, and to develop new social services and social rehabilitation centers as deem necessary. To conduct research and development in the field of social welfare and social development. 2. The substantial change of organization: Since its formation, the new Executive Board is committed to vigorously and relentlessly implement the decisions of the Annual Congress in 2005 with strong program activities and advocacy for the welfare rights of the people and poverty alleviation through empowerment programs for vulnerable groups in the communities. People and organizations affiliated with INCSW have been engaged in wide range of dynamic and important initiatives, i.e. in the field of education and training of street kids, healthcare for senior citizens; micro-credit programs for the poor, conducting activities for youth; and advocacy for the rights of the handicapped. Internationally the Council also engaged in many international undertaking, among others participated in policy reform related to enforcement of international treaties on rights and social welfare. For any given activity or issue, INCSW coordinate and facilitate the mobilization of its networks of government and non-government agencies as well as community-based groups, private agencies, and professional societies. INCSW members comprises of 27 (twenty seven) provincial level offices of committee on social welfare out of 33 (thirty three) existing provinces in Indonesia. At the national level INCSW coordinates also many social organizations as its full members. Since 2005 many new organizations, among others Damandiri Foundation, a private organization which has a strong program on poverty alleviation, joined the Council. Since the National Congress in 2005, the Council has renewed its committee members by a new elected President, Prof. Dr. Haryono Suyono, and assisted by a team consisted of representatives from several member institutions as attached. The INCSW is working in partnership with the Government Ministries working in the field of Social Development and its related interests, namely the Coordinating Ministry for People Welfare, Ministry of Social Affair, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Cooperative. The INCSW has also strengthened its partnership with other social institutions, other bodies or group of people in the society including professionals, enterprises or social development specialists, who work either in domestic institutions or international agencies with similar interests. The Council also works with institutions or bodies under the United Nations Agencies working in the field of Social Welfare and Social Development. Since its inception, every two years INCSW attended The International Conference on Social Welfare organized by The International Council on Social Welfare (ICSW). For the period of 2002-2005 INCSW sent delegations attending The 30th International Conference on Social Welfare on June 24 - 28, 2002, in Rotterdam, Netherlands. In 2004 the Council also sent delegations attending the 31st International Conference on Social Welfare on August 16-20 in Auckland, New Zealand. During the period covered by this report, the Council delegates also attended meeting and or took part in special committee activities, such as Foundation for the Development of Children with Physical Disabilities (YPAC) in relation to RI (Rehabilitation International) activities. In 2005 the Association of Indonesian People with Disabilities (PPCI) has participated in programs conducted by Handicap International to empower disable people of tsunami victims, and for post tsunami programs reconstruction in Aceh. The PPCI, as member of the Council has also cooperated with Disable People organization, internationally or regionally. This organization also participated in the International Abilympic conducted in India in 2003. Since 2002 PPCI has also sent a special delegate to join discussion in the International Convention on Human Right for Disable People. Special Olympics Indonesia (SOIna), a member of INCSW has been assigned to provide training program for mentally retarded people. This organization has been very active in sending potential candidates for Special Olympics International. To prepare the athletes through training programs, SOIna received substantial tools and equipments from Special Olympic International. In the past, in 2003, in the Special Olympics International tournament conducted in Dublin, Indonesian athletes received a medal on athletics. In the new programs mentioned above, the Council is very keen to encourage government ministries and local authorities to be fully aware and committed to achieve the goals and targets of Millennium Development Goals (MDG's) in 2015. In cooperation with Damandiri Foundation and other institutions in the regions, the Council is working to strengthen Posyandu as recently encouraged as a priority social development program in Indonesia by President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Posyandu is an abbreviation of Pos Pelayanan Terpadu or Integrated Service Post, which originally functioned as family planning and health services at grassroots level. To cater for MDGs program actions, Posyandu functions are being expanded to help empower families. By expanding the functions of Posyandu, local community has a vehicle and opportunities to improve its roles to help its members, the families, to work for the welfare of their members. The International Health Awareness Network (IHAN) is a not-for-profit, non-governmental organization in consultative status with the United Nations conceived at the "End of the Decade Women's Conference" in Nairobi, Kenya, during the United Nations' Third World Conference on Women in 1987. IHAN has advisory council members in Jordan, Kenya, India, Switzerland, Turkey, Pakistan, The United States of America, Australia, Bangladesh, South Africa, China, Egypt, Niger, United Kingdom, Iran and Japan. IHAN is affiliated with the International Council of Women and the National Council of Women in the United States, and is also associated with the United Nations Department of Public Information, the Economic and Social Council, the NGO Forum for Health, and the United Nations NGO Committee on Narcotics and Substance Abuse. IHAN'S MISSION STATEMENT To educate, empower and provide health care to women and children with a focus on under served socioeconomic groups. To develop, fund and implement health projects, i.e. mass immunization, primary health care screening, treatment and educational workshops. To work with the United Nations and other organizations to advocate and implement programs and policies that improves women's and children's health and quality of life. To participate in international and national health-related development conferences. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations (for more information please ref to www.ihan.org) Activities in 2002 1. March 2002, United Nations, New York- International Health Awareness Network (IHAN) board members attended the various conferences and events during the session of the 46th Commission on Status of Women (CSW) (4-15 March 2002). 2. April 22- 24th 2002- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran : Dr.Roshan President International Health Awareness Network (IHAN) gave a presentation titled Women's Health Issues in Iran at an International Gynecology conference. 3. May 7th 2002 , New York, IHAN sponsored an interactive dialogue with the Permanent Mission Bangladesh and the National Council of Women on "Partnering to Make the World better for Children" in the Church Centre of the United Nations. Activities in 2003 1. March 7th 2003- , United Nations, New York : IHAN sponsored a side event - Media and Impact of Violence on Women's Health at the United Nations Main Building in New York City to commemorate the 47th Session of the Committee on Status of Women - (CSW) (3-14 March 2003) 2. April 11th 2003 , New York, IHAN and National Council of Women (NCW) USA sponsored a Conference "Brave New World" highlighting the importance of Human Rights and Education. This was held in the Church Centre of the United Nations. 3. December 1- 10 2003-, Hergaisa Somaliland: IHAN conducted a health camp for 5, 00 women and children in. IHAN with private donations has been actively involved in promoting the health of the underprivileged women and children. (Activity in line with the Millennium Development Goal 5- Improve Maternal health) 4. December 10, 2003-, New York: IHAN organized a conference Peace as a Human Right: The Elimination of Violence against Women and Children to commemorate Human Rights Day, which was held in the Church Centre of the United Nations campus in New York. Dr. Noeleen Heyzer Executive Director of United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) was the honorary chair of the event. Events in 2004. 1. March 1, 2004 , United Nations, New York: IHAN organized a conference "Gender Equity and Peace Building" to commemorate the 48th Session of the Commission on The Status of Women (CSW) (1-12 March 2004). Speakers were Dr Anamah Tah President of the International Council of Women ( ICW), Dr Vijaya Melnick- Vice President International Health Awareness Network (IHAN), Dr. Satty Gill Keswani Medical Women's International Association (MWIA) representative to the United Nations ,Mrs. Mary Singletary President National Council of Women (NCW) and Dr. Mini Murthy Program Coordinator International Health Awareness Network IHAN .The event was held at the Church Centre of the United Nations. 2. March 11th 2004-, Providence, Rhode Islands : Mini Murthy MD, Program coordinator International Health Awareness Network was a speaker at the Amnesty International conference on Human Rights organized at Brown University Providence. Her talk was entitled- Women's Health is a Human right 3. May 24 2004 . Bronx, New York : Lehman College City University of New York (CUNY) and International Health Awareness Network (IHAN) sponsored a symposium on The Role of Women in World Peace & the Role of Men and Boys in gender equity featuring Shirin Ebadi 2003 Nobel Peace Prize winner was the keynote speaker. 4. December 10, 2004 New York- IHAN organized a program to commemorate the Human Rights Day at the Church Center of the United Nations and Michael Rattner distinguished Human Rights attorney was the keynote speaker. Events in 2005 1. March 4th 2005 United Nations New York - During the 49th Session of the Commission on The Status of Women (CSW) ( 28 February-11 March 2005), IHAN sponsored with Medical Women's International (MWIA) and American Medical Women's Association (AMWA) a panel discussion "Role of Women in Humanitarian Medicine and Equity for Women in Gender and Cultural Competence." The keynote speaker was Ms. Wariara Mbugua, Principal Social Affairs Officer in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women's Office at The United Nations. The even was held at the Church Centre of the United Nations campus in New York City. 2. August 16th to the 19th 2005 in Bosnia and Herzegovina- " Pathways to Reconciliation and Global Human Rights" an International Conference. IHAN members attended the various events and networked with other visiting Non Governmental Organization members. 3. September 7- 9 2005 at the United Nations NewY ork 58th Department of Public Information (DPI) and Non Governmental Organizations (NGO) annual Conference Our Challenge: Voices for Peace, Partnerships and Renewal was attended by Drs Roshan and Murthy board members of IHAN. 