%%%BIOGRAPHY|APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|

Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fifteenth session Vienna, 24-28 April 2006 Agenda item 4 Thematic discussion on maximizing the effectiveness of technical assistance provided to Member States in crime prevention and criminal justice Nomination of a member of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute Note by the Secretary-General** The attention of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice is drawn to a matter concerning the composition of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute requiring action on the part of the Commission and the Economic and Social Council. The term of one member of the Board, namely, Jean-Claude Karsenty (France), expires on 7 November 2006. According to article IV of the statute of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, annexed to Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/56 of 24 May 1989: "2. The Board shall be composed of the following: "(a) Seven members selected by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control upon nomination by the Secretary-General and endorsed by the Economic and Social Council, with due regard to the fact that the Institute and its work are funded from voluntary contributions and to the principle of equitable geographic distribution. The members shall be chosen from among eminent persons who possess the necessary qualifications and expertise. They shall serve in their individual capacity for a term of five years from the date of the first Board meeting in which they are invited to participate. They shall be eligible for reappointment by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control with the endorsement of the Economic and Social Council for not more than one additional term." According to the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, the Commission has succeeded to the functions and powers of the former Committee on Crime Prevention and Control in this and in other matters. The following candidate is proposed: Michèle Ramis-Plum (France). The principle of equitable geographical distribution is taken into account in the composition of the Board. The current Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute is composed of: Ann-Marie Begler (Sweden) Pedro David (Argentina) Iskander Ghattas (Egypt) Željko Horvatić (Croatia) Jean-Claude Karsenty (France) Takayuki Shiibashi (Japan) Elizabeth Verville (United States of America) Background information on the candidate is provided in the annex to the present document. Background information on the candidate nominated to fill a position on the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute Michèle Ramis-Plum (France) Michèle Ramis-Plum is currently Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the Office of the United Nations and to the International Organizations in Vienna (United Nations Office at Vienna, International Atomic Energy Agency, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization). In that capacity, Mrs. Ramis-Plum participates in sessions of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and took part in the negotiation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption (2002-2003). Mrs. Ramis-Plum was Vice-Chairman of the forty-eighth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (2004-2005). From 1998 to 2001, she served as Head of Section for Assistance to French Communities Abroad. From 1995 to 1998, she served as Cultural Attaché at the French Embassy in Mexico. Prior to that, she was Head of the Recruitment Section of the Division of Human Resources of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Previously she was responsible for the negotiation of United Nations conventions, especially in the field of the fight against terrorism and on legal assistance. She entered the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1980 and worked as Third Secretary at the French Embassy in Bogota from 1981 to 1983. She received both her master's degree in law and a Diploma in Criminal Sciences and Criminology from the University of Aix-en-Provence. She is a graduate of the Institute of Political Studies in Paris. 