%%%ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE|WORK ORGANIZATION|SANCTIONS|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each Committee. United Nations A/C.6/53/SR.6 General Assembly Distr.: General Fifty-third session 11 December 1998 English Official Records Original: French Sixth Committee Summary record of the 6th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 19 October 1998, at 3 p.m. Chairman: Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia) Contents Agenda item 154: Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization (continued) A/C.6/53/SR.6 The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m. Agenda item 154: Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization (continued) (A/53/33, 312, 326 and 386) 1. Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine) said that he considered the Special Committee to be the most appropriate forum for consideration of the legal aspects of the revitalization and reform of the Organization, where it could make a contribution. It would need to do more to streamline its methods of work and in that connection he fully supported its recommendation to move its future sessions to the spring, which would allow enough time for delegations not only to analyse thoroughly the results of the General Assembly deliberations of the Sixth Committee and other United Nations bodies but also to draft proposals and assess in time the proposals and documentation from delegations and the Secretariat. Any such proposals and documents ought to be submitted well in advance, at least a month before its session started, if the Special Committee was to consider them. Moreover, coordination with other United Nations bodies was essential, especially in order to avoid duplication. There should be informal contacts with the secretariats and most active delegations of other bodies, and their representatives and those of other Secretariat units should be invited to keep the Special Committee informed of their activities. 2. During its 1998 session, the Special Committee had considered proposals that had been on its agenda for some time. Given the conflicting views among delegations and even the lack of interest in prolonging the discussion on the issues, it had made no recommendations. At the same time, the Special Committee had not seemed to want to drop consideration of them. Ukraine believed that they should be kept in the Special Committee’s programme of work but that consideration should be deferred for two or three sessions to give the delegations time to reconsider their positions or come up with new proposals that might revive the debate. 3. With regard to the working paper submitted by the Russian Federation entitled “Some ideas on the basic conditions and criteria for imposing and implementing sanctions and other enforcement measures”, his delegation believed that the Special Committee was the body that should deal with the question. The discussion at the latest session had been encouraging, and a paragraph-by-paragraph first reading of the proposal should be completed at the next session. 4. The revised working paper submitted by Cuba (A/AC.182/L.93/Add.1) provided an interesting legal framework for discussion by raising the issues of the functions and powers of the General Assembly under the Charter, especially Chapter IV, and the need to ensure a better balance of power between the Security Council and the General Assembly. Thinking along those lines should be pursued, and the sponsor should consider preparing further documentation on the matter. 5. Ukraine attached particular importance to the implementation of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter regarding assistance to third States affected by sanctions. In addition to the résumé of the Special Committee’s discussion of the problem, the Committee had before it an excellent summary of the deliberations and main findings of the ad hoc expert group meeting on the question of developing a methodology for assessing the consequences incurred by third States as a result of preventive or enforcement measures and on exploring innovative and practical measures of international assistance to the affected third States, contained in the report of the Secretary-General (A/53/312). However, it was hard to understand why it took so long for the Secretariat to distribute a completed document to members so that they could consult their Governments and receive instructions well before the beginning of the Sixth Committee’s debate. 6. With regard to Article 50, he reiterated his country’s position that sanctions against any State resulted in economic losses for its neighbours and trade partners. There was no doubt that the maintenance of peace and security and the observance of human rights might require sacrifices on the part of the international community or particular States. That was why Ukraine was ready to bear its own share of the common burden. Nevertheless, it considered it unfair that some States should suffer while others, equally involved in the application of a sanctions regime, should not only experience no untoward economic consequences but even profit from the isolation of their competitors. The Security Council imposed sanctions on behalf of the entire Organization, and all Member States should bear equal responsibility for their implementation and repercussions. Specific proposals should therefore be drawn up and acted upon to remove the inadequacies of the sanctions regime and set up a system of fair distribution of the economic damage caused by sanctions. 7. It was particularly encouraging that in its deliberations the ad hoc expert group had proceeded from the same assumption, noting (A/53/312, para. 37) that the cost of implementing sanctions should be viewed as the opportunity cost of a possible alternative to an international military action or a peacekeeping operation. Since the costs of such military or peacekeeping operations were internationally shared in the form of contributions, the costs of economic sanctions should similarly be borne on a more equitable basis, bearing in mind the special responsibility of the major industrialized countries in that regard. The idea suggested to that end by the expert group, of applying funding procedures similar to those used for peacekeeping operations (ibid., para. 46), deserved to be put into effect after detailed study. 8. Ukraine shared the view of delegations which believed that sanctions should not be a substitute for the established, recognized procedures for settling international disputes. The imposition of sanctions should follow, not precede, the peaceful means of settlement, when the latter were unsuccessful, in accordance with international law and in the Charter of the United Nations. 9. There was no alternative to a thorough, realistic and pragmatic examination of the third State problem both within and outside the United Nations system. The attempt to address the issue solely on the basis of a literal interpretation of the term “consult” in Article 50, or to assign to institutions outside the United Nations system exclusive responsibility for assisting third States would not only make the provisions of that article inoperative, but would also undermine the ends pursued by sanctions, as well as the principle of their strict observance. One could not but note in that connection the understanding reached by the Ad Hoc Expert Group that the imposition of comprehensive sanctions would require broad-based international action involving international financial and trade institutions, the development programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations and other relevant and international and regional organizations. His delegation also fully endorsed the idea that in order to address special economic difficulties in third States more specifically and directly, IMF and the World Bank should consider establishing a special mechanism which would allow them to mobilize new and additional financial resources in order to provide, on exceptional and concessional terms, emergency financial assistance that would go above and beyond the traditional interventions on account of macroeconomic imbalances or structural adjustment programmes. 10. Recognition of the problems of third States was not sufficient. The whole work on the implementation of the relevant General Assembly resolutions must not be confined to measures aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of Secretariat activities or elaborating a uniform methodology for assessing the losses of third States. It was essential to set up a permanent and reliable legal mechanism for addressing those issues, a mechanism which would be able to take up, automatically and without delay, a particular problem related to the implementation of Article 50. His delegation believed that effective and prompt measures taken under Article 50 would be essential if the overall effectiveness of sanctions was to be guaranteed and the authority of the Security Council under Charter VII preserved. 11. Ukraine attached great importance to the creation of a mechanism for consultations between the Security Council and countries which were or might be affected by the implementation of sanctions; that idea had been reflected in the conclusions of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts. Another reasonable proposal was the idea of creating a standing committee of the Security Council on sanctions which would carry out its functions with transparency and would be responsible for assessing the economic and sociopolitical effects of sanctions, coordinating appropriate activities within the United Nations Secretariat, monitoring the observance of sanctions regimes, estimating current and future losses of third States and determining ways of minimizing them. The creation of such a Committee could and should be supplemented by appointing, as was strongly recommended by the Ad Hoc Group of Experts in paragraph 54 of its report (A/53/312), a Special Representative of the Secretary-General to undertake, in the most severe cases, a full assessment of the actual consequences for affected third States for carrying out of sanctions. 12. The work of the Expert Group was commendable for a number of reasons. Its results had permitted the conclusion that there existed a sufficient number of methods and means to properly assess the losses caused to third States by sanctions and that there were specific and realistic ways of providing practical assistance to such States, inter alia to avoid unjustified losses. What was needed now was the political will to start the process of their practical application. 13. His delegation intended to submit, together with the delegations of Bulgaria and Russian Federation, a draft resolution which could be discussed within the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee. The establishment of such a group would also be useful for the purpose of studying the results of the Ad Hoc Expert Group meeting in an appropriate substantive manner, as recommended by the Special Committee. 14. Mr. Troyjo (Brazil) recalled that at its last session, the Special Committee had considered three main issues: the maintenance of international peace and security, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and the situation of the Trusteeship Council. With regard to the issue of assisting third States affected by sanctions, which had figured on the agenda of the Special Committee for a number of years, Brazil had always maintained that sanctions should be contemplated only as a last resort, when diplomatic efforts had been exhausted. That being the case, it was in favour of multilateral efforts aimed at avoiding or minimalizing the adverse impact of sanctions on third States. 15. With regard to the draft declaration on the basic principles and criteria for the work of United Nations peacekeeping missions and mechanisms, his delegation saw it as a document that was all the more useful in that peacekeeping operations were becoming increasingly complex and diversified. 16. His delegation wished to congratulate the Russian delegation on the important dimension assigned to the principles of humanitarian law in the working paper it had submitted. Similarly, his delegation welcomed the revised proposal by Sierra Leone, in the belief that the proposed mechanism would make a positive addition to the range of the Organization’s preventive diplomacy activities. It was now the task of the Special Committee to revise and perfect the text. 17. His delegation believed that the proposals concerning the International Court of Justice should be examined in depth, and that it would be important for the international community to extend its codification efforts further in order to devise the necessary legal basis to deal with the interaction between States and international organizations. 18. With regard to the situation of the Trusteeship Council, his delegation had already expressed on a number of occasions its reservations regarding the proposal that the Council should be given a collective mandate over the global commons. Given that a number of bodies were already dealing with the global commons, Brazil saw no advantage in assigning that role to the Trusteeship Council, which would then be duplicating the work of many existing institutional mechanisms. 19. Mr. Tchatchouwo (Cameroon) said that his delegation attached great importance to the question of assistance to third States affected by sanctions and called for a strict implementation of the relevant provisions of the Charter, especially Article 50. Sanctions should not be imposed unless the peaceful means provided for in the Charter had proved ineffective. Moreover, they should be resorted to only to achieve precise objectives. The measures which the target State must take in order to have the sanctions lifted should be spelt out clearly. 20. In conformity with its humanitarian ideal, his Government considered that the human dimension, especially the social, economic and cultural rights of the people, should be taken into account whenever sanctions were imposed. His delegation therefore supported the Secretary-General’s idea of establishing a mechanism which would make sanctions less brutal. It also endorsed the recommendations of the ad hoc group of experts contained in document A/53/312. It believed that the Sierra Leonian proposal on a dispute prevention and early settlement service deserved further study. 21. A decision on the proposal relating to the Trusteeship Council would be premature. 22. His delegation supported the recommendation to hold sessions of the Special Committee during the first six months of the year. 23. It was extremely important that the International Court of Justice should have the necessary means to perform its functions rapidly and effectively, despite the increase in the number of cases brought before it. 24. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that his delegation had read the report of the Special Committee giving particular attention to the question of assistance to third States affected by sanctions. It felt that the work done by the Special Committee on that subject was unfinished inasmuch as it had dealt with the consequences of sanctions without exploring the cause, namely how sanctions came to be imposed through imperfections in the Charter which enabled certain Member States to manipulate the deliberations of the Security Council and to interpret the provisions of the Charter to their advantage. It was thus that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had endured sanctions for more than six years. As a result it had suffered economic losses of several billions of dollars and seen development efforts halted. The sanctions in question were altogether unjust as they had been taken under Chapter VII of the Charter, which provided for such action only with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression. 25. His delegation fully supported the working paper prepared by the Russian Federation. Sanctions must be an exceptional means that was to be used only after all other means had failed and only in cases where the Security Council saw a threat to international peace and security or an act of aggression. Care must be taken to ensure that sanctions did not harm civilian populations, especially children, and did not remain in place indefinitely. 26. His delegation was in favour of the working paper submitted by Cuba, which offered some useful proposals designed to restore the balance between the General Assembly and the Security Council in the area of international peace and security. The proposal of Sierra Leone also had merit. 27. Moreover, his delegation supported the proposals made with respect to the International Court of Justice, which should be endowed with the human and material resources it required in order to handle a growing caseload. 28. On the subject of the organization of the Special Committee’s work, his delegation favoured a spring session but was against shortening the duration of the session. 29. Committed to strengthening the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security, his delegation had submitted a number of proposals to the Special Committee, the last of which was reproduced in paragraph 98 of the report and consisted of the following six elements: (i) considering ways of bolstering the role of the General Assembly in the maintenance of international peace and security; (ii) considering ways of enhancing the relationship between the General Assembly and the Security Council; (iii) considering the adverse consequences of the veto and redefining the conditions of its use; (iv) elaborating criteria to ensure that the composition of the Council was truly representative and reflected the principle of equitable geographical distribution; (v) formulating a precise definition of what constituted a threat to international peace and security so as to preclude improper resort to action under Chapter VII; (vi) reviewing the implementation of Article 31 of the Charter, which ensured the right of any Member to participate without a vote in the Council’s discussions whenever the interests of that Member were affected. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the Special Committee would study that proposal closely at its next session. 30. Mr. Akbar (Pakistan) said that the international community was becoming increasingly aware of the impact of mandatory sanctions on third States. It appreciated the fact that the Secretary-General, in pursuance of his own proposal and General Assembly resolution 52/162, had convened a group of ad hoc experts to develop a methodology of assessing the consequences incurred by third States as a result of preventive or enforcement measures and to explore innovative and practical measures of international assistance to those States. The report of the Secretary-General (A/53/312) contained a summary of the deliberations and main findings of the expert group. The contents of the report deserved further consideration by the Sixth Committee and the Special Committee on the Charter with a view to their conducting an extensive analysis of the work done by the expert group and looking into ways of facilitating the application of its recommendations. His delegation would give its detailed views on the subject during the consideration of the report. It would be advisable for Member States to take a close look at the following technical elements of the methodology for assessing the impact of sanctions on third States: time series analysis of balance-of-payments changes, stratified sample survey of firms, gravity model of bilateral trade flows, regression equation of income shocks, and analytic hierarchy process for perception surveys. Those techniques and mathematical models required extensive collection of data and hence presumed an advanced system. Prompt relief should be offered to the countries affected by sanctions, which were frequently not in a position to collect the data concerned. The Sixth Committee would note that the expert group had not established a mechanism or a fund to help third States cope with their problems. That gap had to be filled. 31. The Secretariat might consider the feasibility of a structure capable of expeditiously enacting the more realistic recommendations: (i) the Secretariat could draw up a tentative list of potential effects of sanctions on third States; (ii) the Secretary-General could submit to the Security Council as soon as possible an assessment of the potential impact of sanctions on the target countries and in particular on third States; (iii) the Secretariat should monitor the effects of sanctions and report its findings to the Security Council; (iv) the Secretariat should help the affected States to prepare explanatory materials for attachment to their requests for consultation with the Security Council; (v) the Secretary-General should appoint a Special Representative to undertake, in collaboration with the Governments concerned, a full assessment of the consequences actually incurred by the most severely affected States; (vi) the dispatch to the most affected third States of special fact-finding or evaluation missions which would ascertain their urgent needs and particular requirements for international support; (vii) the Special Representative’s functions could include coordination of the follow-up activities to assist the affected countries or regions. 32. The expert group had recognized the unforeseen effects of sanctions and their negative implications for expatriate labour working in third States. The phenomenon was particularly harmful for the low-income developing countries most affected by the loss of remittances and the rise in unemployment. It was therefore essential to find a way to compensate third States for the losses that they incurred. 33. His delegation greatly appreciated the initiative of the Russian Federation in evolving criteria for imposing mandatory sanctions and other enforcement measures. It fully shared the view that social, economic and cultural rights should be taken into account when designing a sanctions regime. General Assembly resolution 51/242 affirmed that the concept of “humanitarian limits of sanctions” merited further attention. The United Nations should not become a punitive organ and the Security Council should not resort to sanctions without first exhausting all other means of resolving disputes. The Council should make fully informed decisions based on an assessment of the situation on the ground and contacts with the parties concerned. Sanctions should be time-limited, with clearly stipulated conditions for lifting them. 34. Pakistan had been in the vanguard of Member States that had substantively contributed to United Nations peacekeeping operations. His delegation had studied the proposal of the Russian Federation on evolving criteria for peacekeeping missions, which were purpose-specific and should not be time-limited. There was no objection to the Special Committee discussing the criteria, but its work should not duplicate that of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. 35. His delegation fully appreciated the thrust of the Cuban proposal on strengthening the role of the Organization. It was essential, however, to detach those elements of the proposal that were under discussion in the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the Security Council. The proposal of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was a commendable approach to strengthening the role of the General Assembly in the maintenance of international peace and security. The Committee could continue to reflect on the issue at its next session. 36. With regard to the peaceful settlement of disputes between States, the Special Committee had been discussing the proposal submitted by Sierra Leone, entitled “Establishment of a Dispute Prevention and Early Settlement Service”. His delegation believed, however, that the service should not be manned by gratis personnel. Indeed, the General Assembly had decided to phase out all gratis personnel by February 1999. 37. The Special Committee was seized of two proposals regarding the International Court of Justice: one concerned the impact of the increase in the number of cases considered on the work of the Court and the other related to extending the Court’s competence to disputes between States and international organizations. The Court had submitted comments and observations on the first issue, which would be useful in dealing with the two proposals. The difficulties caused by the budgetary constraints faced by the Court should be emphasized. It was essential that it should have sufficient financial and logistical support to carry out its work. 38. With regard to the Secretary-General’s report on the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council (A/53/386), the Secretariat should arrange for the placement of the documents on the World Wide Web, so that the growing number of individuals with access to it could benefit from them. 39. The Special Committee had once again noted conflicting views concerning the Trusteeship Council. His delegation believed that the Council should continue to function as one of the six principal organs of the United Nations. The General Assembly might hold detailed discussions to specify clearly the areas of the Council’s activities in the future, in conformity with the principles established in the Charter of the United Nations. 40. Mr. Smejkal (Czech Republic) said that he need not discuss certain issues covered the previous week by the Austrian delegation, speaking on behalf of the European Union, namely the implementation of provisions of the Charter related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions, the consequences that the increase in the volume of cases before the International Court of Justice had on the operation of the Court or the progress report on the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council. His delegation was among those which had aligned themselves with the positions set forth by the Austrian delegation on behalf of the European Union. 41. With regard to the peaceful settlement of disputes between States, his delegation had appreciated the frankness of the discussions following the submission of the proposal on the establishment of a dispute prevention and early settlement service. Unfortunately, the Working Group of the Whole had not made much progress with the consideration of the text itself, although the draft had been on the Special Committee’s agenda for several years and its members ought to be familiar enough with the main ideas put forward. Moreover, at previous sessions some delegations, including his own, had expressed doubts concerning its applicability, whether administratively, financially or otherwise. At the current session the Special Committee had wanted to press on with consideration of the draft. The proposed mechanism was indeed interesting and innovative, but it would be preferable to restructure the text of the proposal in the form of a draft legal instrument which could be submitted to the Special Committee. 42. With regard to the working methods and role of the Special Committee, his delegation was among those which had believed, two or three years earlier, that the time had come to reflect on how to reorganize the Special Committee’s work so that it could be better integrated into the Organization’s reform process. Although by no means negligible, the obstacles had not seemed insurmountable. With the passage of several years, his delegation had considerably more reservations in that regard, particularly since the Open-ended High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of the United Nations System which could have worked with the Special Committee had been disbanded. In other areas relating to reform of the Organization, it was far less realistic to count on the constructive participation of the Special Committee, particularly in relation to anything concerned with the Security Council, given the political dimension of the problems addressed by the Council. Other proposals regarding the maintenance of international peace and security submitted to the Special Committee provided food for thought and could give rise to interesting discussions, but his delegation felt that a body such as the Special Committee should undertake work that could produce practical results. 43. The work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations had also already been examined in other United Nations bodies and the resulting duplication was, to say the least, regrettable. The same went for the current debate on the Trusteeship Council. His delegation could only reiterate its view that there was no need to come to any hasty decisions on either issue. It was true that the Council was not currently engaged in any activities, but that situation could change. Moreover, it would be impractical to establish a new body with responsibility for the common heritage of mankind, given that other bodies were already active in the field. 44. His delegation thought that any consideration of the Special Committee’s methods of work should begin with a study of ways and means of bringing its agenda up to date. The Special Committee itself was best placed to carry out such a task. The Special Committee should also hold slightly shorter sessions, thereby giving a new impetus to its work and refocusing it on issues on which its efforts could lead to specific results in the short term and to which it should therefore give priority. Paragraphs 160–165 of the Special Committee’s report contained some interesting reflections on the matter. His delegation was wholly in favour of pursuing the course of action there outlined. 45. Mr. Haryono (Indonesia), referring to the implementation of provisions of the Charter related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions, said that the Non-Aligned Movement considered the imposition of sanctions a matter of serious concern which should be considered only after all means of pacific settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations had been exhausted and a thorough consideration undertaken of the long- and short-term effects of such sanctions. Since the application of sanctions had increased considerably in recent times, it was important that the potential impact on a targeted country, as well as the time-frame, clearly defined objectives, the humanitarian aspects and special provisions to minimize the collateral damage suffered by third States should be clarified beforehand. It was clear from the provisions of Article 50 of the Charter that concrete steps should be taken to alleviate the hardship of third States adversely affected by sanctions. It was in that context that the Non-Aligned Movement had underscored the need to put Article 50 into effect, particularly by establishing a mechanism, including a fund, to provide relief to third countries affected by sanctions. 46. The Secretary-General’s report on the topic (A/53/312) had touched upon some interesting proposals arising from the meeting of the expert group, particularly the development of a methodology for assessing the impact on third States of the imposition of sanctions and the exploration of innovative and practical measures of international assistance. The proposal to draw up a tentative list of potential effects of sanctions also had considerable merit, provided that it contained all the relevant facts concerning the effect of sanctions on the third State. At the same time, before the decision to impose sanctions was made, the Secretary-General should submit an assessment of their potential impact on third States. An appraisal by the Security Council, including prior studies of the economies to be affected, would also be helpful, together with a consideration of the concerns of third States most likely to be affected. In order to facilitate technical assistance to States invoking Article 50, the preparation by the Secretariat of materials attached to requests seeking consultations with the Security Council would be useful. So too would be the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the most serious cases. The establishment by such a Special Representative of an inter-agency arrangement or task force consisting of various sub-groups would assist in alleviating the negative impact of sanctions in the economic, trade and financial areas. Fact-finding missions, with the consent of the States concerned, would be important in evaluating the full range of adverse effects and economic damage suffered by third States. 47. The working paper submitted by the Russian Federation, entitled “Some ideas on the basic conditions and criteria for imposing and implementing sanctions and other enforcement measures” (A/AC.182/L.94) constituted yet another basis for further deliberations. The working paper entitled “Basic conditions and criteria for the introduction of sanctions and other coercive measures and their implementation” (A/AC.182/L.100) offered further guidance on the imposition, implementation and lifting of sanctions. 48. His delegation viewed the working paper entitled “Fundamentals of the legal basis for United Nations peacekeeping operations in the context of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations”, submitted by the Russian Federation, as a timely initiative aimed at providing a legal framework for the peacekeeping activities of the Organization (A/AC.182/L.89/Add.2 and Corr.1). It was particularly appropriate, since peacekeeping operations, though declining in numbers, had vastly expanded in scope. Furthermore, the working paper contained some of the basic principles for the implementation of peacekeeping activities, including impartiality, non-interference in the internal affairs of the parties to the conflict, consent, and non-use of force. Those principles had also been enunciated in the final document adopted by the Eleventh Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Cairo in 1994, and remained as true as they had been then. 49. His delegation had taken note of the revised working paper submitted by Cuba at the 1997 session of the Special Committee, entitled “Strengthening the role of the Organization and enhancing its effectiveness”, and of the additional working paper before the current session under the same title (A/AC.182/L.93 and Add.1), which contained some interesting ideas about the reform of the United Nations, especially its legal aspects. The working papers could make a valuable contribution to the ongoing endeavours in other United Nations forums. The issue of reform and revitalization of the General Assembly and the Security Council, particularly the legal elements, fell within the mandate of the Special Committee, whose endeavours complemented the work of other bodies and thereby ensured the effective functioning of United Nations organs. 50. His delegation had also noted the revised proposal submitted by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with a view to strengthening the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security (A/AC.182/L.99), elements of which merited further consideration. 51. The strengthening of the General Assembly was particularly important in view of the challenges of the next millennium. Equally crucial was the reform of the Security Council so as to reflect contemporary realities and to accommodate the interests and concerns of the developing nations which comprised the overwhelming majority of the Organization. 52. The recommendation by the Special Committee that its future sessions should be scheduled in the middle of the year was practical, since it would give Member States more time to consider the report of the Sixth Committee and other relevant reports. 53. The Chairman said he had taken note of the proposal that a Sixth Committee working group should be established on Article 50 of the Charter relating to the effects of sanctions on third States. In addition, the delegation of Ukraine had put a question to which he invited the Secretary of the Committee to reply. 54. Mr. Lee (Secretary of the Committee) recalled that the Ukrainian delegation had asked the Secretariat why various documents, including the report of the Special Committee, had not been distributed earlier. He explained that documents were sent to the Documents Control Section and their processing (editing, translation, printing and distribution) took a certain amount of time. The Section received documents from all Secretariat departments and could not always distribute them in the order in which they had been sent. What it tried to do was to send them out to coincide with the order of meetings. The Committee secretariat had asked the Section to give priority to documents to which delegations needed to give the most urgent attention. The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m. 