%%%MINORITIES|HUMAN RIGHTS|DECLARATIONS|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|QUESTIONNAIRES|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. Original: COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights Fifty-eighth session Working Group on Minorities Twelfth session Item 3 (a) of the provisional agenda REVIEWING THE PROMOTION AND PRACTICAL REALIZATION OF THE DECLARATION ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS BELONGING TO NATIONAL OR ETHNIC, RELIGIOUS AND LINGUISTIC MINORITIES Note by the Secretariat 1. The Working Group on Minorities at its eleventh session, held in Geneva from 30 May to 3 June 2005, recommended that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) continue to organize the Minority Fellowship Programme and to prepare the Minority Profile and Matrix. 2. The 2006 Spring Minority Fellowship Programme organized by OHCHR was held from 13 February to 28 April 2006 in Geneva. Part of the work programme of the Fellows was the continued preparation of the Minority Profile and Matrix. The Minority Profile and Matrix as completed under the 2006 Minority Fellowship Programme is attached to this note. MINORITY PROFILE AND MATRIX As at 14 June 2006 MINORITY PROFILE AND MATRIX ON THE hUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION OF MINORITIES The Minority Profile and the Matrix on the human rights situation of minorities are an outcome of the first Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) Minority Fellowship Programme, which took place in Geneva from March to June 2005. Five Minority Fellows from North and Southern Africa, South Asia, the Middle East and Eastern Europe participated in three months of training and benefited from work experience with staff of the OHCHR. The Minority Fellows of 2006 within their programme of work with OHCHR continued to refine the Profile and Matrix with a view to its submission as a document to the Working Group on Minorities' twelfth session. The idea of the Profile and Matrix arose from the need identified by the Minority Fellows to understand better the contents and scope of the United Nations' Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities (abbreviated to United Nations Minorities Declaration), the Commentary on the United Nations Minorities Declaration and other international standards and jurisprudence relating to minorities. The Millennium Declaration stated that States resolved "to strengthen the capacity of all our countries to implement the principles and practices of democracy and respect for human rights, including minority rights" (para. 25). This reaffirms that minority rights as contained in international standards provide for the right to effective participation for persons belonging to minorities and for their inclusion, as well as their protection against forced assimilation and exclusion. The World Summit Outcome document noted that "the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities contribute to political and social stability and peace and enrich the cultural diversity and heritage of society" (para. 130). This affirms again that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities can contribute to the promotion of cultural diversity and heritage and to a reduction of conflict and poverty. There is no universally accepted legal definition of "minority". The approach taken, based on existing standards and jurisprudence, is that the existence of an ethnic, religious or linguistic group in a given State does not depend upon a decision by that State but needs to be established by objective criteria. The established practice of human rights mechanisms and bodies has been to recognize groups with a distinct culture, religion or language, which are in a non-dominant position economically, socially and/or politically, and which wish to maintain their distinct identity and identify themselves as a minority (self-identification). As well, persons belonging to minorities need not be citizens of the State in which they live. The Profile and Matrix that are contained in the pages which follow are aimed at: Understanding the contents of the provisions of the United Nations Minorities Declaration; Indicating current legislation, policies and practices; Identification of avenues for data collection, its analysis and application for the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities; Making suggestions on how situations could be improved, including through adoption of legislative and other measures; Developing a checklist on human rights challenges affecting minorities; Identifying trends and situations which could fuel conflict or violence; Developing a common language for sharing information and good practices; and Contributing to the work of international human rights mechanisms. One of the purposes of the Minorities Profile and Matrix is to better understand the provisions of the United Nations Minorities Declaration and other international human rights standards relating to the rights of persons belonging to minorities. It may be noted, in that regard, that the United Nations Minorities Declaration refers to a number of sources of law including the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the 1981 Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion and Belief and other international human rights standards, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. The United Nations Minorities Declaration has a number of purposes and lays down some main principles as well as the rights of claim-holders and the responsibilities of dutybearers. These are stated on the following page. It should be noted that the right to participate is repeatedly referred to in the United Nations Minorities Declaration. The rights of persons belonging to minorities are mainly contained in articles 2 and 3 of the Declaration and the duties of States are mainly contained in articles 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the Declaration. Main principles and provisions include: Protection of the existence of national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities (art. 1.1); Protection and promotion of the identity of minorities (art. 1); Non-discrimination and equality (arts. 2.1, 3, 4.1 and 8.3); Right to participate effectively in cultural life and right to enjoy their own culture (arts. 2.1, 2.2 and 4.2); Right to profess and practise religion and effectively participate in religious life (arts. 2.1, 2.2 and 4.2); Right to use one's own language and provision of instruction in mother tongue (arts. 2.2, 4.2 and 4.3); Contents of education (human rights education, intercultural, interfaith/religious education, dialogue and understanding) (art. 4.4); Right to participate effectively in public life (art. 2.2); Right to participate effectively in social and economic life and participate in development and economic progress (arts. 2.2 and 4.5); Right to participate in decisions concerning the minority within the country, including through policymaking and programming (arts. 2.3 and 5); Right to establish and maintain associations (art. 2.4); Right to establish and maintain peaceful contacts, including across borders (art. 2.5); Cooperation with and between States (arts. 5.2, 6 and 7); and Cooperation with the United Nations (art. 9). The Matrix provides an indication as to the information that may be submitted with respect to the different principles, rights, duties and purposes of the United Nations Minorities Declaration. The completion of this Matrix should not only provide an overall picture of the prevailing situation, but also draw attention, through the use of bold lettering or capital letters to the PRIORITY issues of concern and suggestions for addressing them. The Profile and Matrix may also be used by minorities to present information to their own Governments, national human rights institutions and regional organizations. The information contained in these tools may also be a useful source for assisting Governments in It would be important for the Profile to identify and reflect the dynamics and different views within each minority and for the Matrix to provide, as far as possible, a spectrum of views held within the minority, the priority concerns and suggestions for solving them. The different organizations representing a minority are encouraged to complete this information jointly, with the aim of agreeing on common ground for their completion. Please note that it is important to provide information on the different situation affecting women and men and children (girls and boys) belonging to minorities. PLEASE NOTE THAT, WHEN COMPLETING THE PROFILE AND MATRIX, ALL INFORMATION INCLUDED NEEDS TO BE BACKED UP WITH DOCUMENTED SOURCES. PLEASE READ THE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE COMPLETING THE PROFILE AND MATRIX. MINORITY PROFILE Please fill in the details below: Name of the organization(s): Address: State/Country: Tel.: Fax: E-mail: Website: Please fill in information, where possible, in the table below. What do the different columns in the Profile mean and how do you fill in information in the table? A. In the first column in the Profile, please complete with official information and data that the Government and authorities of your country provide on minorities, including in reports submitted to the international human rights treaty bodies and procedures. B. The second column of the Profile may be completed with information obtained from other sources such as national human rights institutions, the United Nations in the country and international non-governmental organizations, etc. Please ensure that the exact source of information is indicated. C. Any further information of relevance, such as different views existing within the minority (e.g. on the issue of identity, main claims, examples of best practices, suggestions for solutions to problems or specific issues), should be introduced in the third column of the Profile. Note: Please indicate the sources of information (for example, Office for Federal Statistics, and the publication where the information is available, the exact title of legislation and the location of electronic sources of such information). If there is no information available on an issue, you may wish to indicate this point. Field: x A - Government sources: B - Other sources (e.g. NHRI, UN human rights system, UN organizations, regional organizations, NGOs): C - Further information, such as different views existing within the minority: Name of the minority Name of the State/country in which the minority is to be found Is this minority living in different countries? If so, please name them. Type of minority: National Ethnic Religious Linguistic Population number: In the whole country Of the minority Of the various minorities in the country Languages: Languages spoken in the country: Official language(s) of the country: Self-identification (for example, does the group refer to itself as a minority, and/or indigenous people, as Afro-descendants, etc.?) Recognized minority (please give details of legislative or other source) Unrecognized minority (have there been requests made for official recognition?) Citizenship situation of the minority persons: Are they citizens? Are they non-citizens? (In some instances a minority may be concentrated territorially or dispersed or both - it may be more represented in rural areas or persons have moved from traditional areas to urban areas. Please indicate the situation for the minority.) Dispersed Concentrated Urban Rural Is the minority one within: The country as a whole? A region of the country? Organizations and networking Name the main organizations representing the views within the minority. Please provide contact details. Which organizations work on women's issues within the minority? Please provide contact details. Has a network or an organization been created to work on children's issues within the minority? Please provide names and contact details. MINORITY MATRIX - MATRIX ON THE HUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION OF MINORITIES Information provided by: Organization: Country: What do the different columns mean and how do you fill in information in the table? 1. The first column of the Matrix indicates the relevant provision of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities. 2. The second column of the Matrix provides an indication of the information you may wish to submit. It is there to provide guidance. Please do not insert any information in this column. 3. The third column of the Matrix is entitled "Existing situation: for example, legislative and other measures taken". In this column please provide disaggregated information, where this is available, and information on the actual legislation as it applies to minorities, its application in practice, its impact, including on the situation of persons belonging to minorities in comparison with other sectors of the population as well as the different situation affecting women and men and children belonging to minorities or evidence of discrimination and inequality in different areas of life. Information may be obtained from different sources such as Governments, non-governmental organizations, national institutions or from the United Nations. Please indicate the source. In certain instances it may be sufficient to answer simply yes, no or not applicable. 4. The fourth column of the Matrix is entitled "Proposed solutions and remedies". In this column please enter suggestions on how problems could be solved, steps to be taken to improve the situation or examples of good practice in addressing the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities. When indicating the sources of information, please give, where possible, details of the exact publication or the website address where such information is available. It would be helpful if it were indicated when there was no information available on an issue. 1. Text of the provision of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities. 2. Checklist of possible information to be completed in relation to the situation of the minority. 3. Existing situation: for example, the legislative and other measures taken and their implementation in practice. Please indicate the different situation affecting men, women and children belonging to the minority. Please indicate sources of information. 4. Proposed solutions and remedies. Please indicate sources of information. Protection of the existence of the minority within the territory of the State [UNMD, art. 1] Article 1 1. States shall protect the existence and the national or ethnic, cultural, religious and linguistic identity of minorities within their respective territories and shall encourage conditions for the promotion of that identity. 2. States shall adopt appropriate legislative and other measures to achieve those ends. Have there been cases dealt with by courts or complaints brought to the attention of United Nations human rights special procedures or treaty bodies in relation to persons belonging to the minority and: The right to life (Special Rapporteur on summary, arbitrary and extrajudicial executions); Freedom from torture; Arbitrary detention; Violence against women; Internal displacement; Violence against children? Please provide information on any investigations undertaken by the national authorities and/or courts or reports prepared by international bodies or NGOs into violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons belonging to the minority. Have the cases of human rights violations against persons belonging to the minority been dealt with at the highest level of the courts and have the persons deemed responsible for human rights violations of persons belonging to minorities been held accountable? Have there been changes to the demography of the area where the minority has traditionally lived and what has been the impact of this? Please indicate the number of persons seeking or having received refugee status belonging to the minority (UNHCR and government sources). Do landmines pose a danger to persons belonging to the minority in the country, inhibiting their freedom of movement and economic activity? Does the trafficking in small arms pose a danger to the right to life of persons belonging to the minority? Please explain. Protection and promotion of the identity of national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities [UNMD, art. 1] 1. States shall protect the existence and the national or ethnic, cultural, religious and linguistic identity of minorities within their respective territories and shall encourage conditions for the promotion of that identity. Is the diversity of the population within the country celebrated in legislation and policies? What measures are in place to protect against the minority's identity being denied by others and/or a different identity being applied to or forced on the minority by others? Do political and other leaders express positive attitudes towards the minority's identity and towards cultural pluralism within the country? What measures are in place to protect against restrictions to freedom of movement within the country of persons belonging to the minority and to prevent this from being based upon the provision of identity cards or registration papers or work permits? Non-discrimination and equality before the law, special measures of protection [UNMD, arts. 2.1, 3, 4.1 and 8.3] Article 2 1. Persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities (hereinafter referred to as persons belonging to minorities) have the right to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practise their own religion, and to use their own language, in private and in public, freely and without interference or any form of discrimination. Article 3 1. Persons belonging to minorities may exercise their rights, including those set forth in the present Declaration, individually as well as in community with other members of their group, without any discrimination. 2. No disadvantage shall result for any person belonging to a minority as the consequence of the exercise or non-exercise of the rights set forth in the present Declaration. Article 4 1. States shall take measures where required to ensure that persons belonging to minorities may exercise fully and effectively all their human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination and in full equality before the law. Article 8 3. Measures taken by States to ensure the effective enjoyment of the rights set forth in the present Declaration shall not prima facie be considered contrary to the principle of equality contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Please provide details or indicate where information may be obtained on the legislative framework and institutions existing to prevent racial discrimination and provide recourse to victims of discrimination, and of recent measures taken to implement the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. Have persons belonging to the minority submitted information and complaints to the Special Rapporteur against racism or to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD)? Do conclusions and recommendations refer to the rights of persons belonging to the minority? What actions have been taken to follow-up on these suggestions? Has the minority submitted information to the Committee for the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women and/or the Committee on the Rights of the Child in relation to non-discrimination and the situation of women or children belonging to the minority? If yes, please indicate the action taken to follow-up on those suggestions. Has the Government made provision for the application of temporary special measures to promote equality of opportunity and achieve equality, such as affirmative action for persons belonging to the minority? What are the effects of such policies on the situation of persons belonging to the minority? Are there recent governmental reports, or intergovernmental or independent reports commissioned by the Government monitoring discrimination on ethnic, linguistic or religious grounds? If yes, indicate the main points, including suggestions or recommendations. Where disaggregated data (on racial grounds) and other relevant information is collected, how is it used for developing policy and what safeguards are in place to protect personal data protection? Has the Government encouraged the establishment of multiracial organizations and movements to eliminate barriers between races as well as to discourage racial division? And, how has it done so? Is the minority particularly affected by contemporary forms of slavery such as debt bondage, trafficking, sexual exploitation, etc.? Are corruption and control of elements of the economy by organized crime problems in the country that affect persons belonging to the minority? What measures have been taken to ensure that agencies of the criminal justice system, including the law enforcement agencies, are representative of and responsive and accountable to the community as a whole, including with respect to persons belonging to the minority? What percentage of the population in prison or detention belongs to the minority? What percentage of the detention or imprisonment of persons belonging to the minority is for violent as opposed to non-violent crimes? Where relevant, what measures have been taken to reduce the statelessness of persons belonging to the minority? What particular measures are in place and how are they implemented in practice to ensure that persons belonging to the minority may exercise their rights (including through asserting their identity, language and culture) individually and with other members of the group, without any discrimination? What measures are in place to ensure that no disadvantage shall result for any person belonging to the minority as a consequence of the exercise or non-exercise of minority rights? For example, what particular steps have been taken to protect against the State imposing a particular identity on a given person and for ensuring that a minority does not impose particular rules on any persons who do not want to be part of the concerned minority? Right of persons belonging to minorities to participate effectively in cultural life [UNMD, art. 2.2] and the right to enjoy their own culture [UNMD, art. 2.1] and States shall take measures to enable persons belonging to minorities to develop their culture, traditions and customs, except where specific practices are in violation of national law and contrary to international standards [UNMD, art. 4.2] 1. Persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities (hereinafter referred to as persons belonging to minorities) have the right to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practise their own religion, and to use their own language, in private and in public, freely and without interference or any form of discrimination. 2. Persons belonging to minorities have the right to participate effectively in cultural, religious, social, economic and public life. 2. States shall take measures to create favourable conditions to enable persons belonging to minorities to express their characteristics and to develop their culture, language, religion, traditions and customs, except where specific practices are in violation of national law and contrary to international standards. What measures are in place to ensure that persons belonging to the minority have the right to wear traditional dress/costume? What measures are in place to ensure that persons belonging to the minority have the right to organize and hold their traditional festivals? What measures are in place to ensure that persons belonging to the minority have their traditional holidays recognized? What measures are in place to ensure that persons belonging to the minority have their cultural symbols recognized? What measures have been taken to protect the minority's cultural symbols, buildings, books, etc.? Have there been incidents of the destruction of the minority's cultural symbols heritage or buildings? What measures have been taken to address such incidents? What measures are in place to ensure that persons belonging to the minority have their history recognized and what opportunities are there for passing on the minority's history and culture? Is the minority's history and culture traditionally passed on through oral or written form? What measures are in place to recognize the minority's traditional and community leaders and elders? Does the minority use traditional alternative dispute resolution mechanisms? Are they recognized by persons belonging to the minority, by others and the State? What further measures, if any, are in place to ensure that persons belonging to the minority have their traditions, customs and rituals recognized (exception being if they are contrary to national law and international human rights standards)? Is denial of access to and ownership of land and resources an issue affecting the minority and its culture? What percentage of the minority is landless? Have there been specific and reported instances of expropriation of land and resources of the minority or of persons belonging to the minority? What public resources are made available to support the minority's cultural activities? Have there been any cases concerning the misuse or misinterpretation of particular aspects of the minority culture by third persons? What are the measures being taken to raise public awareness and understanding about the minority's culture? Does the Government support consultative/advisory cultural bodies being established (e.g. to advise on policy, the implementation and monitoring of programmes and on the distribution of resources provided for promotion of your minority's culture, etc.)? Right of persons belonging to minorities to profess and practise their religion [UNMD, arts. 2.1 and 2.2] and States shall take measures to enable persons belonging to minorities to develop their religion, traditions and customs, except where specific practices are in violation of national law and contrary to international standards [UNMD, art. 4.2] Have there been cases dealt with by courts or complaints brought to the attention of United Nations human rights treaty bodies or special procedures, in particular the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, with respect to the rights of persons belonging to religious minorities? (See in particular "framework for communications" contained in the annex to the report of the SR on freedom of religion E/CN.4/2006/5 as well as the ODIHR Guidelines for the review of legislation on religion and belief.) Is there recognition and respect for the right to profess and practise religion without discrimination and interference from the State or others? Do guarantees exist for this? Are there any limitations or restrictions placed on the right to manifest one's religion or belief? Is there freedom to adopt, change or renounce a religion or belief? How is freedom to adopt, change or renounce a religion or belief recognized and respected in law and practice? What measures are in place to ensure freedom to worship or assembly in connection with a religion or belief? Is social pressure or forced conversion an issue affecting your minority? If yes, how is the Government addressing this? What measures are in place to protect holy places, including for their non-desecration? Is there government and authorities' support for the repair and maintenance of religious buildings? Is such support subject to any restrictions? Is there recognition of religious minorities' holidays by the State? Are they recognized as public holidays? Is there recognition and protection of the right to hold religious ceremonies? What is the procedure for the appointment of religious leaders, priests and teachers, for those belonging to religious minorities? Do people belonging to religious minorities have the right to effectively participate in and be represented on religious advisory bodies? Where such advisory bodies exist, to whom do they provide counsel? Does the Government encourage interfaith and inter-religious dialogue at all levels? How does it do so? Where communal and sectarian issues exist, how does the Government address such matters? Where religious education is a subject of the curriculum, what measures are in place, if any, to promote interfaith and inter-religious understanding and dialogue? Is provision made for the allocation of land or resources for establishing or maintaining burial places for persons belonging to religious minorities? Is there a requirement to indicate religious affiliation in identity cards? Do criteria exist for establishing new religious buildings and are they agreed to in consultation with minority religious representatives or institutions? In that regard, are the following issues of importance for the minority: keeping a geographical distance between different religious buildings or maintaining a distance between existing religious buildings and the establishment of a new religious building? What measures are in place to protect persons belonging to minorities from abuse committed in the name of religion (where such practices are in conflict with national law and international human rights standards)? Does the Constitution or other national legislation declare the State to be secular? Does the Constitution officially recognize a religion or religions? Is there a requirement that the Head of State or other public officials belong to a certain religion? Rights of persons belonging to minorities to use their own language in private and in public [UNMD, art. 2.1]. States shall take measures to enable persons belonging to minorities to develop their language [UNMD, art. 4.2] and have adequate opportunities to learn their mother tongue or to have instruction in their mother tongue [UNMD, art. 4.3] 2. States shall take measures to create favourable conditions to enable persons belonging to minorities to express their characteristics and to develop their culture, language, religion, traditions and customs, except where specific practices are in violation of national law and contrary to international standards. 3. States should take appropriate measures so that, wherever possible, persons belonging to minorities may have adequate opportunities to learn their mother tongue or to have instruction in their mother tongue. What measures are in place for the provision of mother tongue education in school, especially in primary education, and also for adult education with respect to persons belonging to the minority? Is a bilingual or multilingual policy advocated by the State? Does its implementation promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to the minority? Where such information is collected, what percentage of the persons belonging to the minority study in higher educational institutions? Is the minority language a subject taught in the higher educational institutes or are subjects taught in the minority language in such institutions? What other opportunities exist for persons belonging to minorities to learn their mother tongue? Please indicate the situation regarding the provision of compulsory and free education at the primary level, especially in the mother tongue of the minority at first/primary levels. Have particular measures been taken to ensure the provision of sufficient resources for the education of children belonging to minorities, including in areas where minority children are living close together? For example, through the setting up of schools in remote rural areas and in urban areas inhabited by minorities, and for ensuring the availability and quality of teachers, books and other materials? Are social services affordable and accessible to persons belonging to minorities? For example, are there any additional costs associated with the provision of education, such as the payment of school fees, registration fees, purchase of textbooks? Where minorities are concentrated territorially, is disaggregated data available on the number of qualified teachers in these areas, and what measures are in place for the training of teachers from the minority? Please provide information, if this is available, on equal access to educational institutions and the level of school drop-out affecting persons belonging to the minority. What public resources are provided for persons belonging to minorities for instruction in the mother tongue? Where the need exists, what measures have been taken to provide education appropriate for the minority's culture? For example, where the minority culture is nomadic, is there provision for mobile education? In those situations where minorities are living compactly within a given area, are there measures in place for signs and place names to be given in the minority language? Is it possible to choose minority-language names on birth-registration and other registration forms or passports? Has support been given, if necessary, for the development of the script and grammar of the minority's language? What measures are in place for the minority language's recognition and use before public and judicial authorities and in their proceedings? What media broadcast in minority languages? Are particular efforts made to produce educational and outreach programmes in minority languages through appropriate media such as radio, video and print material? What measures are in place for persons belonging to minorities being employed/represented in the media (both government and privately owned media)? Have cases been dealt with by courts or complaints brought to the attention of United Nations human rights treaty bodies or special procedures, particularly in relation to freedom of opinion and expression, including with respect to the negative stereotyping of persons belonging to the minority in the media? Have measures been taken to establish particular institutions/mechanisms to monitor the implementation of the rights of persons belonging to linguistic minorities? Have reports or studies been undertaken to assess their effectiveness, independence and accessibility and the remedies that have been provided in the case of violations of the rights of persons belonging to linguistic minorities? Content of education [UNMD, art. 4.4] 4. States should, where appropriate, take measures in the field of education, in order to encourage knowledge of the history, traditions, language and culture of the minorities existing within their territory. Persons belonging to minorities should have adequate opportunities to gain knowledge of the society as a whole. What measures have been taken, if any, to establish consultative bodies comprised of representatives of minorities to advise on the choice and production of teaching material, and the content of curricula, particularly the history curriculum in primary and secondary schools? What measures, if any, have been taken to teach both the minority and majority culture, history, language and the positive contribution of each, including through human rights education? Have there been documents that have reported that textbooks stigmatize the minority's culture or perpetuate discrimination against the minority, or is this not an issue for the minority? Do educational materials on the history and contribution of minority groups provide examples of positive female role models? Is human rights education a compulsory subject and is it taught in a manner respecting human rights principles and fundamental freedoms: non-discrimination, identity, effective participation, tolerance and pluralism? Right of persons belonging to minorities to participate effectively in public life [UNMD, art. 2.2] Where persons belonging to the minority do not have the citizenship of the country in which they live, how does this affect their right to participate effectively in public life? Lund Recommendations. International IDEA. What measures have been taken to facilitate the effective representation in public life and service for persons belonging to the minority? For example, is affirmative action (through a system of quotas or reserved seats) in place? Where studies have been undertaken on the effectiveness of any affirmative action policies, please provide details. Please give a further breakdown as to the situation affecting men and women belonging to the minority. Have voting systems been designed to achieve proportional representation of the population as a whole? Have electoral boundaries or electoral districts been drawn in a way to ensure that members of minorities have a good chance of election? Are measures in place to encourage persons belonging to minorities to stand for election? For example, are there formal or informal rules for the inclusion of members of minorities as candidates for major political parties? What measures are in place to ensure that minority identity is not exploited for political or other purposes in contravention of international human rights norms? Do autonomy arrangements exist for the minority? Are they territorial or functional? Where territorial autonomy exists, what measures are in place to ensure the representation of persons belonging to other minorities in those regions or areas? Which powers are conferred on autonomous areas? What resources are available for implementing their mandate, e.g. is it sufficient for the provision of services? Where decentralized forms of government and administration exist, which powers do the local authorities have and what measures are in place for the provision of sufficient resources for the effective fulfilment of their mandates? To what extent is there representation of persons belonging to minorities in decentralized forms of government (though election or appointments) e.g. in local councils and the administration? How is it ensured that persons belonging to minorities are involved and/or agree to decisions affecting them at the local level? What is the level of representation of persons belonging to minorities as ministers of State, in the civil service and in the police and armed forces, including at the higher levels, as well as the appointment of persons belonging to minorities as judges? Are there advisory or consultative bodies composed of the minority's representatives to influence government decisions and policies on matters affecting them? Do the minority's representatives in the advisory bodies have to be nominated or elected by the minorities? Are any other measures in place to improve the accessibility and approachability of advisory or other bodies - e.g. through holding meetings in regions or areas where minorities reside? Have any other particular measures been put in place to have consultations with, promote the mutual acceptance of or the agreement of minorities regarding decisions affecting them? Have there been reports that the interpretation and translation into minority languages is an issue for ensuring the full and fair participation of persons belonging to minorities in public life? What is the cost of standing for election? What percentage of the cost is covered by the political party? Have there been instances where persons belonging to minorities have claimed that the costs are prohibitive for members of their group to stand for election? Have surveys and other polls been undertaken and published on the public perception of the reasons for those who stand for election (i.e. providing a service to a community or for personal gain)? Right of persons belonging to minorities to participate effectively in social life [UNMD, art. 2.2] What is the standard of living of persons belonging to minorities? Is data collected and analysed in relation to national poverty measures and a comparison of the average with the situation of persons belonging to the minority? Does the right to social security exist? Are there any conditions attached to exercising this right that discriminate against persons belonging to minorities? Are persons belonging to minorities more in need of such benefits than other sectors of the population? Where such data is collected and analysed, what are the average levels of unemployment and underemployment within the country, and how do they compare to the situation of persons belonging to the minority? Is unemployment and underemployment a particular issue for young men and women belonging to the minority and what are the consequences of this? Is the infrastructure in place for provision of social services, e.g. roads, pipes, cables, electricity and communication facilities in areas traditionally inhabited by persons belonging to the minority? What measures are in place to ensure that medical services are affordable and accessible to minorities? Are there particular costs associated with medical care, such as fees for access to medical staff, prescription drugs, hospital care? If so, please provide details. What is the health situation of persons belonging to the minority and how does it compare to the average with respect to: persons affected by HIV/AIDS and other diseases and illness; infant mortality rate; maternal mortality rate; life expectancy rate; birth rate; ratio of doctors and health workers to population; drug abuse. What measures are taken to ensure that health facilities, goods and services are within safe physical reach in the areas where the persons belonging to the minority live? What public programmes exist for disseminating health information, particularly in minority languages, including through use of the mass media, such as radio? What measures are in place for the provision of health care that is culturally appropriate, including through the services of minority health workers? Do special programmes exist for training more persons belonging to minorities as health workers? Are health services community-based, planned and administered in cooperation with minority concerns and culture, taking into account their traditional health practices and medicine? What is the situation of persons belonging to the minority as regards access to and supply and quality of water? Where such information is available, what is the average distance to a water point in comparison to that for persons belonging to the minority? How are persons belonging to the minority able to influence decisions on policy and resource allocation in the field of health, as well as contribute to the measurement of improvements and build on further recommendations in this field? Right of persons belonging to minorities to participate effectively in economic life [UNMD, art. 2.2] and States should consider measures for minorities' full participation in the economic progress and development of their country [UNMD, art. 4.5] 5. States should consider appropriate measures so that persons belonging to minorities may participate fully in the economic progress and development in their country. Are microcredit schemes available and what is the situation of persons belonging to minorities as regards access to and benefiting from such schemes? What is the situation of minorities as regards assistance for setting up businesses and what is the level of self-employment within the minority? Are development organizations set up by the minority? What measures are in place to allow them and other NGOs to operate effectively in the field of development? What is the situation of persons belonging to the minority vis-à-vis other sectors of the population as regards their employment in the private sector? Does affirmative action exist or has it been considered for improving the level of the minority's employment in the private sector? Have any studies been undertaken on the effects of such measures? If so, please provide details. What measures are in place to ensure the right of persons belonging to the minority to freely choose their occupation? In practice are there any restrictions on the choice of occupation or employment for persons belonging to particular minorities? Is there an effort made by the State to increase the value and public perception of certain occupations, where there might be a social stigma associated with such occupations and where this situation affects persons belonging to the minority? Indicate the main ways in which persons belonging to the minority participate in economic life and its links to the minority's culture and indicate whether rights to property/land, the demarcation of land, sharing in revenues/benefits from natural resource extraction or development projects are issues for the minority. What measures are in place to provide for adequate and affordable housing for persons belonging to the minority, and to protect against forced evictions? Right of persons belonging to minorities to participate effectively in decisions concerning the minority [UNMD, art. 2.3] and national policies and programmes shall be planned and implemented with due regard for the legitimate interests of persons belonging to minorities [UNMD, art. 5.1] 3. Persons belonging to minorities have the right to participate effectively in decisions on the national and, where appropriate, regional level concerning the minority to which they belong or the regions in which they live, in a manner not incompatible with national legislation. Article 5 1. National policies and programmes shall be planned and implemented with due regard for the legitimate interests of persons belonging to minorities. What legislative measures and administrative regulations are in place to ensure that minorities can participate effectively in decisions concerning them and in national policies and planning? What other measures, if any, are in place to consult the minority in decision-making, policymaking and programming? Is there a particular governmental office that deals with minority issues in planning and programming? Is the agreement of persons belonging to the minority required where policy and programming decisions affect them? Have objective, independent, up-to-date, expert report/assessments been undertaken to assess the situation of the minority as to their legitimate interests being taken into account in national policy and planning? Are impact assessments undertaken to consider the effect of development planning on the situation of the minority? Are they made public? What measures have been taken to collate data and information relating to the development situation of the minority vis-à-vis other sectors of the population? What measures are in place for strengthening cooperation between the minority and national human rights institutions? Right of persons belonging to minorities to establish and maintain their own associations [UNMD, art. 2.4] 4. Persons belonging to minorities have the right to establish and maintain their own associations. Have cases been dealt with by courts or complaints brought to the attention of United Nations human rights treaty bodies or special procedures such as the Special Representative on human rights defenders, for example, as regards the work of persons belonging to minorities or of those working for minority associations? What is the system in place for the registration of minority associations? Where minority associations are established, are members of those associations called upon to advise authorities on the development implementation and evaluation of minority-related policies? What measures are in place to ensure that minority associations can operate independently and free from interference (where the aims of the association are in conformity with international human rights standards)? What measures are in place for minority associations to receive funding from different sources (where the sources' aims are in conformity with international human rights standards)? If the Government provides funding to minority associations, is there an advisory body established to decide on which associations should receive funding? How does such a body operate? Are allocations of funding proportionate to the situation of the minority, e.g. is it based on the percentage of population or the relative seriousness of the economic and social situation affecting the minority population in comparison to other parts of the population? Right of persons belonging to minorities to establish and maintain contacts with other members of their group and other minorities across frontiers [UNMD, art. 2.5] 5. Persons belonging to minorities have the right to establish and maintain, without any discrimination, free and peaceful contacts with other members of their group and with persons belonging to other minorities, as well as contacts across frontiers with citizens of other States to whom they are related by national or ethnic, religious or linguistic ties. What measures are in place to ensure that persons belonging to minorities have the right to establish and maintain contacts, within the country or across frontiers, including through the development of peaceful networks at the local, regional, national and, international levels? What additional steps, if any, has the Government taken to facilitate peaceful contacts and networking of persons belonging to the minority? Cooperation with and between States [UNMD, arts. 5.2, 6 and 7] 2. Programmes of cooperation and assistance among States should be planned and implemented with due regard for the legitimate interests of persons belonging to minorities. Article 6 States should cooperate on questions relating to persons belonging to minorities, inter alia, exchanging information and experiences, in order to promote mutual understanding and confidence. Article 7 States should cooperate in order to promote respect for the rights set forth in the present Declaration. What measures have been taken by States to ensure that persons belonging to minorities benefit as much as members of the majority from international cooperation, including development assistance programmes? What measures are in place to ensure that assessments are undertaken on the likely impact of such international cooperation or development assistance on the minority? What mechanisms are in place or what steps have been taken for the Government to share and exchange information and knowledge about successful practices in relation to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to the minority and the promotion of mutual understanding and trust? What other particular measures have been taken by the Government to cooperate with other States to find constructive solutions to situations involving minorities? For example, are there any bilateral treaties or agreements between States for supporting good-neighbourly relations? Are there particular regional or subregional mechanisms that exist for promoting and protecting the rights of persons belonging to minorities? Has the Government undertaken particular commitments and pledges to cooperate with the United Nations and other States in respect of the promotion and protection of human rights, and in particular with respect to the rights of persons belonging to minorities? Specialized agencies and other UN organizations to contribute to the full realization of the UNMD, rights and principles [UNMD, art. 9] Article 9 The specialized agencies and other organizations of the UN system shall contribute to the full realization of the rights and principles set forth in the present Declaration, within their respective fields of competence. Have persons belonging to the minority cooperated with UN organizations or programmes particularly at the country level, including with respect to plans for reaching the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), promotion and protection of human rights, good governance, democratization, poverty reduction, women's issues, children's issues and the general provision of services? Is there any mechanism in place for representatives of the minority or minority associations or organizations to participate regularly in consultations organized with the civil society which are sponsored by the UN or any other international organization having a presence in the country? Are any persons belonging to the minority engaged in a working relationship with the UN or other international organizations' activities in the country? Have any of the persons belonging to the minority participated in any internship or Fellowship Programmes organized by the UN in general, the UN in the country or any other international organization? 