%%%DOCUMENTS|

United Nations Children's Fund Executive Board First regular session 2007 16-19 and 22 January 2007 Item 2 of the provisional agenda Provisional annotated agenda, timetable, organization of work and list of documents Contents Item Page 1. Opening of the session (a) Election of officers (b) Statements by the President of the Executive Board and the Executive Director 2. Adoption of the provisional agenda, timetable and organization of work 3. Annual report to the Economic and Social Council 4. Integrated approaches for achieving the Millennium Development Goals: lessons from Africa 5. Progress report on the Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS campaign 6. Ending Child Hunger and Undernutrition Initiative 7. Proposals for UNICEF programme cooperation: approval of revised country programme documents 8. UNICEF financial report and audited financial statements for the biennium ended 31 December 2005 and the report of the Board of Auditors 9. Supplementary support budget for crisis management and business continuity capacity 10. Private Sector Division workplan and proposed budget for 2007 11. Pledging event 12. Other matters 13. Closing statements by the Executive Director and the President Annotated provisional agenda The President and Vice-Presidents of the Executive Board represent the regional groups of the United Nations. In accordance with the rotation scheme established in decision 1992/7 (E/ICEF/1992/14), for 2007 the President will be nominated from among the Latin American and Caribbean group of States which are members of the Board. [For action -- E/ICEF/2007/1] The provisional agenda has been drafted in consultation with the Bureau. The Executive Board will adopt the agenda for the session, making any amendments it considers necessary. [For action -- E/ICEF/2007/3] The report focuses on the triennial comprehensive policy review of United Nations operational activities for development, the implementation of the reform programmes of the Secretary-General, follow-up to the United Nations Summit of September 2005 and other relevant decisions of the Council, including on follow-up to other international conferences and humanitarian and disaster relief assistance. The Board may wish to take note of the report and transmit it, together with the comments made by delegations at the present session, to the Council at its substantive session of 2007. Under this agenda item, the Board will also consider an information note by the secretariat on recent reports of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) that are of relevance to UNICEF (E/ICEF/2007/6). 4. Integrated approaches for achieving the Millennium Development Goals: lessons from Africa Under this special focus item, the Executive Board will have an opportunity to hear presentations on results-driven approaches for achieving Millennium Development Goals in sub-Saharan Africa. A separate detailed programme for this agenda item will be made available to the Executive Board. [For information -- E/ICEF/2007/5] The secretariat will update the Executive Board on the campaign, which was launched in October 2005. [For action -- E/ICEF/2007/4] This report, which has been prepared pursuant to a series of oral reports on the Initiative, is similar to one discussed by the Executive Board of the World Food Programme at its second regular session of 2006. The Executive Board may wish to adopt the draft decision contained in the report. [For action] At the annual and second regular sessions of 2006, the Executive Board commented on a total of 33 draft CPDs (Algeria, Belize, Brazil, Central African Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Honduras, Iraq, Jamaica, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Panama, Paraguay, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, South Africa, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe) and approved the aggregate indicative budgets for the country programmes. In accordance with decision 2002/4 (E/ICEF/2002/8), the draft CPDs were revised, taking into account, as appropriate, comments made by delegations during those sessions, and summary results matrices were added. The revised CPDs, which were posted on the UNICEF Internet site by 1 November 2006, will be approved by the Board at the current session on a no-objection basis, unless at least five members informed the secretariat in writing by 8 December 2006 of their wish to bring a country programme before the Board. 8. UNICEF financial report and audited financial statements for the biennium ended 31 December 2005 and the report of the Board of Auditors [For information -- A/61/5/Add.2] The UNICEF audited financial statements are presented to the Executive Board for information every two years, at the same time as they are submitted to the United Nations Board of Auditors and to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly. The report is presented at the first regular session so that the Board may take into account any comments made by the Fifth Committee during the sixty-first session of the Assembly. 9. Supplementary support budget for crisis management and business continuity capacity [For action -- [E/ICEF/2007/AB/L.1]] This report is presented pursuant to Executive Board decision 2006/17, in which the Board requested the secretariat to resubmit its remaining budget for crisis and business continuity capacity, including for an influenza pandemic or other disasters, to the Executive Board, through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, at its first regular session of 2007. The Board may wish to adopt the decision contained in the report. The report of the Advisory Committee is contained in document E/ICEF/2007/AB/L.2. [For action -- E/ICEF/2007/AB/L.3] The report covers the PSD workplan and proposed budget for 2007, including draft resolutions submitted for the Executive Board's approval. As part of the UNICEF resource mobilization strategy (decision 1999/8), during the pledging event, which is held at the first regular session each year, Governments in a position to do so will announce their voluntary contributions to UNICEF regular resources for 2007, together with firm or indicative commitments for future years. The Board may consider discussing any other issues that it finds appropriate under this agenda item. Proposed timetable and organization of work for the 2007 First regular session of the Executive Board, 16-19 and 22 January 2007* Tuesday, 16 January a.m. 10 a.m.-1 p.m. Item 1 Opening of the session: Election of officers Statements by the President and the Executive Director Item 2 Adoption of the provisional agenda, timetable and organization of work Item 3 Annual report to the Economic and Social Council p.m. Item 8 UNICEF financial report and audited financial statements for the biennium ended 31 December 2005 and the report of the Board of Auditors Item 9 Supplementary support budget for crisis management and business continuity capacity Item 10 Private Sector Division: workplan and proposed budget for 2007 Informal consultations Wednesday, 17 January 10 a.m.- 1 p.m. Item 4 Integrated approaches for achieving the Millennium Development Goals: lessons from Africa Item 5 Update on the Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS campaign Item 6 Ending Child Hunger and Undernutrition Initiative Item 7 Proposals for UNICEF programme cooperation: approval of revised country programme documents Thursday, 18 January Item 11 Pledging event Item 12 Other matters Item 13 Closing statements 3-6 p.m. * When consideration of an agenda item concludes ahead of the allocated time, the next item will be taken up for consideration and the timetable adjusted accordingly. Joint Meeting of the Executive Boards of UNICEF, UNDP/UNFPA and WFP Friday, 19 January Natural disaster preparedness Chaired by President, UNICEF Executive Board 3 p.m.- 6 p.m. Millennium Development Goal 1: Interlinked approaches to poverty alleviation Chaired by President, WFP Executive Board Monday, 22 January United Nations reform Chaired by President, UNDP/UNFPA Executive Board The gender dimension of HIV/AIDS 