%%%WOMEN'S RIGHTS|ARAB COUNTRIES|GENDER DISCRIMINATION|GENDER EQUALITY|RACIAL DISCRIMINATION|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE|ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE|LEGAL REMEDIES|RIGHT TO EDUCATION|RIGHT TO HEALTH|RIGHT TO WORK|HARMFUL TRADITIONAL PRACTICES|

UNITED NATIONS HRI International Human Rights Instruments Distr. Original: SUBREGIONAL WORKSHOP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CONCLUDING COMMENTS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN AND THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION Cairo, Egypt 19-22 December 2005 REPORT OF THE SUBREGIONAL WORKSHOP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CONCLUDING COMMENTS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN AND THE COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION* Cairo, Egypt, 19-22 December 2005 A subregional workshop on the implementation of the concluding comments/observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) took place in Cairo, Egypt from 19 to 22 December 2005. Over 50 participants from 6 countries of North Africa (Algeria, Egypt, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia), including government officials, members of the judiciary, representatives of national human rights institutions, national NGOs, the League of Arab States and United Nations entities as well as treaty body experts, took part in this event. The main objective of the workshop was to enhance the capacity of States to implement the concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD and to strengthen cooperation with other relevant stakeholders for this purpose. The workshop took place in plenary meetings as well as in working groups on the following themes: (i) constitutional and legislative framework and obstacles to the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW Convention) and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD); (ii) independent monitoring structures/national machineries; (iii) discrimination-based violence and access to justice/remedies; (iv) multiple forms of discrimination; (v) equal enjoyment of the right to education, health and employment and (vi) harmful cultural practices and stereotypes. At the end of the workshop, participants adopted a series of recommendations supporting the implementation of recommendations of CERD and CEDAW in countries of the subregion. The workshop, which was hosted by the Government of Egypt, was organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Division for the Advancement of Women/Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DAW/DESA) in cooperation with the National Council for Women of Egypt. The Government of Germany contributed to the funding of this workshop. Paragraphs Page I. INTRODUCTION 1 - 11 4 II. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 12 - 43 6 III. ANNEXES: SUMMARY OF WORKING GROUP DISCUSSIONS 44 - 49 9 A. Constitutional and legislative framework and obstacles to the implementation of both Conventions 44 9 B. Independent monitoring structures/national machineries 45 10 C. Discrimination-based violence and access to justice/remedies 46 11 D. Multiple forms of discrimination 47 12 E. Equal enjoyment of the right to education, health and employment 48 13 F. Harmful cultural practices and stereotypes 49 14 I. INTRODUCTION 1. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Division for the Advancement of Women /Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DAW/DESA), in cooperation with the National Council for Women (NCW) of Egypt, organized a subregional workshop on the implementation of the concluding comments/ observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) from 19 to 22 December 2005. This Workshop was hosted by the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt and took place on the premises of the National Council for Women of Egypt in Cairo (Egypt). The Government of Germany contributed to the funding of the workshop. Government officials and representatives of national human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations from Algeria, Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia, as well as representatives of the United Nations and the League of Arab States and members of CEDAW and CERD took part in the workshop. 2. The workshop was opened by Dr. Sahar Nasr who read a statement on behalf of Dr. Ferkhonda Hassan, SecretaryGeneral of the National Council for Women. The statement delivered by Ambassador Naela Gabr, Assistant Foreign Minister, on behalf of the Egyptian Foreign Ministry was followed by a speech made by Mr. Antonio Vigilante, UNDP Resident Representative in Egypt. Messages from Ms. Louise Arbour, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and Ms. Carolyn Hannan, Director of the Division for the Advancement of Women, were read respectively by Mr. Frej Fenniche, OHCHR Regional Representative in the Arab Region and Ms. Emanuela Calabrini, Human Rights Officer, DAW/DESA. 3. Discussions took place both in plenary meetings and in six working groups. Several plenary meetings were devoted to presentations which were followed by a discussion with participants. On the first day of the workshop, Ms. Mylene Bidault (OHCHR) and Ms. Saras Jagwanth (DAW/DESA) made introductory statements on the United Nations human rights system. This was followed by a presentation by Ms. Dubravka Šimonović and Ms. Meriem Belmihoub-Zerdani, CEDAW experts, on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW Convention) and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. Mr. Nourredine Amir, CERD expert, made a presentation on the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. The presentations highlighted the main provisions of the two instruments and the role of both Committees in the interpretation of the Conventions, including through various general recommendations. They also emphasized the role of both Committees in monitoring the implementation of the Conventions and highlighted the various procedures developed in this regard. Subsequent presentations by Mr. Morten Kjaerum, CERD expert, and Ms. Françoise Gaspard, CEDAW expert, highlighted the role of the Committees as facilitators for the implementation of and follow-up to concluding observations/comments. Ms. Dubravka Šimonović, CEDAW expert, and Ms. Fatima Binta Victoire Dah, CERD expert, also spoke respectively on the individual complaints procedure under the Optional Protocol to the CEDAW Convention and under article 14 of ICERD. 4. A panel discussion was held on the activities of the United Nations and specialized agencies in the Arab region to combat discrimination against women and racial discrimination. Panellists were Mr. Pierre Sane, Assistant DirectorGeneral of UNESCO for Social and Human Sciences, Mrs. Maya Morsi, UNIFEM Representative and Mr. Frej Fenniche, OHCHR Regional Representative in the Arab Region. 5. A panel discussion was held on the role of civil society and national human rights institutions in follow-up to concluding comments/observations. Three representatives of nongovernmental organizations and national human rights institutions, Ms. Wassila Tamzali, Collectif 95 Maghreb Egalité (Algeria), Ms. Amina Lemrini Elouahabi, Conseil Consultatif des Droits de l'Homme (Morocco) and Mr. Abdoulaye Sow, Association Mauritanienne des droits de l'homme (Mauritania) participated in the panel discussion. 6. The working groups discussed the six following themes: Constitutional and legislative framework and on obstacles to the implementation of both Conventions, facilitated by Ms. Meriem Belmihoub-Zerdani (CEDAW member) and Mr. Mahmoud Aboul-Nasr (CERD member); Independent monitoring structures/national machineries, facilitated by Ms. Dubravka Šimonović (CEDAW member) and Mr. Morten Kjaerum (CERD member); Discrimination-based violence and access to justice/remedies, facilitated by Ms. Françoise Gaspard (CEDAW member), Ms. Fatima Binta Victoire Dah and Mr. Nourredine Amir (CERD members); Multiple forms of discrimination, facilitated by Ms. Françoise Gaspard (CEDAW member), Mr. Nourredine Amir and Mr. Morten Kjaerum (CERD members); Equal enjoyment of the right to education, health and employment facilitated by Ms. Dubravka Šimonović (CEDAW member) and Mr. Mahmoud Aboul-Nasr (CERD member); Harmful cultural practices and stereotypes, facilitated by Ms. Dubravka Šimonović (CEDAW member) and Mr. Mahmoud Aboul-Nasr (CERD member). 7. Each working group was facilitated by CEDAW and CERD experts, and a rapporteur was appointed from among the participants. Participants were given copies of the latest concluding comments/observations adopted by CEDAW and CERD for the six countries participating in the workshop. Working groups discussed the objectives and obstacles regarding the implementation of these concluding comments/observations. They identified recommendations regarding follow-up to and implementation of the concluding comments/observations of both Committees. A summary of the discussions in each of the working groups is contained in annexes to the present report. 8. On the third day of the workshop, participants met in national working groups, which included representatives of governments, national human rights institutions and nongovernmental organizations to discuss the elaboration, adoption and implementation of national plans to follow up on recommendations of CERD and CEDAW and the conclusions and recommendations of the workshop. 9. Throughout the workshop, discussions were frank and allowed for a fruitful exchange of information on experiences and difficulties encountered in each country to implement the concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD. They also highlighted the common will to enhance cooperation between participating States and the Committees in order to improve follow-up to the concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD. 10. Her Excellency, Mrs. Susanne Mubarak, First Lady of Egypt, addressed the participants at the closing session. In her speech, H.E. Mrs. Mubarak stressed the importance of respecting international protection mechanisms. Acknowledging this was a long-term process, Mrs. Mubarak emphasized that all concerned should be committed to developing the necessary monitoring mechanisms. She indicated and welcomed the increase in cooperation between private actors, non-governmental organizations, and Government, which is a requirement for social peace and security. She also referred to the crucial role of education in the development of the individual and reiterated her commitment to democracy, human rights and a spirit of tolerance. 11. On the last day of the workshop, participants agreed upon the present report including conclusions and recommendations for further action to implement the concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD. II. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMENDATIONS 12. The representatives of the Governments of Algeria, Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia, the National Council for Women of Egypt, the League of Arab States, United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations, participating in the workshop on the implementation of concluding comments/observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, held in Cairo, Egypt, from 19 to 22 December 2005: 13. Express their gratitude to the Government of Egypt for hosting the workshop, to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women/Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and the National Council for Women in Egypt, which organized the workshop. They express particular gratitude to the expert members of CEDAW and CERD: Mr. Mahmoud Aboul Nasr, Mr. Nourredine Amir, Ms. Fatima Binta Victoire Dah, Ms. Françoise Gaspard, Mr. Morten Kjaerum, Ms. Dubravka Šimonović and Ms. Meriem Belmihoub-Zerdani who served as resource persons throughout the workshop. They express gratitude to the Government of Germany for their support and financial contribution towards the workshop; 14. Reaffirm the indivisibility and universality of all human rights, as stipulated in the Declaration of the 1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights; 15. Also reaffirm the importance in this regard of the ratification by States of international human rights instruments and of their full cooperation with the various United Nations mechanisms in place for the protection of human rights; 16. Call on religious institutions to contribute to building a modern State; 17. Recall that the consideration by CEDAW and CERD of States parties' initial and periodic reports, and the adoption of concluding comments/observations thereon, are useful to follow up the implementation by States parties of the obligations they have undertaken under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 18. Emphasize the importance of follow-up to the recommendations made by CEDAW and CERD in their concluding comments/observations; 19. Consider that the preparation by Governments of reports for CEDAW and CERD and the subsequent issuing of recommendations should be viewed as an opportunity for the State party and civil society to evaluate the situation and improve the implementation of the Conventions at the national level; 20. Express their appreciation for the expertise of CEDAW and CERD; 21. Express their commitment to enhance cooperation between all national stakeholders to increase the realization of human rights and, in this connection, commend the role played by national institutions and non-governmental organizations; 22. Reaffirm the importance of exchange of experience among States parties on implementation of the Conventions and the Committees' recommendations; 23. Emphasize the importance of making use of human rights technical cooperation programmes provided by the United Nations and its specialized agencies; 24. Welcome the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Division for the Advancement of Women/Department of Economic and Social Affairs in the promotion and protection of human rights, and in particular their activities in the region; 25. Acknowledge the catalytic role played by UNDP and other United Nations entities through the United Nations Country Teams; 26. Adopt the following recommendations addressed to Governments, civil society and the United Nations system, which they agreed should be widely disseminated by the participants, OHCHR and DAW/DESA, as well as the NCW: RECOMMENDATIONS The participants recommend that: 27. All actors increase their efforts at the national and subregional levels to enhance followup to concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD; 28. CEDAW and CERD consider formulating more specific, concrete and action-oriented recommendations in their concluding comments/observations, so as to facilitate the implementation of the Conventions by States parties; 29. United Nations entities and agencies continue and strengthen their work with respect to human rights, and in particular the right not to be discriminated against on the basis of race, colour, descent, sex, gender, or national or ethnic origin; 30. United Nations entities and agencies enhance their efforts in the Arab region to assist States in the implementation of the concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD; 31. States parties consider withdrawing reservations made to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 32. States comply with their reporting obligations and submit reports to CERD and CEDAW in a timely manner; 33. States strengthen their internal human rights coordination among the various branches of Government and civil society, including through the establishment of national committees to prepare periodic reports and follow up on the implementation of concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD; 34. States strengthen national machineries for the advancement of women by providing them with adequate financial and human resources to implement programmes for the protection and promotion of women's human rights and by placing them at the highest level of Government; 35. States that have not yet done so establish national human rights commissions in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions (the Paris Principles) and those States that have already established such commissions should ensure that the powers, composition and working methods are in full accordance with the principles; 36. States adopt a comprehensive approach to the promotion and protection of equality and non-discrimination, including through the full implementation of the concluding comments/observations of CEDAW and CERD, the Declaration and Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995, the Programme of Action of the Third World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance held in Durban in 2001 and the Millennium Development Goals; 37. States fulfil their obligations under the CEDAW Convention and ICERD and adopt the necessary legislative and procedural measures to adapt their national legislation to the requirements of the two Conventions; 38. States take steps, in partnership with civil society, to change stereotypical attitudes and traditional views about the roles and responsibilities of women and men in society and the family; 39. States take temporary special measures, in accordance with articles 4 (1) of the CEDAW Convention and 2 (2) of ICERD to accelerate the advancement of all disadvantaged groups and to promote their rights, in particular in the fields of employment, health, education and participation in public and political life; 40. States become parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and make the declaration under article 14 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which respectively grant CEDAW and CERD the competence to receive and consider communications from individuals or groups of individuals who claim to be victims of violations of the rights set forth in the two Conventions and which grants CEDAW the competence to institute inquiries into situations of grave or systematic violations of women's rights. 41. Participants in the workshop adopted the following additional recommendations: 42. That all participants contribute to the dissemination of the report of the workshop and its recommendations; 43. That OHCHR and DAW/DESA disseminate widely the report of the workshop. III. ANNEXES: SUMMARY OF WORKING GROUP DISCUSSIONS A. Constitutional and legislative framework and obstacles to the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 44. Participants in the working group on constitutional and legislative framework and obstacles to the implementation of the CEDAW Convention and ICERD noted the importance of the following: Clarifying the status of CEDAW and ICERD in domestic law and recognizing the primacy of norms of international law over domestic law, and in particular the norms provided in the CEDAW Convention and ICERD; Initiating discussion of the reasons for entering reservations to human rights treaties, in particular to the CEDAW Convention, taking account of current developments in other States parties with regard to reservations; Prohibiting and bringing to an end, by all appropriate means, including through legislation, discrimination on the grounds of sex, race, colour, descent, national or ethnic origin by any person, group or organization, and adopting measures to ensure the implementation of such legislation; Submitting the concluding comments/observations of the two treaty bodies to Parliaments/people's assemblies in order to ensure appropriate follow up to CERD and CEDAW recommendations, including through the revision and amendment of domestic laws whenever necessary; Intensifying efforts to establish partnerships between State institutions and civil society, with a view to promoting a human rights culture and applying the principle of equal rights for all without discrimination; Raising public awareness and supporting the activities of groups working to entrench the principle of non-discrimination on grounds of sex, race, colour, descent, national or ethnic origin; Taking the necessary steps to disseminate information about United Nations activities, particularly as they relate to human rights and non-discrimination and adoption of measures to raise public awareness regarding the activities of CEDAW and CERD; Making widely available States parties' reports, together with the Committees' concluding observations/comments adopted following consideration of these reports; Ensuring the timely submission of initial and periodic reports by States parties; Providing training, in particular on norms contained in the CEDAW Convention and ICERD, to judges and lawyers, as well as law enforcement officers, in particular police and prison officers. B. Independent monitoring structures/national machineries 45. Participants in the working group on independent monitoring structures/national machineries noted the importance of the following: 1. Creating mechanisms, including networks, to guarantee effective coordination and cooperation among civil society actors in the six participating countries with a view to providing CEDAW and CERD with accurate and specific information; 2. Creating consultative mechanisms, with wide participation of all sectors of society, to prepare reports and follow-up to the concluding comments/ observations of CEDAW and CERD; 3. Formulating national action plans that are consistent with the Conventions as well as the Programme of Action of the Third World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance held in Durban in 2001 and the Declaration and Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995; 4. Establishing a specific and measurable plan of action for the implementation of treaty bodies' recommendations aimed at remedying deficiencies and eradicating all forms of discrimination within set time frames; 5. Encouraging parliamentarians, national human rights institutions and national machineries for the advancement of women to contribute to build a culture of democracy, non-discrimination and tolerance, and ensuring effective follow-up to CEDAW and CERD recommendations; 6. Creating databases for the elaboration of indicators on progress in the implementation of the CEDAW Convention and ICERD, and providing CEDAW and CERD with statistical data and indicators disaggregated by sex, race, colour, descent, national or ethnic origin on such implementation; 7. Recognizing the synergies between the CEDAW Convention, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the Millennium Development Goals. C. Discrimination-based violence and access to justice/remedies 46. Participants in the working group on discrimination-based violence and access to justice/remedies noted the importance of the following: 1. Defining discrimination and violence linked with discrimination in accordance with the definitions provided in the CEDAW Convention and ICERD as further interpreted by CEDAW and CERD in their general recommendations; 2. Developing legislation that is consistent with the commitments undertaken by States parties under the CEDAW Convention and ICERD, in particular provisions concerning access to legal remedies for victims of discrimination-based violence; 3. Assuring to everyone the right to equal treatment before courts, tribunals and all other organs administering justice as well as effective protection and remedies against any act of discrimination, as well as the right to seek just and adequate reparation or satisfaction for any damage suffered as a result of such discrimination; 4. Taking concrete measures to prevent and eradicate all forms of violence against women, including through the provision of adequate remedies and legal aid; 5. Improving States parties' reports by including accurate and up-to-date statistics on discrimination-based violence, in accordance with the guidelines issued by the treaty bodies on the preparation of periodic reports; 6. Educating civil society and raising awareness, including through the media, about the phenomenon of violence against women and racial violence, in particular acts of violence against migrants and refugees from sub-Saharan countries, and the need to combat it; 7. Designing and running training programmes at the national level in order to facilitate follow-up to CEDAW and CERD recommendations, drawing on international cooperation programmes in this domain, particularly with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Division for the Advancement of Women/Department of Economic and Social Affairs; 8. Training professionals working in relevant fields, such as law enforcement officers, journalists, educators and civil society actors in order to enhance their contribution to combating racial discrimination and discrimination against women. D. Multiple forms of discrimination 47. Participants in the working group on multiple forms of discrimination noted the importance of the following: 1. Acknowledging the importance of fully implementing the CEDAW Convention and ICERD in guaranteeing respect for human rights, particularly the right to equality and non-discrimination, women's human rights and cultural rights; 2. Widely discussing the issues of racial discrimination and discrimination against women in a transparent manner, and in particular explicitly and clearly identifying the groups that are discriminated on the base of race, colour, national or ethnic origin; 3. Ensuring that all women exercise and enjoy civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights without any discrimination on grounds of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin, and ensuring that women belonging to national or ethnic minorities do not suffer any discrimination in access to citizenship and that they are protected from violence and exploitation; 4. Combating all forms of discrimination in the administration of justice which may be suffered by persons belonging to racial or ethnic groups, paying particular attention to the situation of women belonging to the aforementioned groups, who are susceptible to multiple forms of discrimination because of their race and sex; 5. Ensuring that refugees are adequately protected by host countries and removing obstacles that prevent their enjoyment of basic economic, social and cultural rights; 6. Taking effective measures to prevent and redress the problems commonly faced by domestic workers, including guaranteeing their right to health insurance and social insurance; 7. Ensuring that laws concerning deportation or other forms of removal of illegal migrants do not discriminate in purpose or effect on the basis of race, colour or ethnic or national origin; ensuring that they have equal access to effective remedies; and making efforts to deal with illegal migrants in a manner that respects their human dignity; 8. Considering education as a vital tool for spreading the message of tolerance and respect for others; 9. Protecting and promoting cultural rights and consider cultural diversity as a strength and an asset; 10. Ensuring that members of ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples, in particular the Amazigh, can exercise their rights to their own culture, use their own language and preserve and develop their own identity; 11. Organizing awareness-raising campaigns to promote tolerance and combat all forms of discrimination and hatred and discrimination against women. E. Equal enjoyment of the right to education, health and employment 48. Participants in the working group on the right to education, health and employment noted the importance of the following: 1. Studying, with a view to their elimination, the obstacles to the implementation of the recommendations of CEDAW and CERD in the areas of education, health and employment; 2. Discussing the ways of developing national action plans to implement the Beijing Platform for Action and realize the Millennium Development Goals on the eradication of poverty and the World Programme for Human Rights Education; 3. Inviting the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Division for the Advancement of Women/Department of Economic and Social Affairs to hold other workshops, especially at the national level, to enable States parties to share experiences about ways to promote and implement human rights for all without discrimination, in particular the right to education, health and work; 4. Designing and implementing human rights training programmes in secondary and higher education institutions to promote the principle of equality without discrimination on grounds of sex, race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin; 5. Focusing on the protection of social and economic rights, on the basis of equality between women and men, of refugees, migrants, minorities, and other marginalized groups; 6. Taking measures, including temporary special measures, to ensure that women have equal access to education and employment; 7. Creating new employment opportunities, without discrimination, in many different sectors of the labour market; 8. Undertaking efforts to eradicate illiteracy, particularly in poor and rural communities; 9. Taking the necessary steps to ensure that children, especially girls, do not drop out of school; 10. Ensuring equality of educational opportunities and helping girls to attain the highest levels of education; 11. Guaranteeing free and compulsory primary education; 12. Preventing all forms of exploitation of children, in particular girl children and children belonging to national or ethnic minorities; 13. Respecting the rights of minorities, particularly cultural and linguistic rights; 14. Providing adequate healthcare services for women and facilitate their access to healthcare centres in particular in rural areas; 15. Providing women with access to family planning services, especially reproductive health programmes; 16. Combating female genital mutilation and defining this practice as a form of violence against women; 17. Establishing a national plan of action for rural women focusing on equal access to health, education and employment. F. Harmful cultural practices and stereotypes 49. Participants in the working group on harmful cultural practices and stereotypes noted the importance of the following: 1. Acknowledging the importance of education and awareness-raising in reducing harmful cultural and traditional practices and stereotypes; 2. Combating harmful customs and traditions, such as the practice of female genital mutilation, and the denial of women's inheritance rights; 3. Training judicial and law enforcement officials and other relevant actors in order to ensure the effective implementation of relevant international norms; 4. Encouraging the media, national institutions, political parties, non-governmental organizations and intellectuals to develop joint strategies to combat harmful traditional practices; 6. Broadening cultural dialogue in society in order to promote the discourse of acceptance of others and to safeguard democratic principles; 7. Undertaking, in accordance with article 7 of ICERD, to adopt immediate and effective measures, particularly in the fields of teaching, education, culture and information, with a view to combating prejudices which lead to racial discrimination and to promoting understanding, tolerance and friendship among nations and racial or ethnic groups. Cairo, 22 December 2005 