%%%POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|PEACEBUILDING|INTERNAL SECURITY|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|ARMED INCIDENTS|RULE OF LAW|WOMEN'S STATUS|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|GOVERNANCE|HEALTH|WATER|SANITATION|RIGHTS OF THE CHILD|AIDS|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the Security Council of 31 October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/30), in which the Council requested me to submit reports on a quarterly basis on the situation in Somalia. The report covers developments since my last report, of 11 October 2005 (S/2005/642), with particular focus on the Aden Declaration (S/2006/14) signed on 5 January 2006 in Yemen by the President of the Transitional Federal Government, Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, and the Speaker of the Transitional Federal Parliament, Sharif Hassan Sheikh Adan. 2. The report details the developments that led to the Aden Declaration. It also summarizes developments inside Somalia and the activities of the international community in support of the peace process. The report provides an update on the security situation, and on the humanitarian and development activities of United Nations programmes and agencies in Somalia, with a special focus on the serious humanitarian situation created by the drought in the southern and central regions of the country. II. Situation within the transitional federal institutions 3. For most of 2005, the situation in Somalia was characterized by the political impasse within the leadership of the transitional federal institutions, in particular between President Yusuf and Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Gedi of the Transitional Federal Government, based in Jawhar, and the Speaker and some ministers, based in Mogadishu, over issues such as the seat of government, security and the deployment of an Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)/African Union (AU) peace support mission. 4. In an effort to break the stalemate, on 6 November 2005, Prime Minister Gedi led a ministerial delegation to Mogadishu, with the intention of holding a meeting of the Council of Ministers. His motorcade was attacked soon after his arrival in north Mogadishu. A device exploded under one of the "technicals" (armed vehicles) protecting his vehicle and, although he escaped unhurt, the blast killed nine people and wounded at least 10 others. On 8 November, a cabinet meeting was held under the chairmanship of Prime Minister Gedi in Mogadishu, but was attended only by those ministers who already supported him. The Mogadishu-based ministers declined to attend on the grounds that there had been no prior consultation between the two sides regarding the meeting. 5. Another initiative for reconciliation was undertaken in early November 2005 by Barre Aden Shire, "Barre Hirale", the Chairman of the Juba Valley Alliance in control of Kismayo. He proposed a two-phased approach for parliamentary dialogue. The first phase was to have involved a meeting in Kismayo of 16 parliamentarians from each of the two sides (Jawhar and Mogadishu) to discuss technical modalities followed by a second larger meeting, possibly involving a full session of Parliament. Barre Hirale claimed that his initiative had the support of both President Yusuf and the Speaker. However, because the two sides were unable to reach a prior consensus on the venue for the second phase of dialogue, the first phase of talks did not take place. Barre Hirale proposed Kismayo as a compromise venue for both phases of the dialogue. 6. On 1 January 2006, President Yusuf, who had earlier travelled to Yemen to attend a regional summit, was joined by the Speaker in Aden. The two leaders engaged in a dialogue with the facilitation of the Government of Yemen. As a result, on 5 January, President Yusuf and the Speaker signed the Aden Declaration "... to start a new page and end their differences ...". Under its provisions, they agreed to respect the principles and norms of the Transitional Federal Charter and to hold a session of Parliament within 30 days inside the country at a venue to be agreed upon. Both leaders called upon members of Parliament and of the Transitional Federal Government "... to put aside their fruitless squabbles and differences, urging them to unite, placing the supreme interest of the nation above other interests ...". They also called on the international community to fully support the efforts to convene the first session of the Transitional Federal Parliament inside the country. 7. On 14 January, President Yusuf and the Speaker met again in Nairobi where they were joined the following day by Prime Minister Gedi. While in Nairobi, the President arranged the first meeting of all three leaders since the emergence of the split within the leadership of the transitional federal institutions in May 2005. The three leaders also met together with President Mwai Kibaki and then separately with representatives of the international community in Nairobi. At those meetings they underscored their commitment to the Aden Declaration and to the early convening of Parliament. In their discussions with my Special Representative, both President Yusuf and Prime Minister Gedi requested his assistance in securing a waiver of the arms embargo for the training of a Somali national police and army. 8. On 18 January, the Speaker called a meeting of all those members of Parliament present in Mogadishu to elicit their support for the Aden Declaration. After consulting his colleagues, the Speaker returned to Nairobi. President Yusuf, who arrived in Nairobi on 27 January from the AU Summit in Khartoum, held talks with the Minister of Internal Security of the Transitional Federal Government, Mohamed Qanyare Afrah, one of the main Mogadishu-based leaders, in what was seen as a reconciliatory meeting. On 28 January, Prime Minister Gedi also arrived in Nairobi and held meetings with President Yusuf and the Speaker on ways to implement the provisions of the Aden Declaration. 9. After intensive consultations among the leaders of the transitional federal institutions, the Speaker announced, on 30 January, that Baidoa had been selected as the venue of the first session of the Transitional Federal Parliament inside Somalia, to be held on 26 February 2006. There were reports that Prime Minister Gedi left Nairobi for Jawhar before the announcement because of concerns regarding the choice of Baidoa as the venue of the parliamentary session. In his intervention at the announcement, President Yusuf appealed to the international community to help bring Prime Minister Gedi on board. 10. My Special Representative and a group of ambassadors representing the international community met with President Yusuf and the Speaker the following day. President Yusuf requested that the group travel to Jawhar to meet Prime Minister Gedi and seek his support in convening the announced parliamentary session in Baidoa. On 1 February, my Special Representative and other members of the international community met with Prime Minister Gedi in Jawhar. The Prime Minister expressed concern about the security situation in Baidoa, but nevertheless, reaffirmed his commitment to the Aden Declaration and expressed his willingness to work towards a resolution of outstanding issues with the President in the near future. III. Activities of the United Nations and the international community 11. During the period leading up to the signing of the Aden Declaration, my Special Representative spared no effort in trying to convince the leaders of the transitional federal institutions to initiate a dialogue with a view to overcoming their differences, promoting reconciliation and creating the conditions that would allow the effective functioning of Somali institutions. Commendable efforts were also made by several members of the international community to encourage the Somali parties to move towards dialogue and reconciliation. 12. On 25 October 2005, my Special Representative visited Jawhar and met with President Yusuf regarding ways to move the political process forward. While understanding his reluctance to accept outside facilitation, my Special Representative underscored the need for President Yusuf to reach out to the Mogadishu-based leaders and engage them in a genuine dialogue aimed at establishing a functional government in Somalia. He met President Yusuf again in Nairobi on 5 December and encouraged him to continue his efforts in favour of dialogue among the transitional federal institutions. Similarly, my Special Representative and staff of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia continued to meet with other leaders of the transitional federal institutions and encouraged them to make progress towards dialogue. On several occasions my Special Representative urged the Speaker to convene an early session of Parliament. On 19 December, in a meeting with my Special Representative in Nairobi, the Speaker gave his commitment to convene a full session of Parliament in the near future. 13. Subsequently, the signing of the Aden Declaration by President Yusuf and the Speaker was welcomed by my Special Representative, the European Union and the United States of America. My Special Representative met with all three leaders of the transitional federal institutions and congratulated them on the signing of the declaration. He encouraged them to advance its implementation, especially the convening of Parliament within the 30-day period. All three leaders expressed their commitment to the declaration and their wish to work with members of Parliament to help reach an early agreement on the venue for its first session inside Somalia. 14. On 8 November 2005, a high-level Swedish delegation met with President Yusuf in Jawhar and discussed possible ways of enhancing the international community's engagement with Somalia, including the revitalization of the Coordination and Monitoring Committee, which was established in October 2004 to channel international support for the Somali transitional federal institutions. Prime Minister Gedi had written earlier to members of the international community to propose ways of improving the functioning of the Committee. In an effort to make the Committee a more effective mechanism, the Swedish delegation submitted a draft proposal for its mandate to the Transitional Federal Government and the international community. After consulting members of the international community, my Special Representative submitted a revised proposal to Prime Minister Gedi based on the Swedish draft. The Swedish Government is continuing consultation with the Transitional Federal Government in order to finalize the new mandate, which would promote and coordinate international support for the transitional federal institutions. 15. On 29 November 2005, the 26th session of the IGAD Council of Ministers was held in Jawhar. Participants included: ministers from Djibouti, Ethiopia and Uganda; representatives of the Transitional Federal Government; delegations from Eritrea, Kenya and the Sudan; and representatives of the international community. During the meeting, some members of IGAD recommended punitive measures against possible spoilers in the peace process as well as increased efforts to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia. The final communiqué, which reflected many of these views, also restated the Authority's earlier position on the deployment of an IGAD-led peace support mission for Somalia. The IGAD ministers called on the Security Council to take appropriate and enabling action to pave the way for the earliest deployment of the peace support mission. They also proposed the deployment of an IGAD military observer mission as an advance component of the peace support mission and underlined the solemn right of the Transitional Federal Government "to establish, train and equip its law enforcement authorities, while seeking regional and international cooperation towards achieving the goal of lifting the United Nations arms embargo". 16. On 29 December 2005, the concluding statement of the Sanaa Forum Summit, which involved the Heads of State of Ethiopia, Somalia, the Sudan and Yemen, called on the Security Council to lift the arms embargo on peacekeeping troops when they deploy in Somalia to achieve peace and security. The Executive Council of the African Union (AU) met from 16 to 21 January 2006 in Khartoum, and adopted a decision, which, inter alia, called "... upon the United Nations Security Council to provide an exemption on the arms embargo on Somalia with a view to facilitating the deployment ..." of the proposed IGAD-led peace support mission and the African Union peace support mission. The Transitional Federal Government welcomed the AU decision. 17. During the period under review, several delegations visited Jawhar for discussions with the Transitional Federal Government. A delegation of the League of Arab States held talks with officials in Jawhar on 9 November 2005. On 30 November, the Ambassador of Belgium to Kenya presented her credentials to President Yusuf in Jawhar. A Chinese delegation visited Jawhar and signed a number of economic and technical agreements with the Transitional Federal Government on 25 December. On 5 January 2006, an Italian delegation led by Senator Alfredo Mantica, Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, held discussions with Prime Minister Gedi and other members of the Transitional Federal Government. IV. Developments inside Somalia 18. Elders of the Digil-Mirifle clan have been trying to resolve differences in the Baidoa area between Sheikh Aden Madobe (Minister of Justice) and Hassan Mohamed Nur "Shattigudud" (Minister of Agriculture), on the one hand, and Mohamed Ibrahim "Habsade", who nominally controls the town, on the other. The aim of this reconciliation effort has been to form a joint regional administration. The process has now been given added importance and urgency with the announcement of Baidoa as the venue for the first session of the Transitional Federal Parliament inside Somalia. 19. On 29 November 2005, the newly elected parliament of "Somaliland" became embroiled in a disagreement during its first session. The dispute arose when opposition members of the Parliament of the Unity Party (Kulmiya) and the Party for Justice and Democracy (UCID) defied a decision by the acting Speaker to adjourn Parliament and proceeded to elect a new speaker and two deputy speakers. This move was opposed by members of Parliament from the ruling Allied People's Democratic Party (UDUB). However, after an intervention by the Council of Elders on 7 December, "President" Dahir Riyale Kahin announced his acceptance of the election of the Speaker and his two Deputies by the opposition members of Parliament. V. Security 20. Insecurity remains a significant problem for aid agencies in much of the country. Recent inter- and intra-clan clashes over land, water and grazing rights have resulted in many civilian casualties. Most of these clashes have occurred in the central and southern parts of Somalia where they continue to make humanitarian access difficult. Reports indicate continuing violations of the United Nations arms embargo in addition to military preparations, activities and movements by some faction leaders linked to the continuing differences within the transitional federal institutions. Attacks on ships and other acts of piracy are also on the rise, hampering the ability of the United Nations to deliver food and other assistance to populations in need. 21. Extremist activities are reported to be increasing in Mogadishu and in Lower Juba. This is not only of concern to the United Nations but is also causing unease on both sides of the divide within the transitional federal institutions. There has also been an upsurge of fighting between Shariah Court militias and those of other faction leaders in north Mogadishu. According to various reports, some militants are suspected of having links with Al-Qaeda operatives and to have set up training camps in south-eastern Somalia. 22. On 18 November 2005, a court in Hargeisa, "Somaliland", sentenced eight people to death for the killing of three international relief workers between 2003 and 2004. Four other people were sentenced to life imprisonment for their involvement in the murders. While there have been no significant incidents between "Somaliland" and "Puntland" in the disputed regions of Sool and Sanaag in past months, tensions have continued to affect humanitarian access in the region. There appears to be no progress towards a political solution to this dispute. Nevertheless, there was an exchange of prisoners in December 2005. A total of 36 prisoners captured in 2004 (24 from "Somaliland" and 12 from "Puntland") were exchanged between the two administrations. 23. Tensions in the central region resulting from the presence of forces supporting the Transitional Federal Government and those belonging to faction leaders in Mogadishu caused concern. In October 2005, there was some military build-up by forces loyal to the Mogadishu-based leaders and allied faction commanders in Balad. However, despite verbal threats to attack Jawhar, there were no incidents. Tensions were also reported between forces loyal to President Yusuf and those belonging to the Middle Shabelle administration, which led to a clash in the Jawhar area on 27 November 2005, resulting in two casualties. 24. Serious clashes have also occurred between clans and sub-clans in the central region. Intermittent and sometimes large-scale fighting between the militias of the Sa'ad and Suleyman sub-clans of the Hawiye in the South Mudug and Galgadud regions in December 2005 and January 2006 left at least 43 people dead and 50 injured. In spite of interventions by elders and other leaders to defuse the situation, tensions persist between the two clans. 25. This region has also seen clashes and tensions between other clans and militias. On 13 December 2005, fighting in the Lower Shabelle region between the Garre and Jiddo sub-clans of the Digil-Mirifle clan claimed the lives of more than eight people and injuring more than 10 others. On 2 January 2006, three militiamen were killed and seven others wounded when a fight broke out in Wanla Wein over the alleged confiscation of one side's weapons and military vehicles by the other. 26. Continued insecurity in Mogadishu was highlighted by the assassination attempt on Prime Minister Gedi on 6 November 2005 (see para. 4 above). Targeted assassinations appear to be on the rise, including the killing of Qadar Osman Elmi Boqore, the son of the second deputy Speaker of Parliament on 12 November and of Ahmed Dahir Saeed, a driver of a Swedish non-governmental organization, International Aid Services, on 28 November. On 22 January 2006, former air force Colonel Salad Ali Dhorre, former police Colonel Ali Haji Mohamed and a serving police officer, Colonel Mohamed Hassan Addawe, were killed in separate incidents by unknown gunmen. 27. Although most of the militia checkpoints were dismantled in the capital during the year, other security concerns involve the presence of and confrontations between various factional militias, including freelancers and extremist elements. In north Mogadishu, there have also been frequent clashes between the militia of the Wa'eysle Shariah Court of Abukar Omar Addan and those supporting Bashir Rage. Both Addan and Rage are from the Abgal sub-clan of the Hawiye. The latest fighting between the two sides, which took place on 13 January 2006 near the port of El-Maan, resulted in the death of at least 15 people and the wounding of 30 others. In earlier fighting between the two militias in the Bondhere district in north Mogadishu on 23 December, about 30 people, including civilians, died and more than 50 were wounded. On 25 December, five civilians died and three others were wounded when a mortar shell landed in south Mogadishu. Thus far, efforts by elders to resolve the conflict have failed. 28. Inter- and intra-clan fighting continues to account for much of the violence in southern Somalia. There has been ongoing fighting between Jilible and Boqol-Hore militia in and around Tiyeglow during the reporting period. At least 10 people were killed in early October following a dispute between the two clans over logging rights near the village of Sigle, and 13 people were killed in early January 2006 in relation to the same dispute. The Leysan and the Harow sub-clans of the Rahanweyn (Digil-Mirifle) clashed in a dispute over access to water in a village near Berdale on 6 November, resulting in at least six dead. On 19 November, at least three people died during fighting between the Huber and Yantar sub-clans of the Digil-Mirifle over their long-standing dispute over the ownership of Idale village. Other clashes included fighting within the group administrating Burhakaba over the control of the town and clashes in Hudur in January over the control of military vehicles. Both of these incidents resulted in significant casualties. 29. While Kismayo has remained generally calm during most of the reporting period, heavy fighting erupted on 15 January between the forces of Barre Hirale and the militia of Colonel Abdi Igal. Reports indicate that Colonel Igal was taken prisoner by Barre Hirale's forces. 30. Piracy has become a major problem all along the east coast of Somalia. According to the International Maritime Board, there were more than 34 reported attacks on commercial shipping between March 2005 and late January 2006, including an unsuccessful attempt to capture the cruise liner Seabourne Spirit in early November. During the reporting period, a minimum of seven ships were seized, of which at least five are still in the possession of their captors. 31. There is serious concern in the region and among humanitarian agencies over the persistence of piracy and its impact on humanitarian shipments into Somalia. The IGAD Council of Ministers, in its communiqué after its meeting in Jawhar on 29 November, decided to coordinate its strategies and action plans to face this common challenge in close collaboration with the international community (see para. 15 above). 32. On 21 January 2006, the crew of a United States Navy warship captured 10 suspected Somali pirates off the coast of Somalia. In the process, the American forces reportedly rescued a crew of 16 Indian sailors who were being held hostage on the ship by the Somalis. The suspected Somali pirates were handed over by the United States to the Kenyan authorities on 28 January. This was the first time such enforcement action had been taken against pirates operating off the coast of Somalia since the increase in acts of piracy in early 2005. The Kenyan authorities have begun legal proceedings to prosecute the suspects. 33. On 22 December 2005, I transmitted to the President of the Security Council a letter dated 28 November 2005 addressed to me by the Secretary-General of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), Efthimios E. Mitropoulos, with regard to the increase in the number of incidents of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. In his letter, the Secretary-General of IMO stated that, at its twenty-fourth session, the IMO Assembly had requested that its resolution on Somalia be brought to the attention of the Security Council. 34. There has been a significant deterioration in the humanitarian situation in recent months as Somalia faces the worst drought in a decade. Failure of the deyr (autumn) rains in southern Somalia has exacerbated an already dire situation, with the number of people in need of urgent assistance rising to 1.7 million. In addition, some 400,000 internally displaced people continue to be in need of assistance and protection. 35. In northern Somalia, the 2005 deyr rains were generally normal, bringing about improvement in rangeland and livestock conditions. However, some localized pockets in Sool and Sanaag received very little rain, risking the recovery of communities in those areas. In the central regions, unresolved conflicts continue to affect livelihoods and delay recovery. In the north and central regions, 290,000 people remain in an acute food and livelihood crisis. 36. The situation in southern Somalia became alarming by November 2005 as poor rains led to depleted pasture and water sources, in turn impacting livestock, rangeland conditions and crop production. The annual crop harvest is expected to be the lowest in a decade, only 50 per cent of the (pre-civil war) average. The most affected regions are Gedo, Lower and Middle Juba and areas of Bay and Bakool, which are beset by high malnutrition levels (above 20 per cent in some areas) exceeding emergency thresholds. Given the severity of the current situation and the potential for deterioration, these regions face a moderate risk of famine before the onset of the next rainy season in April-June 2006. 37. Continued piracy along the Somali coastline has affected the delivery of supplies into southern Somalia, with particular impact on commodities such as food and fuel, as well as on access, at a time when the humanitarian situation is deteriorating and needs in southern Somalia have been increasing. By November 2005, the World Food Programme (WFP) food stocks in the country were at an all-time low due to piracy. For the first time in five years, WFP resorted to transporting food aid into southern Somalia overland through Kenya. By the end of December 2005, however, as the gravity of the humanitarian situation became apparent, WFP resumed small-scale shipments of food through the southern port of Merka while also continuing to transport food overland through Kenya. 38. The 2006 Consolidated Appeals for Somalia launched in Nairobi on 14 December 2005 targeted one million people. To address the needs of the affected population, which have been further compounded by the drought, the aid community will have to increase its operational capacity on the ground. Subject to developments in early 2006, consideration might be given to revising the Appeal to match increasing needs. In mid-January, the Transitional Federal Government established a Disaster Committee at ministerial level to address the drought and to establish close liaison with the humanitarian community. The Humanitarian Coordinator for Somalia will ensure a coordinated response by the aid community. A memorandum of understanding was also signed with Prime Minister Gedi with a commitment from him that it will be further promoted with the local authorities to enhance cooperation and access for unhindered humanitarian access. 39. As the effects of the drought spread through southern Somalia, humanitarian access to reach those in need is of paramount importance. As the humanitarian situation has deteriorated and needs have increased in south/central Somalia, gaining and maintaining access will be an even bigger challenge. There have been encouraging developments however. As the effects of drought have taken hold in southern Somalia, an increasing number of local authorities have indicated commitment towards renewed engagement with aid agencies. A humanitarian inter-agency assessment in southern Gedo was made possible due to support from the local authorities. Also in Gedo, some improvement in El Wak district enabled CARE International to resume food distribution to vulnerable populations in November 2005, including civilians affected by the fighting in Gare and Marehan in 2005. On 19 December 2005, a memorandum of understanding was signed by the Humanitarian Coordinator with the Middle Shabelle administration in Jawhar to govern relations between the United Nations agencies and the regional authorities. 40. Relative stability in the northern zones has continued to facilitate access in most regions, with the exception of the contested areas of Sool and eastern Sanaag, where, despite written agreements with both the "Puntland" and "Somaliland" authorities, ongoing tensions continue to affect the smooth delivery of assistance. Restrictions imposed by them have led to the disruption, and, in at least one case, suspension of medical and humanitarian assistance in the region during the reporting period. VII. Operational activities to promote peace A. Governance 41. The Somalia Emergency Budgetary Support Project of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued to serve as a coordinated funding mechanism for donor budgetary support to the nascent Somali institutions. During the period under review, the project facilitated the participation of the transitional federal institutions in more than 40 international meetings. It also financed the transportation of government officials as they travelled inside Somalia, assisting in efforts to mediate between belligerent communities. In February 2006, through the project, there are plans to pay allowances to members of Parliament and to manage the establishment of a Parliament secretariat for the duration of the first session of the Transitional Federal Parliament inside Somalia. In addition, UNDP funded four policy studies on key civil service issues through its Governance and Financial Services Programme. 42. UNDP has continued to support a transition to good governance in 2005 through a variety of activities, including the Qualified Expatriate Somali Technical Support Project, established to engage the Somali diaspora in the rebuilding of the country. Under the initiative, thus far, 27 Somali consultants from the diaspora have been deployed to help local institutions adopt best practices in their service delivery. 43. UNDP has also continued its efforts to develop financial services in Somalia, with particular focus on strengthening the capacity of Somali money transfer operators that provide the essential channel for remittances to the country. These initiatives focus on building knowledge of international regulations in key source countries and acquiring electronic platforms for improved compliance and business operations. Assistance is also being provided by UNDP for the development of a legal and regulatory framework for the entry of banks, including the establishment of a central bank in Somalia. 44. Under the United Nations Trust Fund for Peacebuilding in Somalia, the United Nations Political Office for Somalia is currently engaged in the implementation of three projects focusing on: the reconstitution and revival of the judiciary; the establishment of a national reconciliation commission; and the organization of a seminar on federalism and constitutional affairs. Two of the projects (the judiciary and the national reconciliation commission) are being implemented through UNDP. The third project (seminar on federalism and constitutional affairs) will be implemented as soon as the members of Parliament meet and agree on a venue and timetable for the seminar. Its primary objective is to stimulate dialogue on the Transitional Federal Charter and prepare the ground for the adoption of a new federal constitution. 45. The judiciary project seeks to assist in the establishment of a judicial commission to rebuild the domestic justice system in accordance with Somali legal traditions and the rule of law through training and capacity-building for judges and other court personnel. The primary aim of the national reconciliation commission project is to help build national capacity to meet the reconciliation objectives defined in the Transitional Federal Charter. Members of such a commission have already been nominated by the Transitional Federal Government and are awaiting parliamentary approval to start their training. B. Joint needs assessment 46. The Somali joint needs assessment has significantly expanded its efforts since October 2005, with over 55 experts from the United Nations, the World Bank and the Somali diaspora being organized into cluster teams and some 65 Somali counterparts being involved in the exercise. The assessment covers six priority clusters: governance, safety and the rule of law; macroeconomic policy framework and data development; infrastructure; basic social services and protection of vulnerable groups; productive sectors and environment; and livelihoods and solutions for the displaced. It also includes three cross-cutting issues: peacebuilding, reconciliation and conflict prevention; capacity-building, institutional development (public and private) and anti-corruption initiatives; and gender parity and human rights. 47. A joint needs assessment inception workshop was held from 23 to 27 November 2005 in Nairobi with the primary aim of strengthening teamwork and networking between cluster leaders and experts, together with their Somali counterparts and resource persons with experience in post-conflict needs assessment. 48. A planning workshop took place from 12 to 15 December in Jawhar with the aim of organizing four workshops in the south, central and Mogadishu areas and in the south-west zones. It also served as a bridge-building exercise between local and regional administrators as well as with the Transitional Federal Government and civil society. The meeting produced a communiqué in which these officials pledged both their unconditional support for the joint needs assessment and access to their respective regions. 49. In-country consultative workshops in the joint needs assessment have been planned for "Somaliland", "Puntland" and the central, south-west, south and Mogadishu areas. The first of these was held in Hargeisa from 16 to 18 January 2006. Participants included international experts from the United Nations and the World Bank and representatives of regional focus groups, including women's groups, youth, civil society, traditional elders, religious groups, the business community, professionals and regional administrations. One outcome of the Hargeisa workshop was the commitment and support by the "Somaliland" administration for the joint needs assessment. The purpose of the consultative workshops is to identify preliminary priorities from a regional and sectoral perspective, as well as relevant sources of data and information. The workshops will be followed by additional field assessments and culminate in the finalization of the reconstruction and development programme document by mid-2006. C. Rule of law 50. The Armo Police Training Academy in "Puntland" was officially opened by Prime Minister Gedi on 20 December 2005. In its initial operational phase, the Academy will train 150 recruits, including 20 women. The training over a three-month period is based on a new curriculum developed by the UNDP Rule of Law and Security Programme (see para. 62 below). 51. In partnership with the "Ministry of Justice" and pursuant to the recommendations of a United Nations assessment of prison conditions in 2005, the programme has embarked on the relocation of the Hargeisa Central Prison in "Somaliland". With funding from the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom and other development partners, the relocation initiative began in January 2006. When completed, the prison is expected to serve as a model for other detention facilities in Somalia. 52. In an effort to help the two regional administrations to reduce the number of armed militiamen to sustainable levels and free up resources for productive sectors, the programme began its support for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in "Puntland" and "Somaliland" in December 2005. The start of this exercise followed the registration of more than 17,000 security personnel and initially involved 500 individuals from each of the two regions. The programme, which places a high premium on the sustainable reintegration of ex-members of the security forces, will continue throughout 2006. 53. The programme initiated a pilot weapons registration project in "Somaliland" in the third quarter of 2005. The project focuses on the registration of civilian weapons in the urban centres of Burao and Gabiley and will continue in 2006. To date, more than 700 civilian weapons have been registered. The project also aims to facilitate legislation governing the registration of civilian weapons. The intention is to expand the exercise to cover all regions of "Somaliland". 54. Also in December 2005, the programme initiated a 14-month pilot project to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate 512 freelance militias from all 16 districts of Mogadishu. D. Support to security sector reform 55. As stated earlier, both President Yusuf and Prime Minister Gedi have been urging my Special Representative to help secure a waiver of the arms embargo from the Security Council for the establishment of the Somali army and police (see para. 7 above). In each instance, my Special Representative has reminded his interlocutors of a key provision of the Security Council presidential statement of 14 July 2005 (S/PRST/2005/32), namely the development of a national security and stabilization plan. 56. The development of such a plan, as urged by the Security Council remains a key priority. While the primary responsibility for the development of this plan rests with Somali leaders, the international community is currently insufficiently prepared to provide support for such an effort. This is largely due to a lack of coordinated support to the sector. 57. The United Nations Political Office for Somalia has initiated the establishment of a security sector technical working group to provide a forum for coordination in security sector reform until the Security Committee of the Coordination and Monitoring Committee is established. The working group will provide technical advice to the Monitoring Committee in matters pertaining to security sector reform in Somalia. Representatives of the Transitional Federal Government have participated in the meetings of the working group, which could help put in place interim coordination measures for the international community to engage with a Somali-led planning process for a national security and stabilization plan. E. The role of women's groups 58. As described in my previous report (S/2005/642, paras. 35-41), women's advocacy groups and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) continue to play a vital role in the delivery of basic social services, literacy and vocational training. Most of the funding for their programmes comes from United Nations agencies and NGOs. However, women's groups continue to face obstacles to their desire to play a larger political role. This is due in part to the continuing impasse within the transitional federal institutions. 59. Women's groups, together with other civil society and business groups have continued to play a prominent role in initiating and supporting pre-disarmament encampments in Mogadishu. Although the camps are still operating, some militiamen appear to have left because of the worsening security situation and lack of funds to meet their needs. Thus far, women's groups, together with some members of the local business community, have been financing the camps. UNDP has earmarked $172,000 to help them to support demobilization of the militiamen. Half of this amount was paid to the women's groups during the reporting period. 60. UNDP has also developed a nationwide strategy with the goal of enhancing the ability of Somali women leaders to participate meaningfully in the political sphere through effective advocacy for the protection of their human rights and economic security. Based on these overall goals, the strategy focuses on the training of women leaders to enhance their leadership skills and the use of advocacy and communication tools to address issues such as: female genital mutilation; land and property rights; domestic violence; and building the capacity of legislators (both women and men) and civil society to advocate gender-responsive policies, legislative reform and gender mainstreaming within the political sphere at the district, regional and national level. 61. Other ongoing UNDP activities include support for the Somalia Women Journalists Association to train women journalists to investigate, advocate and disseminate information through the media against abuses of women's rights. Another project involves management training for 105 female staff of the "Somaliland" Civil Service Commission. Under the UNDP Rule of Law and Security Programme, 54 women were recruited for the Mandera Police Academy in "Somaliland". Their training commenced in November. In addition, 20 women were among a total of 180 recruits selected for training at the Armo Policy Academy in "Puntland" (see para. 51 above). The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), in partnership with Oxfam-Netherlands (Novib), is working with the Coalition of Grassroots Women Organization, based in Mogadishu, the Nagaad Women's Coalition and the Coalition of "Somaliland" non-governmental organizations, on human rights monitoring and on child protection. 62. In the last quarter of 2005, the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) collaborated with local partners to implement a gender equality programme. These activities have supported public awareness on issues related to HIV/AIDS and human rights and training for internally displaced women to combat HIV/AIDS and gender-based violence. A newly established legal aid clinic in Hargeisa has, to date, represented six women in land disputes. F. Water and sanitation 63. In view of the prevailing drought, and cognizant that access to water is a frequent cause of conflict, emergency interventions are under way by UNDP and other partners to deepen wells and maintain strategic boreholes. During the reporting period, development activities also continued in areas of Somalia that were not affected by drought. In north-east Somalia, post-tsunami rehabilitation progressed as planned. Long-term rural and urban water and sanitation programmes also continued in the northern zones. In rural areas, work started in an additional 29 locations while in the urban areas, water and sanitation planning was initiated for Merka, Bad Weynee and Borama. These interventions are expected to benefit a population of at least 40,000 rural and 140,000 urban dwellers. Direct support to development and sustainability of the sector was improved through the drafting of regulations and provisions of the Water Act and ensure its implementation in "Somaliland". G. Health 64. The re-emergence of polio in the central and southern regions after nearly three years without a confirmed case is cause for serious concern. Despite immunization efforts that began in June, when the virus re-emerged in neighbouring countries, the wild virus was identified in the Benadir region (around Mogadishu) in September. UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO) launched a joint emergency vaccination campaign that covered the region and will continue during the coming years until the virus is eradicated. Prior to the outbreak, over 1.5 million children under five years of age were vaccinated against the disease in 2005. 65. In addition to ongoing polio vaccination efforts, supplementary immunization activities were conducted for measles and maternal and neonatal tetanus in various parts of the country, including "Somaliland", "Puntland" and Bakool regions. These activities targeted almost one million children aged 9 months to 15 years. 66. A meeting of health officials from the three geographic zones of Somalia was held in December 2005 to discuss malaria and to plan control interventions. To date, 160,000 long-lasting mosquito nets have been delivered, with all efforts being made to ensure that children less than five years of age and pregnant women receive the nets. H. HIV/AIDS 67. Somalia has made significant strides towards the establishment of a unified framework to enhance the effectiveness of HIV/AIDS response with the establishment of national AIDS commissions in "Somaliland" and "Puntland" in 2005. These initiatives are expected to be replicated in central/south Somalia during the course of 2006. 68. As part of ongoing efforts to build capacity and forge partnerships to respond more effectively to HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment, UNICEF facilitated the training of 55 young women and men as youth peer educators. They, in turn, trained an additional 2,000 young people. The training has facilitated youth-to-youth education on topics such as sex education, female genital mutilation and the prevention of HIV/AIDS. 69. UNICEF facilitated the training of 58 religious, traditional and secular leaders from all three zones to enable them to take the lead in challenging beliefs and behaviours through enhanced advocacy and more effective community mobilization. In November 2005, UNDP supported representatives of Sheikhs from each of Somalia's three zones to attend a training focused on the role of religious leaders in HIV/AIDS response in Yemen and Egypt. The Sheikhs have formed a network with fellow religious leaders to promote faith-based HIV/AIDS sensitization during weekly prayer gatherings in mosques. I. Education 70. During the period under review, the 2004/2005 primary education survey was completed and distributed to educational institutions. The survey indicated a rise of about 2 per cent in the gross enrolment ratio, from 19.9 per cent in 2004 to 21.9 per cent in 2005, with the girls' ratio recording a modest improvement, from 14.3 to 15.9 per cent. Related to this, new user friendly education management information system tools were introduced to over 9,000 teachers and education managers through a cascade model across all three zones of Somalia. The tools are expected to enhance local capacities in educational data management. 71. Progress continued to be registered in the ongoing enrolment and advocacy drive across all three zones of the country, with a special focus on girls and children in settlements for internally displaced persons. A total of 114,359 new children were enrolled during 2005. This enrolment drive involved partnerships with educational authorities, communities and schoolchildren themselves. In order to increase access, about 34 schools of four-classroom blocks each were rehabilitated and 430 tents were procured to serve as temporary learning spaces. 72. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) through its Programme of Education for Emergencies and Reconstruction, continued to support the peace process in Somalia through primary, secondary, vocational and civic education projects. Key results registered under this programme thus far include: the provision of in-service induction training to about 3,000 teachers in 11 Somali centres to support the use of textbooks distributed by UNESCO; the distribution of teacher guides to support curricula to 160 primary schools in "Somaliland"; and the provision of about 100 university scholarships to Somali students to pursue further studies in east Africa and in "Somaliland" and "Puntland". J. Child protection 73. During the reporting period, community-based child protection advocates continued to work with vulnerable and disadvantaged communities in Somalia to address protection violations. This process of social mobilization is contributing to the prevention of and accountability for, rights abuse and is thus reducing conflict at the community level. 74. As a follow-up to Security Council resolutions on the protection of children affected by armed conflict, in particular resolution 1612 (2005), a partnership has been established between UNICEF and Oxfam-Netherlands (Novib) in Somalia to initiate community-based reporting and monitoring on child rights and child protection violations. Pursuant to this partnership, a format has been developed to monitor and report on rights violations against children and other vulnerable or marginalized groups. The first training of partner organizations took place in Merka in December 2005, with 30 participants in attendance. 75. During the reporting period, an evaluation of UNICEF's recent activities in the field of child disarmament, demobilization and reintegration was undertaken. Strategic recommendations were produced to guide the way forward, in particular in relation to the broader disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, which UNDP intends to conduct during 2006 to reduce the number of small arms in circulation in Somalia. VIII. Observations 76. The signing of the Aden Declaration on 5 January 2006 created encouraging prospects for reconciliation among the leaders of the Somali transitional federal institutions. I commend President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, Prime Minister Ali Mohammed Gedi, the Speaker of Parliament, Sharif Hassan Sheikh Adan and other Somali leaders for taking this courageous step. I welcome the announcement by the Speaker, endorsed by President Yusuf on 30 January, that the first session of the Transitional Federal Parliament inside Somalia will be held in Baidoa on 26 February. I call upon the leaders of the transitional federal institutions, as well as civil society organizations, to work towards the early convening of the first session. I urge all members of the Transitional Federal Government and of the Parliament to forge ahead with equal commitment and courage, in the spirit of national reconciliation. 77. The leaders of the Transitional Federal Government face a number of complex political and security challenges. The peace process remains fragile, especially as it relates to implementation of the provisions of the Aden Declaration. After a year of deadlock within the transitional federal institutions, the convening of the Transitional Federal Parliament is only the first challenge in the dialogue process aimed at reconciliation and the building of functional state institutions in Somalia. The immediate priorities for the transitional federal institutions will include the development of a national security and stabilization plan, the promotion of reconciliation, and the urgent need to improve the humanitarian situation and quality of life of the Somali people. 78. Somalia is once again the victim of the forces of nature. The deteriorating food security situation presents serious humanitarian challenges, which are also likely to have significant political consequences. If the drought continues, the humanitarian situation will become worse and the internal security situation will deteriorate. As food resources diminish, and have to be alleviated by external aid, the competition for these scarce resources will increase, leading to increased inter-and intra-clan fighting, hijacking, looting of convoys, extortion and demands for "protection fees". 79. The international community should continue to support political reconciliation efforts, especially with regard to the preparation and convening of the Transitional Federal Parliament, as envisioned in the Aden Declaration. Reconciliation efforts are likely to foster improved security and thus humanitarian access, particularly in southern Somalia and in Mogadishu where the operational environment is extremely volatile. Improved access will enable the increased presence of aid agencies in areas where there are presently very few, and thus enhance their capacity to respond to growing needs. 80. I commend the United Nations programmes and agencies for their continued delivery of humanitarian assistance to Somalia. International commitment and coordinated support will be critical for improving the humanitarian situation, currently affecting at least 1.7 million people in Somalia. The international community must respond generously to the 2006 Consolidated Appeal for Somalia if the dire effects of the humanitarian crisis are to be mitigated. The effective delivery of aid to affected communities is contingent on an adequate security environment. The need for concerted support and contributions towards improving security cannot be overestimated. Lack of resources towards this activity, particularly in implementing security measures for common United Nations facilities such as airstrips, will have a profound impact on the delivery of aid in Somalia for both the United Nations and the NGO community. 81. I once again express my deep appreciation to the neighbouring countries and to the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union and other Member States for their concerted and increasingly harmonized efforts in support of the Somali peace process. I welcome the renewed engagement of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the African Union in the Somali peace process. I call on them, in accordance with the provisions outlined in the presidential statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2005/32) of 14 July 2005 "... to work out a detailed mission plan in close coordination with and with the broad consensus of the transitional federal institutions and consistent with a national security and stabilization plan", which is also necessary for the reform of the security sector in Somalia. 82. Finally, I wish to reaffirm my deep appreciation to my Special Representative for Somalia for his leadership and relentless efforts to foster inclusive dialogue and reconciliation among the leaders of the transitional federal institutions. I call upon all Somali parties and Member States to continue to lend to him their fullest support and cooperation in the pursuit of this goal. 