%%%INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|INTERNAL SECURITY|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|

Letter dated 3 March 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Austria to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to draw your attention to the statement on the opening session of the Somali Transitional Federal Parliament, issued on 3 March 2006 by the Presidency on behalf of the European Union (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Gerhard Pfanzelter Permanent Representative of Austria to the United Nations [Original: English, French and Spanish] Statement on the opening session of the Somali Transitional Federal Parliament issued on 3 March 2006 by the Presidency on behalf of the European Union The European Union wholeheartedly welcomes the opening session of the extraordinary Transitional Federal Parliament session in Baidoa on 26 February. The European Union congratulates the leaders of the transitional federal institutions for their courage in forging an agreement to facilitate the holding of this session, and applauds their success in implementing the agreement under extremely difficult circumstances. The European Union considers this a demonstration of serious commitment to achieving inclusiveness and establishing democratic practice in the governance of Somalia, and urges all members of the Transitional Federal Parliament to undertake their work in a constructive and inclusive spirit. The European Union welcomes the improved security conditions in the city, urges all Somali parties to continue their efforts in this regard and looks forward to broad agreement on a national security and stabilization plan. The European Union reiterates its firm intention to maintain its political, moral and material support for the implementation of the transitional period through the transitional federal institutions. The European Union, however, strongly condemns the use of force in Mogadishu to resolve grievances and expresses its concern regarding the recent fighting in the capital, which has led to heavy casualties, particularly among civilians. The European Union extends its sympathy to the victims and their families and urges the parties to exercise restraint and commit themselves to resolving their differences by peaceful means. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate countries Croatia,* the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia* and Turkey, the countries of the stabilization and association process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro, and the European Free Trade Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this statement. 