%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|FOREIGN RELATIONS|CHAD|SUDAN|MERCENARIES|SUDANESE REFUGEES|

Letter dated 13 April 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 13 April 2006, from the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of the Republic of Chad, Lucienne Dillah. In the letter, the Government of Chad conveys its concern at the Sudan's aggression against Chad and the threat to State institutions (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be brought to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Letter dated 13 April 2006 from the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of the Republic of Chad addressed to the Secretary-General [Original: French] For several months, my country, Chad, has repeatedly called the attention of the international community to the acts of aggression directed against it by the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and to the risk of escalation of the conflict across the subregion, spreading from the crisis in Darfur. Despite the mediation efforts conducted by certain friendly countries and especially the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006, the Khartoum regime persists in its determination to destabilize Chad. Thus, for several days now, mercenaries acting on behalf of the Government of the Sudan have been waging a broad offensive against a number of military garrisons in eastern Chad and a Sudanese refugee camp within Chadian territory. The plan for the wilful destabilization of Chad and the subregion of Central Africa has thus been clearly demonstrated by the attack this day, 13 April 2006, on the city of N'Djamena, where the central institutions of the Republic are located. The national defence and security forces vigorously repelled and neutralized this latest attack. Some pieces of military equipment, both heavy and light, were destroyed or seized. Some mercenaries were captured and taken prisoner, including combatants holding Sudanese nationality. All this evidence testifies to the lack of will of the Government of the Sudan to seek a lasting peace in Darfur. The Government of Chad is ready to furnish such evidence. This unfriendly conduct violates the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of other treaties and conventions which obligate Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means. There is little need to recall that the Chadian Government, in its capacity as co-mediator in the crisis in Darfur, has spared no effort to induce the warring parties to find a negotiated settlement, including the offer of its good offices on several occasions. In the face of the threat posed by the Sudanese Government to the institutions of the Republic of Chad, I urge you to take the necessary measures prescribed by the Charter of the United Nations to put an end to the aggression against Chad. These measures must also provide for the protection of the Sudanese refugees sheltering in Chadian territory, who are subjected daily to acts of vandalism by Janjaweed militias. (Signed) Lucienne Dillah (For) Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration 