%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|BURKINA FASO|TERRORISM|BORDER TRAFFIC|CULTURAL PLURALISM|

Letter dated 29 June 2006 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council The Counter-Terrorism Committee has received the attached report from Burkina Faso submitted pursuant to resolution 1624 (2005) (see annex). I would be grateful if you could arrange for the present letter and its annex to be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Ellen Margrethe Løj Chairman [Original: French] The Permanent Mission of Burkina Faso to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and further to the note verbale of 20 June 2006 has the honour to transmit a supplementary report on the measures taken by the Government of Burkina Faso in the areas covered by resolution 1624 (2005) (see enclosure). Report of Burkina Faso on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) on measures to combat terrorism Burkina Faso, as a Member of the United Nations, has always participated in the Organization's activities, including those to combat terrorism. Like other States, it transmits reports on its national and international activities in this area to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The present report relates to the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). Implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) Paragraph 1 1.1 What measures does Burkina Faso have in place to prohibit by law and to prevent incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts? What further steps, if any, are under consideration? They are currently being determined. 1.2 What measures does Burkina Faso take to deny safe haven to any persons with respect to whom there is credible and relevant information giving serious reasons for considering that they have been guilty of incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts? The ministerial departments responsible for finance, security, defence and territorial administration are alerted and take appropriate steps within their respective spheres of competence. In addition to its border control system for checking those entering and leaving, Burkina Faso relies on order No. 84-49 of 4 August 1984, the Organization of African Unity convention of 10 August 1969 and decree AN-V-28/FP of 3 August 1988 on the status of refugees to deny entry visas or safe haven. Paragraph 2 1.3 How does Burkina Faso cooperate with other States in strengthening the security of its international borders with a view to preventing those guilty of incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts from entering their territory, including by combating fraudulent travel documents and, to the extent attainable, by enhancing terrorist screening and passenger security procedures? There is cross-border security cooperation in the subregion consisting of periodic meetings between those working to combat organized transnational crime by sharing information on the movement of suspicious individuals and persons with records, in accordance with the convention on cooperation and assistance in security matters of 15 February 1996 between the States members of the Council of the Entente. Within this framework a meeting of the heads of the security forces of Burkina Faso, Benin and the Niger was held on 13 June 2006. The measures for inspecting departing and arriving passengers may also be included among the security procedures adopted. Paragraph 3 1.4 What international efforts is Burkina Faso participating in or considering participating in/initiating in order to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding among civilizations in an effort to prevent the indiscriminate targeting of different religions and cultures? Burkina Faso is a secular State which promotes and defends dialogue and tolerance in multilateral forums. In this regard, it maintains very good relations with the Vatican and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. The Government accordingly ensures that all religions enjoy full respect. All religious denominations coexist harmoniously in a spirit of tolerance. 1.5 What steps is Burkina Faso taking to counter incitement of terrorist acts motivated by extremism and intolerance and to prevent subversion of educational, cultural and religious institutions by terrorists and their supporters? The steps taken by Burkina Faso consist essentially in control of the activities of associations of a denominational nature. Such control is based on law 10 ADP of 10 December 1992, which lays down and regulates the conditions for the existence of non-governmental organizations and associations in Burkina Faso. Apart from the Ministry of Territorial Administration, the office responsible for monitoring nongovernmental organizations exercises this control. In addition, the activities of these associations are monitored by the security services, which attend meetings at which preachers speak in order to listen for attempts at incitement in educational and cultural surroundings. Paragraph 4 1.6 What is Burkina Faso doing to ensure that any measures taken to implement paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of resolution 1624 (2005) comply with all its obligations under international law, in particular international human rights law, refugee law, and humanitarian law? Burkina Faso has established an interministerial committee in which the departments responsible for foreign affairs, territorial administration, security, defence, justice, finance and budget are represented, and each acts in its own sphere to implement the resolution. Observations The political will of the authorities in Burkina Faso to stamp out international terrorism is evident, despite the meagre resources available. It must be said, however, that the difficulties caused by a lack of resources, especially suitable equipment, make the job of territorial vigilance and detection of suspect individuals extremely difficult. Police and security services need to be equipped with the necessary tools in terms of both information and logistics in order to strengthen the existing system. 