%%%POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|ELECTIONS|POLITICAL REPRESENTATION|INTERNAL SECURITY|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|IRAQ|IRAQ SITUATION|VIOLENCE|BOMBINGS|DIPLOMATS' SECURITY|EMBASSIES|REGIONAL COOPERATION|TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|

Letter dated 10 July 2006 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to enclose herewith the final communiqué of the ninth meeting of foreign ministers of Iraq's neighbouring countries held in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, on 8 and 9 July 2006 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mehdi Danesh-Yazdi Ambassador Chargé d'affaires a.i. Final communiqué of the ninth meeting of foreign ministers of Iraq's neighbouring countries Upon the invitation of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the ninth meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Iraq's neighbouring countries, attended by the Foreign Ministers of the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Republic of Iraq, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the State of Kuwait, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Republic of Turkey, was held in Tehran on 17-18 Tir 1385, corresponding to 12-13 Jamdi al-Thani 1427 and 8-9 July 2006. His Excellency Dr. Mahmoud Ahmadi Nejad, President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, inaugurated the meeting. His Excellency Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, the Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, His Excellency Amre Moussa, the Secretary-General of the Arab League, and His Excellency Ashraf Ghazi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations for Iraq, also attended the meeting. The Foreign Ministers attending the meeting recalled other regional and international conferences on Iraq, particularly eight previous meetings of the Foreign Ministers and two meetings of the Ministers of Interior of Iraq's neighbouring countries, as well as the meetings at Sharm al-Sheikh, Egypt and in Brussels, and underlined the need to assist the Government and people of Iraq in their endeavours to bring stability and security to that country. They reviewed the current situation in Iraq and, in keeping with the universally recognized principles of international law, including respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Iraq, agreed as follows: 1. Welcoming the completion of the political transition process and the establishment of a permanent Government and national assembly in Iraq, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs expressed their full support for the constitutionally based elected Government and national assembly of Iraq and for the realization of the priorities of the new Government towards a prosperous, free, independent, democratic and unified federal Iraq, living in peace and tranquillity with its neighbours, based on good neighbourly relations, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and respect for international and bilateral treaties and agreements. 2. Welcoming the establishment of a broad-based Government with the participation of all segments of the Iraqi population in all elected institutions and in the new political structure of the country, the Ministers expressed their full support for the national reconciliation plan of His Excellency Mr. Nouri Al-Maliki, the Prime Minister of Iraq, aimed at strengthening national unity, ensuring security and ending the current violence and at the inclusion of all groups in the political process. They called upon all Iraqi groups to participate and contribute actively within the framework of the aforementioned plan. They supported the invitation by the Government of Iraq extended to all Iraqis to participate constructively in the constitutional review according to the constitutionally agreed procedures. In that context, they also confirmed their support for the efforts led by the League of Arab States to ensure a viable process of national reconciliation through the convening of a national accord conference in Baghdad in the near future. 3. Expressing deep concern over the continued escalation of violence and terrorist attacks against the citizens and the political and religious leaders of Iraq, members of the diplomatic corps, foreign nationals engaged in economic, reconstruction and humanitarian activities in Iraq, mosques and sacred religious places, including the bombing of the holy shrine of Imams Ali al-Hadi and al-Askari in Samara, the Ministers strongly condemned those attacks and reaffirmed their full support for the Government and people of Iraq in countering terrorist and criminal activities. In that context, they underlined the need for convening a meeting of the religious leaders of Iraq, aimed at reaching consensus on strengthening Iraqi national unity, and condemning sectarian, and other kinds of violence, and welcomed the initiatives in that regard presented by His Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan, His Excellency the Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 4. Noting the stated intention of the international community, including in Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004) and 1637 (2005), to terminate the presence of multinational forces at the request of the Government of Iraq, the Ministers expressed their support for the transfer of all affairs to the elected representatives of the Iraqi people, and underlined the need to raise the level of preparedness of Iraqi defence and security forces and the earliest transfer of defence and security responsibilities to them. 5. Emphasizing the need for a more active contribution by the international community, especially regional and international organizations and neighbouring countries, to the political and economic development of Iraq, and welcoming the enhanced diplomatic presence of other countries in Iraq, the Ministers called on countries and international institutions to provide comprehensive assistance to the process of political and economic development and reconstruction of Iraq. In that context, the Ministers welcomed the contributions of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, as reflected in the Baku Declaration on Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Development in the Caspian Sea Region and Other Oil Producing and Exporting Countries and the relevant resolutions, and of the League of Arab States. 6. Emphasizing the importance of the reconstruction and economic development of Iraq, the Ministers expressed their Governments' readiness to participate actively in the reconstruction of Iraq. They agreed to reopen their embassies in Baghdad and to enhance their diplomatic presence in Iraq. 7. Expressing grave concern at the alarming security situation in Iraq, the Ministers expressed their determination to engage in effective cooperation with the Government of Iraq to enhance security and stability in Iraq and the region. 8. Emphasizing the important decisions of the first and second meetings of the Ministers of Interior of Iraq's neighbouring countries, held in Istanbul and Tehran, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs declared their readiness to support and cooperate bilaterally and multilaterally in implementing those decisions, and reaffirmed the holding of the third meeting of the Interior Ministers of Iraq's neighbouring countries in Riyadh on the agreed date. 9. Underlining the importance of the expansion of cooperation between the Government of Iraq and the neighbouring countries to combat terrorism, through inter alia, the cooperation of their security officials, and to consider ways and means of enhancing security, and expressing concern over the continued presence and activities of certain recognized terrorist groups operating in Iraq and the resulting implications and threats for the security and stability of Iraq and its neighbours, the Ministers expressed their support for the efforts made by the Government and Parliament of Iraq, in accordance with its new constitution, to combat all forms of terrorism and to prevent terrorist groups from using Iraqi territory to supply, organize or launch terrorist operations against neighbouring countries or to infiltrate into their territories. The Ministers emphatically called for more effective continuation and enhancement of those efforts. 10. The Ministers underlined the need for a fair and transparent trial of Saddam Hussein and other criminal leaders of the former Iraqi regime for war crimes, particularly the use of weapons of mass destruction, crimes against humanity, genocide and aggressions against the Iraqi people, the Islamic Republic of Iran and the State of Kuwait, and stressed the need for the adoption of measures to alleviate the sufferings of the victims of those crimes. 11. The Ministers expressed their thanks to the Islamic Republic of Iran for hosting the meeting. They emphasized the importance of the continued holding of such meetings to support the people and Government of Iraq, and welcomed the invitation extended by Iraq to host, in Baghdad, a future meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Iraq's neighbouring countries at the earliest appropriate time. They decided to hold a ministerial meeting in New York during the sixty-first session of the General Assembly. 