%%%NEGOTIATION|NUCLEAR ENERGY|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|VERIFICATION|NUCLEAR REACTORS|NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY|REGIONAL SECURITY|RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|INVESTMENTS|REGIONAL COOPERATION|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|

Letter dated 13 July 2006 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit to you the proposals of China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, with the support of the High Representative of the European Union, for a comprehensive long-term arrangement that would allow for the development of relations and cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran, based on mutual respect and the establishment of international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran (see annex). I should be grateful if you would arrange for the present letter and its annex to be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Jean-Marc de La Sablière Ambassador Permanent Representative [Original: English] Elements of a long-term agreement Our goal is to develop relations and cooperation with Iran, based on mutual respect and the establishment of international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We propose a fresh start in the negotiation of a comprehensive agreement with Iran. Such an agreement would be deposited with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and endorsed in a Security Council resolution. To create the right conditions for negotiations, We will: :: Reaffirm Iran's right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with its obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (hereinafter, NPT), and in this context reaffirm our support for the development by Iran of a civil nuclear energy programme. :: Commit to support actively the building of new light water reactors in Iran through international joint projects, in accordance with the IAEA statute and NPT. :: Agree to suspend discussion of Iran's nuclear programme in the Security Council upon the resumption of negotiations. Iran will: :: Commit to addressing all of the outstanding concerns of IAEA through full cooperation with IAEA, :: Suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing activities to be verified by IAEA, as requested by the IAEA Board of Governors and the Security Council, and commit to continue this during these negotiations. :: Resume the implementation of the Additional Protocol. Areas of future cooperation to be covered in negotiations on a long-term agreement 1. Nuclear We will take the following steps: Iran's rights to nuclear energy :: Reaffirm Iran's inalienable right to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles I and II of NPT, and cooperate with Iran in the development by Iran of a civil nuclear power programme. :: Negotiate and implement a Euratom/Iran nuclear cooperation agreement. Light water reactors :: Actively support the building of new light water power reactors in Iran through international joint projects, in accordance with the IAEA statute and NPT, using state-of-the-art technology, including by authorizing the transfer of necessary goods and the provision of advanced technology to make its power reactors safe against earthquakes. :: Provide cooperation with the management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste through appropriate arrangements. Research and development in nuclear energy :: Provide a substantive package of research and development cooperation, including possible provision of light water research reactors, notably in the fields of radioisotope production, basic research and nuclear applications in medicine and agriculture. Fuel guarantees :: Give legally binding, multilayered fuel assurances to Iran, based on: ◦ Participation as a partner in an international facility in Russia to provide enrichment services for a reliable supply of fuel to Iran's nuclear reactors. Subject to negotiations, such a facility could enrich all uranium hexaflouride (UF6) produced in Iran. ◦ Establishment on commercial terms of a buffer stock to hold a reserve of up to five years' supply of nuclear fuel dedicated to Iran, with the participation and under supervision of IAEA. ◦ Development with IAEA of a standing multilateral mechanism for reliable access to nuclear fuel, based on ideas to be considered at the next meeting of the Board of Governors. Review of moratorium The long-term agreement would, with regard to common efforts to build international confidence, contain a clause for review of the agreement in all its aspects, to follow: :: Confirmation by IAEA that all outstanding issues and concerns reported by it, including those activities which could have a military nuclear dimension, have been resolved; :: Confirmation that there are no undeclared nuclear activities or materials in Iran and that international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's civil nuclear programme has been restored. Regional security cooperation Support for a new conference to promote dialogue and cooperation on regional security issues. International trade and investment Improving Iran's access to the international economy, markets and capital, through practical support for full integration into international structures, including the World Trade Organization and to create the framework for increased direct investment in Iran and trade with Iran (including a trade and economic cooperation agreement with the European Union). Steps would be taken to improve access to key goods and technology. Civil aviation Civil aviation cooperation, including the possible removal of restrictions on United States and European manufacturers in regard to the export of civil aircraft to Iran, thereby widening the prospect of Iran renewing its fleet of civil airliners. Energy partnership Establishment of a long-term energy partnership between Iran and the European Union and other willing partners, with concrete and practical applications. Telecommunications infrastructure Support for the modernization of Iran's telecommunication infrastructure and advanced Internet provision, including by possible removal of relevant United States and other export restrictions. High technology cooperation Cooperation in fields of high technology and other areas to be agreed upon. Agriculture Support for agricultural development in Iran, including possible access to United States and European agricultural products, technology and farm equipment. 