%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|INTERNAL SECURITY|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|TIMOR-LESTE|POLICE|EAST TIMOR SITUATION|MILITARY PERSONNEL|ELECTION VERIFICATION|

Letter dated 4 August 2006 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Timor-Leste to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to submit to you a copy of a letter dated 4 August 2006 addressed to the Secretary-General by José Ramos-Horta, Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, on the establishment of a new integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission in Timor-Leste. I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Sofia Borges Chargé d'affaires a.i. I wish to thank you for your continued concern for the people of Timor-Leste and your personal engagement during these past months. The emergency situation in my country is at an end and it is now important to focus attention on the establishment of a new integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission in Timor-Leste working under the authority of the Secretary-General and within a framework as agreed to by the Government of Timor-Leste. I should like to express our appreciation for the work of your Special Envoy, Ian Martin, and the efforts of the recent assessment mission. On behalf of all Timorese, I wish to reiterate that we are deeply indebted to the deploying countries -- Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal -- all of whom were able to respond promptly and efficiently to quell the violence and to maintain law and order and to re-establish confidence among the people. As mentioned in the 11 June letter signed by President Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, the President of the National Parliament, Francisco Lu'Olo Guterres, and then Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri (S/2006/383, annex), we believe that a robust police, military and civilian element is indispensable to our hard-won peace and freedom. There is a consensus among all stakeholders that the situation in Timor-Leste requires the establishment of a United Nations multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping mission. Furthermore, in light of the prevailing fragility of the security situation and the need to maintain stability throughout the upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections, but taking into account that the emergency phase has passed and that the current arrangements regarding the international forces need to be reviewed, we deem necessary that along with a strong civilian component, the new mission should have a police force of considerable strength to allow for adequate deployment throughout the districts and subdistricts, backed by a small military force, under the command and control of the United Nations. I reiterate my thanks for your support for the people of Timor-Leste and trust we can count on your continuing support in meeting our critical requirements for an integrated peacekeeping mission in your upcoming report to the Security Council. (Signed) José Ramos-Horta Prime Minister 