%%%CEASEFIRES|TRUCE SUPERVISION|MAPS|MIDDLE EAST|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|LANDMINES|MILITARY PERSONNEL|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (for the period from 10 June 2006 to 1 December 2006) I. Introduction 1. The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past six months pursuant to the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 1685 (2006) of 13 June 2006. II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force 2. During the period under review the ceasefire in the Israel-Syria sector was maintained and the UNDOF area of operation remained generally quiet except in the Shab'a Farms (area 6), which experienced activity originating from the area of operation of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), described in my reports on UNIFIL. In particular, between 12 July and 14 August 2006, rockets originating from the UNIFIL area of operation hit close to UNDOF installations, destroying one United Nations unmanned watchtower. Also, unidentified elements operating from the UNDOF area of separation detonated an explosive along the ALine and destroyed a small portion of the technical fence. 3. UNDOF supervised its area of separation by means of fixed positions and patrols to ensure that military forces of either party were excluded from it. The Force also carried out fortnightly inspections of equipment and force levels in the areas of limitation. Liaison officers from the party concerned accompanied the inspection teams. As in the past, both sides denied inspection teams access to some of their positions and imposed restrictions on the Force's freedom of movement. From 12 July to 14 August 2006, the Force temporarily restricted its patrolling and inspection activities in areas 4, 5 and 6, adjacent to the UNIFIL area of operation. Israeli national customs officials continued to operate at the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) post at the UNDOF crossing gate between the Israeli-occupied Golan and the Syrian Arab Republic. 4. The Force continued to assist the International Committee of the Red Cross with the passage of persons through the area of separation. During the past six months, UNDOF assisted in the crossing of 727 students, 1,009 pilgrims and 6 civilians, provided protection at one wedding and facilitated the passage of a body for burial. In addition, the Force assisted in the handover from the IDF to the Syrian authorities of three Syrian civilians who had crossed into the Israeli-occupied Golan. 5. In the area of operation, especially in the area of separation, mines continued to pose a threat to UNDOF personnel and local inhabitants. Owing to the age of the mines and their deteriorating explosives, this threat has increased. UNDOF continued to carry out operational mine clearance. UNDOF remained available to support the United Nations Children's Fund in activities to promote mine awareness among the civilian population. 6. The Force Commander and his staff maintained close contact with the military authorities of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. Both sides generally cooperated with the Force in the execution of its tasks. 7. As at 15 November 2006, UNDOF comprised 1,025 troops, from Austria (372), Canada (2), India (190), Japan (30), Nepal (2), Poland (334) and Slovakia (95), respectively. A total of 15 personnel were employed by Japan as a national support element. In addition, 83 military observers from the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) assisted the Force in carrying out its tasks. A map showing the deployment of the Force is attached to the present report. III. Financial aspects 8. By its resolution 60/277 of 30 June 2006, the General Assembly appropriated the amount of $39.9 million gross, equivalent to $3.3 million gross per month, for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007. Should the Council decide to extend the mandate of the Force beyond 31 December 2006, as recommended in paragraph 13 below, the cost of maintaining the Force will be limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly. 9. As at 30 September 2006, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNDOF special account for the period from the inception of the Force to 30 September 2006 amounted to $30.2 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $2,080.2 million. As at 31 October 2006, amounts owed to troop contributors totalled $2.4 million. Reimbursement of troop- and contingent-owned equipment costs have been made for the period up to 31 August and 31 March 2006, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule. IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) 10. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 1685 (2006) to renew the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 31 December 2006, also called upon the parties concerned to implement immediately its resolution 338 (1973), and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, and in particular the efforts undertaken at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East (A/61/298) submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 60/40 and 60/41. 11. The situation in the Israel-Syria sector has remained generally quiet. UNDOF, which was established in May 1974 to supervise the ceasefire called for by the Security Council and the agreement on disengagement between Syrian and Israeli forces of 31 May 1974, has continued to perform its function effectively, with the cooperation of the parties. 12. Nevertheless, the situation in the Middle East is tense and is likely to remain so, unless and until a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East problem can be reached. I hope that determined efforts will be made by all concerned to tackle the problem in all its aspects, with a view to arriving at a just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973). 13. Under the prevailing circumstances, I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area to be essential. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2007. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has given its assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel has also expressed its agreement. 14. In making this recommendation, I must draw attention to the shortfall in the funding of the Force. At present, unpaid assessments amount to some $30.2 million. The sum represents money owed to the Member States that contribute the troops who make up the Force. I appeal to all Member States to pay their assessments promptly and in full and to clear all remaining arrears. 15. In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to Lieutenant General Bala Nanda Sharma and to the men and women serving with UNDOF and UNTSO. They have performed with efficiency and devotion to duty the important tasks assigned to them by the Security Council. I take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Governments contributing troops to UNDOF and to those which provide the UNTSO military observers assigned to the Force. 