%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|WORKING GROUPS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|CONSULTATIONS|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|LOGISTICS|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|CALENDAR OF MEETINGS|

Letter dated 12 December 2006 from the Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations addressed to the President of the Security Council In my capacity as Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, I have the honour to submit a report of the Working Group (see annex). It would be appreciated if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Kenzo Oshima Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations 1. The establishment of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations was announced in a statement by the President of the Council on 31 January 2001 (S/PRST/2001/3) in the context of the Council's efforts to strengthen cooperation with troop-contributing countries. While not intended to replace the Council's private meetings with the troop-contributing countries, the Working Group would "address both generic peacekeeping issues relevant to the responsibilities of the Council, and technical aspects of individual peacekeeping operations, without prejudice to the competence of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations" of the General Assembly. 2. In a subsequent note issued by the President of the Security Council on 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56), the Council authorized the Working Group to convene joint meetings with troop-contributing countries as a means of promoting closer and more interactive dialogue among members of the Council, relevant troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and other significant stakeholders, as deemed appropriate, on issues pertaining to peacekeeping operations. 3. The previous activities of the Working Group were reported to the President of the Security Council by the Chairman of the Working Group (see S/2001/546, S/2001/900, S/2001/1335 and S/2004/1040). The Working Group was engaged in such activities as examining the relationship between the Security Council, troop-contributing countries, other stakeholders and the Secretariat, and discussing issues related to specific missions and generic issues of peacekeeping, including how to deal with the increasing number of peacekeeping operations. 4. Following the guidelines mentioned above and taking into account previous activities, the Working Group, since January 2005, has directed its efforts at expanding its activities, by intensifying the interaction with troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders, as well as with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other United Nations organs. It has also varied the types of meetings and the subject matter considered. A chronological tabulation of those meetings, the participants and the subject matter discussed is annexed to the present report. Meetings 5. On 11 January and 28 March 2005 the Chairman held consultations with other members of the Working Group on the conduct of its work. The Chairman presented his views on how to expand the activities of the Working Group, which were supported by the other members. The Group also discussed other in-house procedural issues. 6. Except for those two meetings, the meetings of the Working Group have been held jointly with relevant troop-contributing countries, other major stakeholders and representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other United Nations organs. The meetings are grouped into three categories -- the creation of a new mission and significant modifications to mission mandates, mission operational procedures and other specifically identified issues -- and are described in the paragraphs that follow. One meeting was held with the Bureau of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. (a) Creation of a new mission and modification of mission mandates 7. The exchange of views with troop-contributing countries, other stakeholders, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other United Nations offices is of particular importance in the creation of a new mission or a renewal involving substantial changes to the mandate, structure or size of a mission. For example, on 22 February 2005 a meeting was held to discuss the creation of a new United Nations mission in the Sudan (later named the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)) as an international mechanism to monitor and facilitate the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement between northern and southern Sudan (see Security Council resolution 1547 (2004)). The Chairmen of the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and representatives of potential troop contributors and other stakeholders as well as resource persons from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations Development Programme, attended the meeting. The members of the Working Group held a frank exchange of views with the participants on the expected mandate of and forthcoming challenges for the mission. 8. On the subject of Darfur, the members of the Working Group met at the expert level on 16 June and 10 October 2006, inviting troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders as well as the AU to attend. At those meetings, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provided briefings on UNMIS assistance to the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) and contingency planning for the possible replacement of AMIS by a United Nations mission, followed by a three-way discussion on these issues among the participants. 9. From late 2005 to early 2006, the Working Group held a number of meetings on the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), most of which were devoted to discussing operational difficulties faced by the Mission, as described in paragraphs 10 and 11 below. At those meetings, the Working Group also discussed with troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders the options suggested by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which would inevitably change the mandate and composition of UNMEE in various ways. The Chairman duly communicated with the President of the Security Council to apprise the members of the Council of the views expressed on the matter by the members of the Working Group and others that had participated in the deliberations. In the meeting on 6 November 2006, the Working Group, troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders were briefed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the situation surrounding UNMEE and exchanged their views on possible options for the future of that Mission. (b) Operational issues related to specific missions 10. On 21 October 2005, the Working Group met with troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders to discuss how to deal with the restrictions imposed by the Government of Eritrea on the monitoring activities of UNMEE, including the prohibition of UNMEE helicopter and other flights over Eritrean territory. The Chairman of the Working Group made a special visit to the Mission and discussed with UNMEE officials and those representing the troop-contributing countries the situation on the ground and the difficulties facing the Mission. The Chairman also met with high-ranking members of the Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Upon his return to United Nations Headquarters, the Chair briefed members of the Working Group on his visit at a meeting held on 15 November 2005 (the mission report is annexed to S/2005/723). 11. On 18 January and 30 March 2006, the Working Group held meetings with troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders to analyse the situation on the ground and discuss the options mentioned in paragraph 9 above. (c) Operational issues with implications for generic issues of peacekeeping operations 12. The Working Group has held meetings at which it has considered other specially identified issues related to a specific mission but also relevant to generic issues of peacekeeping operations. The Working Group considered the topic of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel in the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on 6 June 2005. The Working Group invited to that meeting, in addition to the representatives of troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders, experts working on the issue, including a representative of MONUC and the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. The Working Group noted with approval that the DPKO had established a special office within MONUC for addressing the sexual exploitation and abuse issues in the country vis-à-vis MONUC personnel. Another example is the meeting of 19 August 2005 on the possibility of inter-mission cooperation by the United Nations peacekeeping missions in Côte d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The Group discussed, among other ideas, the possibility of having prearranged joint operations, such as joint air patrols and cross-border patrols. In addition to those meetings, three meetings were held in a more informal setting to discuss the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Sierra Leone (25 August 2005), Burundi (9 December 2006) and Timor-Leste (29 April 2006), focusing on the feasibility and merits of installing a United Nations presence in those countries in the form of a United Nations integrated office to assist the home Government in stabilizing the transition and consolidating it into effective domestic control. Recommendations 13. The recent expansion of United Nations peacekeeping operations has been remarkable in terms of both the number of personnel and the variety of tasks entrusted to those operations. As of September 2006, there were 77,000 military and police personnel from 110 countries deployed in 18 missions, the costs for which exceeded $5 billion in 2005. Operations of this magnitude cannot be sustained without the strong commitment of Member States in the form of personnel and financial contributions, as well as their political support. To ensure the cooperation and support of Member States, it is necessary that they have a proper understanding of the activities of the Security Council in the field of peacekeeping, in particular with regard to the creation of a new mission and changes in the mandate of an existing mission. Transparency and accountability are important in the work of the Council. The Working Group can serve as an effective tool for the promotion of understanding among Member States, by engaging in close, interactive dialogue with troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders. 14. From this point of view, and for the purpose of making its work more meaningful and effective, the Working Group should consider the following elements: Modalities (a) The Working Group's main objective is to promote mutual understanding among the members of the Security Council, troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders, and the Secretariat. This objective is best achieved if discussions are conducted in an interactive manner. The views expressed during the discussions by troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders may add value to the discussions in the Security Council. The Chairman should make his or her best efforts to report these views to the Council at the earliest opportunity, and if necessary in writing; (b) The Working Group should attempt to hold a meeting at the time of the creation of a new mission or a renewal involving substantial changes in the mandate, structure or size of a mission, inviting troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders to the meeting; (c) The Working Group should periodically converse with the Bureau of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in order to maintain an appropriate level of interaction; Agenda (d) When a crisis that affects the safety and security of mission personnel in a United Nations peacekeeping operation arises, the Working Group should attempt to meet and discuss the current situation on the ground with troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders; (e) The Working Group may discuss the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in a given country when a peacekeeping operation is expected to withdraw in the near future. The need to address longer-term issues related to peacebuilding, e.g., rule of law, should be factored into decisions on initial mandates for peacekeeping missions. (f) The Working Group may address an issue that has ramifications beyond the mission in which the issue has come up. The questions of sexual exploitation and abuse and inter-mission cooperation, which the Working Group has already taken up, require follow-up discussions; Future Review (g) The Working Group should review its work continuously, taking into account the views expressed in the context of the United Nations reform. Chronological tabulation of the Working Group's meetings and other activities since 1 January 2005 Date Participants Subject matter 11 January 2005 Members of Working Group only Organization of work and other procedural issues 22 February 2005 Members of Working Group, potential troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders, Chairman of African Union, Chairman of IGAD and officials of Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP Creation of a new United Nations mission in the Sudan 28 March 2005 6 June 2005 Members of Working Group, major troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders, Chairman of Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, Chairman of Working Group of Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and officials of Secretariat MONUC, with special attention to the sexual exploitation and abuse issue 19 August 2005 Members of Working Group, major troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders and officials of Department of Peacekeeping Operations Inter-mission cooperation, with special reference to Côte d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone 21 October 2005 Situation in UNMEE 6-9 November 2005 Visit to Eritrea-Ethiopia Mission area by Chairman 15 November 2005 Members of Working Group, troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders and officials of Department of Peacekeeping Operations Briefing by Chairman on his visit to Mission area 18 January 2006 Situation in UNMEE and options for its future 30 March 2006 Options for future of UNMEE 30 May 2006 Members of Working Group and Bureau of Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations Interaction between Special Committee and Security Council 7 July 2006 Briefing by EUFOR Commander and EU Special Representative on EU assistance to MONUC 6 November 2006 Draft report of Working Group Members of Working Group, troop-contributing countries, and other stakeholders and officials of Department of Peacekeeping Operations 25 August 2005 Members of Working Group, major troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders, Deputy Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to United Nations, a representative of World Bank and officials of Secretariat, UNDP and other United Nations agencies Proposed United Nations integrated office in Sierra Leone after departure of UNAMSIL 9 December 2005 Members of Working Group, major troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders and officials of Secretariat, UNDP and other United Nations agencies Future of Burundi after withdrawal of UNOB and possibility of United Nations integrated office 28 April 2006 Members of Working Group, members of core group, Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste to United Nations, a representative of the World Bank, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, officials of Secretariat, UNDP and other United Nations agencies Recent developments in Timor-Leste and prospects for future of the country 16 June 2006 Members of Working Group, major troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders, representative of African Union and officials of Department of Peacekeeping Operations UNMIS assistance to AMIS and future United Nations role in Darfur 10 October 2006 