%%%LAWS AND REGULATIONS|JORDAN|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|ARMS LIMITATION|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) Letter dated 11 May 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Committee In reference to the letter dated 5 December 2005, in which request was made for additional information to further clarify the steps undertaken by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), I have the honour to transmit herewith a copy of our supplementary report containing further clarifications in response to the questions raised by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in relation to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan's first report (see annex). (Signed) Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein Ambassador Permanent Representative The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan takes this opportunity to express to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) its gratitude for the active role played by the Committee, as represented by its Chairman and members. The Jordanian Government, reaffirming its commitment to the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council, in particular those relating to the elimination and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, based on the Government's belief in the need to use all means to prevent such weapons, whether nuclear, chemical or biological, as well as their means of delivery, from falling into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors; reaffirming also that Jordan is a State free of weapons of mass destruction whose defence policy focuses on measures of protection against such weapons, submits in the following paper Jordan's response to the Committee's questions contained in its letter S/AC.44/2005/DDA/103 of 5 December 2005 on Jordan's first report submitted pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 4 of the resolution. OP 1 and related matters from OP 5, OP 6, OP 8 (a), (b) and (c) and OP 10 In relation to the Committee's request to supply it with additional information on the Jordanian Government's intentions regarding accession to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, signed in Vienna on 3 March 1980, the Jordanian Government is currently studying the benefits of such accession. In this context, it has been proposed to amend either the Jordanian Nuclear Energy and Radiation Protection Act (No. 29 of 2001) or the Jordanian Penal Code (No. 16 of 1960), as amended, by the addition of an article listing the crimes stipulated in the Convention and the penalties to be applied in the event of their being committed. The proposed draft amendment has been referred to the Legislation and Opinion Bureau of the Office of the Prime Minister, the executive body competent to study draft acts. The Bureau is currently studying the proposal in conjunction with the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission and other concerned Jordanian authorities. In relation to the Committee's enquiry about zones free of weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, the Jordanian Government accords the utmost importance to the creation of such zones, taking into consideration that, even if they do not represent a full guarantee of achieving regional security, they contribute to the building of regional stability and represent the foundation stone of a world free from weapons of mass destruction. Accordingly, the issue of the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East heads the Jordanian Government's scale of priorities, within the framework of the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, ratified by Jordan on 2 November 1970; the commitments of the Review Conferences of 1995 and 2000; and Security Council resolution 687 (1991), paragraph 14, of which stipulates that actions taken on the basis of that resolution "represent steps towards the goal of establishing in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass destruction and all missiles for their delivery and the objective of a global ban on chemical weapons". Be advised that the Jordanian Government is making diligent efforts within the framework of the League of Arab States to formulate a draft treaty for making the Middle East region a zone free of weapons of mass destruction. OP 2 -- Biological weapons (BW) and chemical weapons (CW) Regarding the Committee's enquiry as to the extent to which there exists national legislation prohibiting persons or legal entities from committing certain listed acts associated with biological and chemical weapons and whether penalties for such acts exist, the reader is referred to the text of article 145 of the Jordanian Penal Code (Act No. 16 of 1960), which stipulates: Anyone who proceeds, with the intention of committing or facilitating any of the said crimes of sedition or any other crime against the State, to manufacture, acquire or gain possession of explosive or inflammable materials, toxic or incendiary products or parts used in the preparation or manufacture thereof shall be sentenced to a term of hard labour, in addition to any more severe penalties imposable on perpetrators of such crimes, whether committed, attempted or incomplete; and to the text of Article 148/4 of the said Code, which stipulates: He shall be punishable by death in any of the following cases: ... (c) if the act is committed using explosive or inflammable materials or toxic, incendiary, infectious, bacteriological, chemical or radioactive agents or the like; and of paragraph 5 of the same article, which provides: A term of hard labour shall be imposed on any person who knowingly manufactures, procures or transports any explosive material, any of the materials mentioned in subparagraph 4 (c) of this article or any of the components of such materials in connection with the execution of terrorist acts or in order to enable another person to use them for that end. It is thus clear that the Jordanian Penal Code punishes the use, manufacture, acquisition or transportation of biological and chemical weapons, in addition to criminalizing the procurement and possession of chemical weapons. The Code similarly punishes the perpetration of the listed acts, whether the act is committed by means of the said substances themselves or by means of any of their components or parts. The Code also provides penalties for enabling other persons to use such substances or components thereof for the same purpose, including non-State actors. In this connection, it should be taken into consideration that the text of paragraph 5 of article 148 is unqualified; moreover, article 20 of the Code stipulates: Unless specifically provided otherwise in this Code, the minimum term of hard labour and imprisonment shall be three years; the maximum sentence shall be fifteen years. In this context, attention should also be drawn to the general provision contained in article 141 of the Penal Code, which stipulates: Whoever forms armed groups of soldiers or enrols or enlists troops or equips or supplies them with arms and ammunition, without the approval of the authorities, shall be subject to a term of imprisonment of not less than five years. With regard to the Committee's enquiry about the extent to which national law criminalizes unlawful participation in listed acts, article 76 of the Penal Code provides: If a number of persons together commit a misdemeanour or felony, or such misdemeanour or felony consists of a number of acts and each person commits one or more of the constituent acts with intent to cause the misdemeanour or felony to take place, all shall be considered as accomplices therein and each shall be subject to the punishment specified in the Code, as though each were an independent actor therein. OP 2 -- Nuclear weapons (NW) With regard to the Committee's enquiry about the extent to which there exists national legislation prohibiting persons or legal entities from committing certain listed acts associated with nuclear weapons and whether or not penalties for such acts exist, the reader is referred to the provisions of the Nuclear Energy and Radiation Protection Act (No. 29 of 2001), article 15 (a) of which clearly prohibits any person not having prior authorization from establishing, operating or managing a nuclear facility in the Kingdom or circulating, importing, exporting, using, handling, procuring, trading in, operating, leasing, transporting, storing, destroying, disposing of or producing any radioactive sources or substances emitting ionizing radiation. This includes their discovery, pulverization, fragmentation, extraction, conversion, mining and manufacture. The article similarly prohibits the use of ionizing radiation and any activity related thereto. Article 18 of the aforementioned Act prohibits the introduction of any radioactive materials classified as radioactive waste or residues into Jordanian territory or the use, handling, transportation, storage, disposal or burial thereof in Jordanian territory. It similarly prohibits the treatment of foodstuffs with ionizing radiation and circulation of foodstuffs so treated, including the sale, distribution or use thereof, without the agreement of the Board of Directors of the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission established under the Act. In addition, the dumping in the Kingdom of radioactive waste or residues resulting from uses and applications or the burial thereof in any part of its territory is prohibited except by or under the supervision of the Board at sites set aside for that purpose by the General Establishment for Environmental Protection (now the Ministry of Environment). Article 23 of the aforementioned Act lists the mandatory penalties to be applied to all violators of, inter alia, the provisions of the above-mentioned articles 15 and 18. Paragraph (a) of the said article 23 provides as follows: Any person who violates the provisions of articles 15 and 18 of this Act shall be subject to imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not more than three years or to a fine of not less than 10,000 dinars and not more than 30,000 dinars or both. As indicated in the discussion on the perpetration and criminalization of certain acts associated with biological and chemical weapons, the Jordanian Penal Code (Act No. 16 of 1960) imposes penalties for committing listed acts whether the act is committed by means of the actual substances mentioned in the Act or by means of any of their components or parts. The Code also imposes penalties for enabling other persons, including non-State actors, to use such substances or components thereof for the same purpose, pursuant to paragraph 4 (c) of article 148, which provides the death penalty for anyone who commits such a criminal act: By using explosive or inflammable materials or toxic, incendiary, infectious, bacteriological, chemical or radioactive products or the like. Paragraph 5 of the same article provides for the imposition of a term of hard labour upon any person who: Knowingly manufactures, procures or transports any explosive material, any of the materials mentioned in paragraph 4 (c) or any of the components of such materials in connection with the execution of terrorist acts or in order to enable another person to use them for that end. With regard to the Committee's enquiry about the extent to which national law criminalizes participation in listed acts relating to nuclear weapons, it goes without saying that such participation is subject to the provisions of article 76 of the Penal Code, referred to above. OP 3 (a) and (b) -- Account for/Secure/Physically protect BW including Related Materials With regard to the Committee's enquiry about the extent to which the Government of Jordan has put in place and continues to implement effective and appropriate measures to contain biological weapons, secure them during the stages of production, use, storage and transport and physically protect them, the Public Health Act (No. 54 of 2002), among other laws and numerous regulations, governs such matters. Article 20 of the Act provides that the Director of the Ministry of Health or a competent official or physician shall have the right to inspect any location if he suspects that it has been contaminated by an infectious disease and shall be authorized to have the location disinfected and to take all measures to ensure that the communication or spread of the infection is checked. The use of infected materials, items or locations likely to transmit the disease is prohibited and is subject to the penalty provided for in the said Act. It is similarly prohibited to make any such materials, items or locations accessible or available to others. Article 24 of the Act provides that the Minister of Health has the power to take, on an urgent basis, all measures to combat and prevent the spread of any infectious disease which has broken out in the Kingdom and that the penalty stipulated in the Act shall be imposed on any person who intentionally conceals an infected person, exposes any person to infection, causes the transmission of the infection to others or refuses to carry out any measure he has been requested to take to prevent the spread of the infection. Article 25 of the Act provides that the Minister of Health has the power to issue the necessary directives for imposing epidemic control measures, including the taking of laboratory samples and the adoption of quarantine measures, if necessary, to prevent the spread of diseases to the Kingdom and their transmission to other States by land, sea or air, and to implement the relevant international agreements by which Jordan is bound. Regarding the Committee's enquiry about the manner of granting licenses to persons and facilities which deal with biological substances and of verifying staff qualifications, article 5 (b) of the Public Health Act (No. 54 of 2002) states that no person may practice any medical or health profession or any occupation related thereto without having obtained a licence from the Minister of Health in accordance with the related laws and regulations. The terms and conditions pertaining to the granting of a licence to practice those professions and the conditions for revocation, cancellation and renewal of the licence are defined on the basis of regulations issued for that purpose (article 6 (a)). Article 10 provides that any person who violates the provisions of the said Act by unlicensed practice of the aforementioned professions shall be subject to the penalties determined in accordance therewith. Article 11 (b) and (c) provide that private treatment centres and hospitals shall be allowed to operate only after obtaining a licence in accordance with the regulations issued under the said Act. They also stipulate that the Minister of Health or his authorized deputy shall have the power to inspect such institutions to ascertain the extent of their compliance, in the exercise of their activity, with the terms and provisions of the law. Article 12 stipulates that the Minister or his authorized deputy shall have the power to take all measures necessary to safeguard public health, including the closure of private treatment centres or hospitals for violation of the Act. With regard to the Committee's specific question concerning regulations governing the field of genetic engineering, article 5 (a) of the Act defines the medical and health professions as the practice of a set of activities that includes biomedical and genetic engineering. On this basis, the question of genetic engineering is subject to the regulations contained and explained in detail in the Public Health Act. Articles 59 to 61 of the Public Health Act (No. 54 of 2002) stipulate the penalties for violations of the Act, as follows: imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not more than one year or a fine of not less than 250 dinars and not more than 1,000 dinars or both for any person responsible for a water source, network, reservoir or station or drinking water bottling plant who sells or distributes contaminated or untreated water or water that does not conform to technical standards or the approved specifications. The same penalty applies to any licensed physician who treats a person suffering from an infectious or contagious disease and does not notify the Ministry of Health of the person's illness or death and to any individual responsible for any facility who violates the conditions governing the management of medical waste resulting therefrom; imprisonment for a term of not less than three months and not more than two years or a fine of not less than 500 dinars and not more than 3,000 dinars or both for any person holding a position of responsibility in any hospital or treatment centre who practices therein before obtaining a licence and for any person who engages in any medical or health work, occupation, profession or trade without having obtained a licence; imprisonment of from one week to one year or a fine of from 25 five dinars to 500 dinars or both, without prejudice to any more severe penalty provided in any other legislation, for any person who violates any provision of the Act for which there is no textual stipulation, in respect of which the extent of the damage to health and any repetition of the offence shall be taken into consideration. Finally, the courts have the right to order the closure of the site where the violation occurred and of the water sources and networks in order to safeguard public health. The Minister of Health has the right to order the closure of the place in which the violation occurred and of the water sources and networks and to seize the machines and equipment that caused the damage for a period he deems appropriate and until the violation has ceased. In this context, it should be noted that, under article 64 of the Public Health Act, the Minister or a secretary general, director, physician and any official delegated by the Minister shall have, each within his particular sphere of competence, the capacity of a law enforcement officer and may undertake the related tasks and duties. Article 9 of the Civil Defence Act (No. 18 of 1999) also grants the capacity of law enforcement officers to government officials charged by the Minister of the Interior with implementing the duties and tasks specified in the Act, principally the drawing up of the plans necessary to counter and ensure the prevention of and protection against bacterial contamination, in coordination and cooperation with the entities concerned. Since the 1920s, the Jordanian Government has been concerned with the question of the elimination and non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. This concern is reflected in the Act on Items Prohibited for Importation inside Letters or Postal Packages (No. 120 of 1926), article 1 of which provides that it is forbidden to import certain items and substances inside letters or postal packages, such as those relating to public health and pharmaceuticals (e.g., hashish or any compound thereof, opium preparations and all items mentioned in the Dangerous Drugs Act), and items having to do with agriculture and insects (e.g., live insects and animals). In this context, it must be pointed out that articles 4 and 9 of the Regulation on the Licensing of Private Medical Laboratories (No. 30 of 2003) provide that it is not permitted to practice laboratory medicine, which includes genetics as well as other areas of specialization, or for any individual to run a medical laboratory without having first obtained a licence to do so from the Minister of Health in accordance with the provisions of the Regulation. The Regulation contains a set of provisions aimed at ensuring that public health standards are complied with when one is dealing with biological substances. An example of this is the prohibition against using any medical laboratory for activities other than those relating to the diagnosis and prevention of disease. The Regulation also makes it an obligation for the laboratory director to report to the competent health directorate in the area in which he works, within twenty-four hours after the test result becomes available, all cases of contagious disease discovered in the laboratory and for all licensed medical laboratories to apply public safety principles and standards within the laboratory and dispose of laboratory waste safely in accordance with the legislation in force and the directives issued to that end by the Minister. Regarding the Committee's enquiry about the manner of ascertaining whether medical professionals dealing with biological substances are qualified, the Regulation stipulates that whoever is granted a licence to work as a laboratory medicine professional must not have been convicted of a misdemeanour or felony offending against honour and morals and must hold the scientific qualifications specified in the Regulation. The Regulation grants the Minister of Health the authority to revoke any licence if it is established that it was granted on the basis of incorrect information, if any condition stipulated for the granting of the licence is no longer satisfied or if the practitioner violates the code of ethics of the profession or is convicted of a crime offending against honour. The Regulation on the Management and Circulation of Harmful and Hazardous Substances (No. 43 of 1999) has been superseded by the Regulation on the Management, Transportation and Circulation of Harmful and Hazardous Substances (No. 24 of 2005) to account for recent developments and the challenges of dealing with harmful and hazardous substances and as an affirmation of the Jordanian Government's desire to take all measures to help protect the environment from the dangers of unsafe circulation of such substances. The new Regulation, as indicated in the first Jordanian report, distinguishes between harmful and hazardous substances, prohibited substances, restricted substances and waste. It specifies, inter alia, the tasks to be assumed by the technical committee formed under its provisions. These include the drafting of directives for determining the scientific and technical principles, conditions, means and methods necessary for the transportation, collection, storage, waste treatment and disposal of harmful and hazardous substances, on which the Committee submits recommendations to the Minister of Environment. The Regulation provides that no entity dealing in any way whatsoever with harmful and hazardous substances and waste may engage in such activity before obtaining a licence from the Minister of Environment and that the Minister has the power to revoke any licence granted, if it is established that it was granted on the basis of the submission of incorrect or misleading information or statements, if any of the terms of the licence are violated or if hazardous environmental effects result from the operation of the licence, unless anticipated when the licence was granted. Finally, the Regulation prohibits all persons from introducing or importing any harmful or hazardous waste into Jordanian territory, waters or airspace, processing or burying such waste therein, dumping harmful or hazardous substances or related waste or any part thereof anywhere in Jordanian territory, waters or airspace and exporting any harmful and hazardous substances or harmful and hazardous waste otherwise than by order of the Minister of the Interior and with due regard to any relevant international agreement ratified by the Kingdom. Mention should be made of the Directives and Provisions for Special Storage in the Aqaba Special Economic Zone (No. 65 of 2005), issued under the Aqaba Special Economic Zone Act (No. 32 of 2000), which clearly apply to all biological, chemical and nuclear materials. Article 28 of the Act prohibits storage of a group of items in the Aqaba Special Economic Zone under penalty of confiscation without compensation and of being called legally to account. Such materials include: radioactive materials, unless approved and supervised by the Commission for Environmental Affairs of the Aqaba authority, highly flammable substances, malodorous substances, hazardous substances as determined by the said Commission and prohibited foodstuffs or foodstuffs harmful to environmental health. OP 3 (a) and (b) -- Account for/Secure/Physically Protect Chemical Weapons including Related Materials Articles 43 to 48 of the Public Health Act (No. 54 of 2002) deal with chemical substances. Article 43 defines a chemical substance as any substance not containing living beings, whether it be an element, amalgam or artificial or natural compound. Prohibited chemical substances are those whose use is forbidden by any official body in one or more areas for reasons associated with public health. Restricted chemical substances are those whose importation and handling are subject to limitation on the basis of Ministry of Health directives and procedures for reasons associated with public health (directives thereon were issued in 2004). The Act defines the term "handling of substances" as the production, manufacture, preparation, processing, bottling, packaging, supply, transportation, procurement, distribution, sale, offering for sale, giving or donation of chemical substances. As for the regulations governing chemical substances, Articles 44 to 48 provide that the Ministry of Health shall be responsible for supervising the importation of chemical substances whose importation, exportation and handling are prohibited or restricted with a view to safeguarding public health. They further provide that the Minister of Health may issue and amend lists of prohibited and restricted chemical substances and prohibit the importation or handling of any chemical substance not mentioned in such lists if it is apparent to him that the substance is harmful to public health (such lists have in fact been issued). The Act also requires any individual responsible for a facility to provide the Ministry of Health on a regular basis with information relating to the chemical substances in the facility, the substances produced from them, the related quantities, the entities to which such substances are sold, the chemical composition and chemical formula for manufacture, confidentiality naturally being maintained, and any other essential information relating to public health. The Act grants authorized officials of the Ministry of Health the power to inspect any facility to ensure that the handling of chemical substances therein takes place in a way that has no negative impact on public health and conforms to the conditions laid down by the Ministry of Health for that purpose. It further grants authorized officials the power to take samples of chemical substances for laboratory analysis at the facility's expense. The Act provides that any person instrumental in causing harm to public health as a result of faulty handling of chemical substances shall be obliged, under penalty of the law, to put an end to the harm within a period fixed by the Minister of Health, failing which the Minister shall issue the necessary decree for the violation to be terminated at the expense of the party that caused it. Moreover, any person who imports chemical substances instrumental in causing harm to public health shall be required, under penalty of law, to re-export them to the country of origin with a period specified for that purpose by the Minister of Health. Finally, article 59 (a)(1) of the Act provides for imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not more than one year or a fine of not less than 250 dinars and not more than 1,000 dinars or both for anyone instrumental in causing harm to public health as a result of faulty handling of chemical substances. The Defence Act (No. 13 of 1992) stipulates that the Prime Minister shall have powers to take all measures necessary to ensure public safety and the defence of the Kingdom without being constrained by the provisions of the normal laws in force. Included are the powers to revoke licences for firearms, ammunition, explosives or materials used in the manufacture of explosives; to prohibit their manufacture, sale, purchase, transportation and disposal; and to order their surrender and confiscation and the closure of points of sale and storage (article 4/l). Article 7 provides that anyone who violates defence orders shall be subject to the penalties stipulated therein, on condition that the penalty shall not exceed a term of three years' imprisonment or a fine of 3,000 dinars or both. If the defence orders do not explicitly stipulate a penalty for the violation, the offender shall be subject to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months and/or a fine of not more than 500 dinars. However, if the violation is a crime under any other law, the penalty stated therein shall be applied if more severe than that stated in the Act under discussion. The funds and means employed in committing or attempting to commit the crime shall be seized; the Prime Minister shall have the power to return the seized items or part thereof. The Civil Defence Act (No. 18 of 1999) stipulates that the Higher Council for Civil Defence formed under the provisions of the Act has the power to draw up the plans necessary to counter chemical, radiological and bacteriological contamination and that due to poisonous gases to prevent such contamination and ensure protection therefrom, in coordination and cooperation with the competent authorities concerned (article 4(c)). Article 8 of the Act provides that the Minister of the Interior shall have the power, on being so authorized by the Prime Minister, to seize, in emergency situations, inflammable materials of all kinds and restrict the disposal and manner of storage thereof for as long as the situation lasts. The Directorate of Civil Defence has responsibility for a number of duties defined in Article 13 of the Act, including helping to detect any chemical or radiological leakage, in cooperation with the entities competent to deal with and eliminate the effects thereof. In addition, it is responsible for determining the preventive measures and means of self-protection for the purposes of granting licences for the manufacture, storage and sale of explosives, fireworks, chemicals, hazardous substances, etc. The Act grants the General Director of the Directorate of Civil Defence the power to issue such directives and orders as he deems appropriate to the owners and managers of sites where hazardous chemical and other substances are manufactured, stored, sold and transported and to take measures pertaining to prevention and means of self-protection. Lastly, Civil Defence personnel working in the field of prevention and self-protection exercise, in the course and within the limits of their duties, the powers conferred upon law-enforcement officers under the Code of Criminal Procedure (Act No. 9 of 1961). Civil Defence directives on preventive and self-protective materials and equipment (No. 1 of 2004) have been issued, as have directives on procedures for prevention and means of self-protection, in which the sites for the manufacture, storage, sale and transportation of chemical and other hazardous substances are determined. Article 1 of the Act on Items Prohibited for Importation inside Letters or Postal Packages (No. 120 of 1926) stipulates that it is forbidden to import certain items and substances inside letters or postal packages, such as those relating to public security (e.g., weapons, ammunition and explosives) and those relating to public health (e.g., any infectious material or liquid). Regarding the Committee's enquiry about the national body concerned with implementing the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, to which Jordan acceded on 29 October 1997, and about the submission of a report on chemical substances listed in Schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the Convention to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in the Hague, a special national committee has been formed to deal with the Organization. The committee is charged with communicating and coordinating with OPCW and following up with the various national civil and military parties on the Jordanian Government's undertakings to comply with the provisions of the Convention. In addition, the national committee is responsible for drawing up the necessary directives for the monitoring of control procedures for chemical substances entering and exiting Jordan and procedures for the transportation, storage and trading of those substances. Committed to implementing the provisions of article X (4) of the Convention, which requires each State Party to report annually to the Technical Secretariat of OPCW on national data and procedures related to protection, the Jordanian Government has submitted its report, supported by detailed information, in addition to providing the Technical Secretariat with information on the manner of implementing procedures relating to commercial dealings in accordance with the Convention. Committed to implementing the provisions of article VI (7) of the Convention, the Jordanian Government has submitted a declaration including duly completed forms on five Jordanian installations falling into the category of facilities producing chemicals that are not prohibited and not among those comprised in Schedules 1, 2 and 3, which it is obligatory to declare. The Jordanian Government is fully prepared at any time to provide OPCW, on a regular basis and as required by the provisions of the Convention, with the necessary details and clarifications on the declaration of all OPCW scheduled chemicals and on the facilities that produce and import them. OP 3 (a) and (b) -- Account for/Secure/Physically protect Nuclear Weapons including Related Materials As in the response to the Committee's enquiry concerning the extent to which there exists national legislation prohibiting persons or entities from engaging in listed nuclear-weapons-related activities and whether there exist penalties for such acts, the Committee is referred to the provisions of the Nuclear Energy and Radiation Protection Act (No. 29 of 2001). Article 15 (a) thereof clearly prohibits any person not having prior authorization from establishing, operating or managing a nuclear facility in the Kingdom or circulating, importing, exporting, using, handling, procuring, trading in, operating, leasing, transporting, storing, destroying, disposing of or producing any radioactive source or substance emitting ionizing radiation, including their exploration, pulverization, fragmentation, extraction, conversion, mining or manufacture. It similarly prohibits the use of ionizing radiation or any related activity. Article 18 prohibits the introduction into the Kingdom's territory of any radioactive materials classified as radioactive waste or residue, or the use, handling, transport, storage, disposal or burial thereof in the territory of the Kingdom. It similarly prohibits the treatment of foodstuffs with ionizing radiation and the circulation of foodstuffs so treated, including the sale, distribution or use thereof, except by agreement of the Board of Directors of the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission established by the Act. In addition, the dumping in the Kingdom of radioactive waste resulting from uses and applications or the burial thereof in any part of its territory is prohibited except by or under the supervision of the Board at sites set aside for that purpose by the General Establishment for Environmental Protection (now the Ministry of Environment). Article 23 lists the mandatory penalties to be applied to all violators of, inter alia, the provisions of the above-mentioned articles 15 and 18. Paragraph (a) of the said article 23 provides as follows: Any person who violates the provisions of articles 15 and 18 of this Act shall be subject to imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not more than three years or to a fine of not less than 10,000 dinars and not more than 30,000 dinars, or both. Article 21 of the Act outlines the precautionary measures to be taken, at the violator's expense, in cases where any of the acts provided for in articles 15 and 18 have been committed. Such measures include closure of the site, installation, plant or facility where the radioactive sources, materials or equipment are being kept or used if its continued existence, its continued operation, the handling of stocks therein or its use constitutes a threat to public safety or health or the environment. In addition, any unlicensable radioactive sources, materials or equipment shall be confiscated, whereas those which are licensable shall be retained and their use prohibited and they shall be placed in the Nuclear Energy Commission's storage facilities or any other place deemed suitable by the Commission's Board of Directors until such time as they are licensed. If they are not licensed within a period of three months from the date of their seizure, the Board shall order them to be confiscated and also disposed of in accordance with the dictates of public interest, which may include returning imported materials to their place of origin. Finally, the appropriate precautionary measures shall be taken, as, for example, in the case of the directives on the management and handling of hazardous waste issued for such a purpose by the Ministry of the Environment in 2003. As indicated previously, the Jordanian Penal Code (Act No. 16 of 1960) imposes a sentence of death on anyone committing a terrorist act through the use of explosive or flammable materials or toxic, incendiary, infectious, bacteriological, chemical, radioactive or similar substances (article 148, paragraph 4(c)), and a term of hard labour on any person who knowingly manufactures, procures or transports any explosive material, any of the materials mentioned in paragraph 4 (c) or any of the components of such materials in connection with the execution of terrorist acts or in order to enable another person to use them for that end (paragraph 5 of the same article). Returning to the provisions of the Nuclear Energy and Radiation Protection Act (No. 29 of 2001), we find upon examination that it provides for the establishment in the Kingdom of a body to be called the "Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission", whose purpose is, inter alia, to ensure, in coordination and cooperation with the relevant parties, that the conditions and requirements are met for public safety, radiological protection, nuclear safety, protection of the environment, human health and property from the dangers of radioactive pollution and exposure to ionizing radiation. To that end, the Commission is charged with the task of establishing the necessary facilities for radiological protection, nuclear safety and the protection of the environment from the dangers of radioactive pollution and participating with relevant agencies in setting up national plans for responding to radiological and nuclear accidents. The Commission's Board of Directors, formed under the provisions of the same Act, is charged with the task of laying out public policy and drafting the necessary national strategy in the areas of nuclear energy use, radiological protection and nuclear safety. It also has the task of ensuring the availability of highly qualified human resources in these areas and related applications and setting up the necessary qualification and training programmes, including the establishment of an academy for that purpose in accordance with the legislation in force. The Commission's Director-General makes sure that licensees in both the public and private sectors abide by the conditions of their licences and takes appropriate measures to ensure compliance. He conducts inspections of plants, facilities, installations and sites where radiation sources are located, handled or used to ascertain that precautions and preventive systems are in place to ensure radiological protection and nuclear safety. The Commission's Board of Directors has the authority to cancel or temporarily suspend a licence in the following cases: if it transpires that the licensee has submitted false information or employed illegal means to obtain the licence; if the licensee is in violation of any of the conditions stipulated by the said Act or the regulations or directives issued under it; if the licensee develops an illness that renders him incapable of working with ionizing radiation; or if it becomes evident that there is risk to the environment, the licensee or his employees as a result of exposure to ionizing radiation. It should be borne in mind that the terms and conditions for the granting of licences and permits are laid out by regulations issued by the Council of Ministers. Finally, the Director-General of the Nuclear Energy Commission or a Commission official designated by him in writing has the right to enter and inspect any place suspected of containing unlicensed radioactive sources, materials or equipment or engaging in any activities violating the provisions of the said Act or any regulations or directives issued under it. The official conducting the inspection must prepare an official report and submit it to the Director-General. Designated officials may also seize and turn over to the Commission any radioactive sources, materials or equipment that are unlicensed, violate the provisions of the Act or are being used for an unlicensed or unpermitted activity. Officials designated to conduct inspections have the status of law-enforcement officers and any seizure they order has the force of law until the grounds for the seizure are proven false. The civil and military authorities, the security services and all citizens are required to inform the Commission immediately of any conduct violating the said Act and render all possible assistance to the Commission's designated officials in carrying out their work of detecting violations. Regulation No. 33 of 2003 on the terms and conditions for granting licences and permits for radiological work provides for a number of things, including procedures for granting natural persons individual licences for carrying out radiological work and for granting institutions institutional licences for carrying out radiological work, for acquiring, using, trading in, producing, transporting, handling or disposing of radiation sources and for establishing, operating and managing nuclear and radiological installations or facilities. It contains procedures for granting the following: site permits for the construction of nuclear or radiological facilities or fore the acquisition, manufacture, production, use, storage, disposal or handling of any radiation sources; facility licences for any nuclear or radiological facility or installation that is established or rented to carry out any type of radiological work in accord with the conditions and technical specifications for which the facility was established; and operator licences for the acquisition or operation of any nuclear or radiological facility or radiation source or for the circulation, production, handling, transport, trading, import, export, disposal or use in any way thereof. Finally, it provides for a radiological permit, which is accorded to a natural or legal person to grant him certain responsibilities relating to protection from and the handling of radiation or to permit him to render certain services or facilities so as to enable a licence-holder to acquire or use radiation sources in accordance with the provisions of the Nuclear Energy and Radiation Protection Act. The Regulation establishes the bases for the granting of such permits and licences and sets conditions to ensure that workers in the nuclear and radiological fields are qualified, that they comply with professional ethics and that plants where nuclear and radiological work takes place abide by public safety standards. With regard to the Committee's enquiry regarding how the qualifications of personnel working with nuclear materials are checked, articles 19 to 23 of Regulation No. 37 of 2002, on officials of the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission, specify the duties and conduct to which officials of the Commission must adhere, as well as what they are prohibited from doing. Violation of these provisions exposes the official to the punitive measures specified in the Regulation. As an example of such duties, an official must abide by the laws, regulations and directives related to his work, maintain absolute secrecy regarding the work of the Commission and safeguard its interests, funds and other assets. Prohibited behaviour includes, inter alia, using one's position and authority for personal gain, passing any information on the activities of the Commission to others, giving statements or opinions to the media, keeping Commission documents in one's possession or allowing anyone outside the Commission to see them. With regard to the Committee's enquiry about the Government of Jordan's intentions concerning the IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources (which, while not legally binding, is of course politically binding), the intention is to endorse the Code and action has been taken in that direction. There is also an intention to participate in other activities such as the IAEA Database on Illicit Trafficking of Nuclear Materials and other Radioactive Sources. In response to the Committee's enquiry about any other IAEA-related agreements to which there is an intention to accede, Jordan always makes an effort to participate in conventions and agreements aimed at enhancing national, regional and international security. As for additional national legislation and/or regulations related to nuclear materials, the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission continues to cooperate with relevant local institutions concerned with developing and enhancing radiation-safety, export-security and border-security programmes. OP 3 (c) and (d) and related matters from OP 6 and OP 10 -- Controls of BW including Related Materials We now turn to items relating to operative paragraph 3 (c) and (d), calling on States to develop and maintain appropriate effective border controls and establish, develop, review and maintain appropriate effective national export and trans-shipment controls over nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery as well as over related materials; operative paragraph 6, which urges States to establish effective national control lists to implement resolution 1540; and operative paragraph 10, which calls on States to take cooperative action to prevent illicit trafficking in these items. With regard specifically to the Committee's enquiries concerning individual licensing, general licensing, exceptions to licensing and the granting of licenses for exports or certain visas and its enquiries concerning control lists (operative paragraph 6) and appropriate ways to work with industry (operative paragraph 8 (d)), article 3 of the Import-Export Act (No. 21 of 2001) provides for the unrestricted import of any goods into the Kingdom provided that an importer identification card (a document issued by the Ministry of Industry and Trade to importers entered in the register of importers) is presented at the time of clearance of the goods through customs or payment of any fines levied in accordance with the regulations issued in that regard, and the unrestricted export or re-export of any goods from the Kingdom provided that an exporter identification card (a document issued by the Ministry of Industry and Trade to exporters entered in the register of exporters) is presented. Exceptions to these regulations include goods whose import or export is prohibited, goods whose import or export is restricted exclusively to a specific body or authority and goods whose import or export is conditional on the attainment of a licence in accordance with the provisions of the said Act. The Act gives the Minister of Industry and Trade the authority to designate the goods whose import and export are subject to automatic licences (an import or export licence issued by the Ministry of Industry and Trade or the competent authority if the conditions and requirements for granting it are fulfilled). The Act also grants the Minister or competent authority the power to designate the goods whose import is subject to non-automatic import licences (import licences that may be issued by the Ministry or competent authority if the legal conditions and requirements for granting them are fulfilled). This applies in cases where the requirements of public safety, public health or public order or the preservation of the environment, natural resources or public security so demand, or where the goods are subject to quantitative restrictions in accordance with the legislation in force or relevant international agreements. The Minister or competent authority designates the goods whose export is subject to non-automatic export licenses (export licences that may be granted by the Ministry or competent authority if the conditions and requirements for granting them are fulfilled). [Examples of commodities of a radiological nature whose import, export, re-export or transit requires prior approval from the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission by means of non-automatic permits are provided in the discussion of controls of nuclear weapons and related materials.] It must be pointed out that import and export licences are issued in the name of the grantee and may not be transferred or surrendered except by approval of the competent authority and on condition that the legal requirements for such transfer or surrender are fulfilled. Import or export licences shall be cancelled by decision of the authority that issued them in the following cases: if the Council of Ministers charged under the provisions of the Act under discussion decides to prohibit the import or export of the goods or decides to restrict their import or export to a specific body or authority (goods contracted for prior to the date of any such decision would naturally be excepted); if the competent authority decides not to permit the import or export of the goods because their circulation has been banned in accordance with legislation in force; or if the licensee ceases to satisfy any of the conditions for granting the licence. Finally, article 12 of the Act grants the Council of Ministers the authority to issue, on the basis of a recommendation of the Minister of Industry and Trade, the regulations necessary for the implementation of the provisions of the Act, including the following: provisions relating to import and export licences, the procedures, conditions and requirements for granting them, the determination of the information they must contain and the cases in which obtaining such licences may be dispensed with; provisions relating to the establishment of import and export licence fees and to exemptions therefrom; provisions relating to importer and exporter identification cards, entry in the importer and exporter registers and the time limits for decisions on licence applications. The Regulation on Export and Import Licences and exporter and importer identification cards (No. 114 of 2004) issued under article 12 of the Import and Export Act contains ample provisions in this regard. The Specifications and Standards Act (No. 22 of 2000) sets standards, specifications and technical criteria that must be met by local and imported products and establishes procedures for evaluating compliance with those specifications and standards. Such compliance is measured in accordance with international practice and involves attention to the protection of health and the environment and the general safety of citizens by ensuring that products conform to technical standards. The Act specifies the procedures to be followed in cases where the owner of the commodity does not abide by the technical standards (this was covered in some detail in Jordan's first report). With regard to the control plans and methods employed by customs officials to ensure the security of goods entering and exiting the country by all modes of transport, so as to curtail the spread of weapons of mass destruction, such plans and methods relate to applications and procedures referred to in the Customs Act (No. 20 of 1998) and include, inter alia, actual inspection of goods, verification of documentation in accordance with a risk selectivity system and ways of dealing with smuggling routes. The Customs Department is also authorized to open packages for inspection when they are suspected of containing prohibited or illegal materials. The Authority deals with goods according to categories established by law, such as prohibited goods, which include all goods whose export or import is prohibited under the Customs Act or any other law that the Customs Department is required to enforce in the exercise of its control functions at customs border-crossing points. In accordance with the Customs Act, the Customs Department has issued a list of prohibited goods subject to customs control, including all types of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, toxic substances detrimental to public health and all types of weapons, munitions and explosives. It should be pointed out that although customs officials are charged with inspecting all goods fully or partially upon import or export once the related customs data have been recorded, sometimes inspection procedures are dispensed with and the receipt of documentation is deemed sufficient for immediate clearance. This is done to simplify procedures in accordance with the risk analysis and selectivity method, which naturally takes into account dangerous goods and persons with criminal records and those on whom information has been circulated, in accordance with the directives on the inspection of goods. It should also be noted that under the Customs Act, officials of the Customs Department charged with enforcing customs laws and combating smuggling have the right to inspect goods and means of transport and to search individuals, as those officials are considered customs law-enforcement agents (article 171 (a) of the Customs Act). Measures to investigate illicit trafficking and to combat customs violations include the holding of goods in the land and maritime customs zones, the customs area or any location subject to customs control, including public and private warehouses, even outside the land and maritime customs zones, while they are being checked. In addition, customs officials have the right to conduct external verification and investigation, to demand to see bills of lading, invoices, commercial correspondence, contracts, records and any other documentation relating to customs or non-customs operations, and to take them into custody on the premises of any entity involved in the customs operation in question. Furthermore, in order to streamline and facilitate the movement of goods, X-ray inspection equipment is used at land, air and sea entry-exit points. The function of the Customs Department is linked to the implementation of laws directly related to combating the spread of weapons of mass destruction through the exchange of information, the seizure of goods and their transfer to the appropriate competent agencies. The Customs Department is part of the Border Management Group established by decision of the Council of Ministers for the purpose of coordination, planning, exchange of information and cooperation among all agencies concerned with border crossings. The competent security agencies impose extremely stringent security measures and border surveillance operations at all border posts. This means checking the authenticity and legal validity of all documents and ruling out forgery. State-of-the-art equipment for detecting document forgery has been set up at all border posts, allowing technically trained and qualified security personnel to verify any document with regard to both technical and intelligence aspects. The major border posts have been outfitted with advanced X-ray and gamma-ray inspection equipment to detect any weapons, bombs or explosives as well as other smuggled items that might otherwise enter the Kingdom. Responsibility for guarding the international border outside official border posts and crossings falls to the Jordanian armed forces and the Public Security Directorate, with specialized border guard units set up for this duty and armed with advanced technological equipment, in particular nightvision equipment. There are also offices for military liaison on border security with neighbouring States, which facilitate the implementation of the relevant bilateral agreements. It may be said that there is full border-surveillance coverage by means of coordination between the State security forces and the Jordanian armed forces involving both foot patrols and motorized patrols at land and water borders, crossing points and airports; the installation of electronic surveillance equipment to prevent the infiltration of persons and the smuggling of all types of arms, explosives or drugs into the Kingdom; and the use of helicopters belonging to the security forces and the Jordanian armed forces. There is close cooperation between Jordan and neighbouring States to strengthen the security of its international borders through the exchange of security information. Concerning the Committee's enquiry regarding the control of transport operations and especially transit traffic, article 20 of the Transport of Goods by Road Act (No. 21 of 2006) provides that shippers must place marks on dangerous goods precisely indicating their nature and the hazard they pose in accordance with the provisions of the laws in force and relevant international agreements. The shipper must inform the carrier, upon delivering the goods, of their hazardous nature as specified in the transport document and of any precautions that must be taken. Otherwise the shipper shall be liable for any and all resulting direct or indirect damage and losses, unless it is established that the carrier failed to take the necessary precautions in full knowledge of the hazards associated with the goods. If the carrier becomes aware that the goods are hazardous without the shipper having either so indicated in the transport document or expressly informed him, he must either eliminate the hazard or discharge the cargo from the vehicle in accordance with legislation in force. In such a case, the shipper shall be liable for any and all expenses, losses and damage incurred by the carrier as a result. Provisions and conditions for non-Jordanian trucks permitted to engage in international shipping or transit and attendant charges and services are defined in regulations issued by the Council of Ministers on the recommendation of the Minister of Transportation. The Minister of Finance has issued a decision on the establishment of customs houses pursuant to the provisions of article 6 of the Customs Act (No. 20 of 1998) (i.e., the Wadi al-Yutm and Wadi Araba customs houses), charging the said customs houses with keeping orderly data on the belongings carried by travellers, which must not exceed a value of 500 dinars and must be of a personal nature; overseeing the exit and entry of goods in transit; and completing all procedures related to transit data. Also with respect to security procedures and transport control, directives for 2004 concerning the transport of hazardous materials and explosives were issued pursuant to paragraph A (2) of article 46 of the Provisional Act on Traffic (No. 47 of 2001), article 1 of which defines hazardous materials as "any simple or compound substance or mixture or any related waste, whether natural or manufactured, which poses a threat to the environment or any part thereof or to the safety of living beings by reason of its toxicity or its flammable, explosive or corrosive nature". Instructions concerning the required labelling of hazardous or explosive materials during transport have also been issued. Finally, one must note that out of recognition of the necessity to standardize directives on the transport of hazardous or flammable materials by road so as to ensure public safety on roads and limit the spread of weapons of mass destruction, the Jordanian Government signed a memorandum of understanding with the Governments of both Syria and Lebanon on 12 January 2004 which defines a hazardous material as "any simple or compound substance or mixture or any related waste, whether natural or manufactured, which poses a threat to the environment or any part thereof or to the safety of living beings by reason of its toxicity or its flammable, explosive or corrosive nature". An explosive material is defined as "any material or waste product (or combination of materials or waste products) capable by its nature of producing, by way of chemical reaction, gas at a temperature, under a pressure or at a rate such as to cause damage to the surrounding environment". In the area of initiatives which it intends to join, the Jordanian Government is currently looking into the possibility of signing a security cooperation agreement between Iraq and its neighbours, designed to strengthen cooperation among the signatory States in fighting crime in general and terrorist crimes in particular. Article 3 of the draft agreement provides for the establishment among the signatory States of a database designed to collect information on suitable ways and means of combating terrorism and its sources of funding, organized crime networks, individuals and groups involved in such networks, and chemical and biological weapons and toxic substances that might be used in terrorist operations. This is to be done in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in those States and with relevant international conventions and covenants. It is worth noting that Jordan's signing a memorandum of understanding on security with the Republic of Iraq on 1 October 2005, illustrates the desire of the Kingdom to enter into other similar agreements and memorandums of understanding, especially in the light of the Jordanian Government's efforts to combat the phenomenon of terrorism. OP 3 (c) and (d) and related matters from OP 6 and OP 10 -- Controls of NW including Related Materials The provisions described in the response regarding controls over biological and chemical weapons and related materials naturally also apply to nuclear weapons and related materials. One must also bear in mind that the laws, regulations and directives referred to above contain provisions governing hazardous materials generally, including biological, chemical and nuclear materials. In addition, mention should be made of certain measures adopted by the Jordanian Government in the area of controlling nuclear weapons and related materials, considering the special characteristics of those materials. Cooperation and coordination between the Jordanian Customs Department and the Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission in the implementation of the provisions of the Nuclear Energy and Radiation Protection Act (No. 29 of 2001) and the regulations and directives issued under it have had a positive effect on the satisfaction of the conditions and requirements of radiation safety, protection and security in all organizations engaging in work involving radiation, as well as on the regulation and registration of radioactive materials and equipment entering or exiting the Kingdom. All this helps to protect the environment, human health and property from the dangers of radiation exposure and pollution and limit the spread of nuclear weapons. The Nuclear Energy Commission has recently created a list (reviewed from time to time together with the parties concerned for the purpose of reclassification) of items of a radiological nature and the related tariff provisions. These are items whose import, export, re-export or transit require prior approval from the Commission in the form of "non-automatic licenses" in accordance with the law previously indicated. The Customs Department may not clear such items without the necessary prior approvals being obtained from the Commission. For that purpose, on 15 March 2006 the Jordanian Customs Department issued circular No. 103 (2006) to all customs houses. The materials and equipment in question include: (a) nuclear materials and related equipment, such as raw uranium, nuclear reactors or components thereof, radioactive chemical elements or radioisotopes, or their constituents, including fissile or fertile chemical elements or isotopes; (b) radioactive materials and equipment containing radioactive materials, including equipment and instruments for chemical analysis; (c) radiation generators and equipment containing radiation generators, such as radioscintillation diagnosis equipment; (d) materials classified as radioactive waste, including radioactive chemical elements, radioisotopes and their constituents; (e) any source of ionizing radiation or any material emitting ionizing radiation not included in the list. The Jordanian Nuclear Energy Commission, in cooperation and coordination with relevant institutions, strengthens the border radiation monitoring system through the use of fixed radiation monitoring stations and, occasionally, portable devices, and also steps up the related laboratory work. There is close cooperation and coordination between the Commission and other border enforcement agencies such as the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Jordanian Customs Department and the Public Security Directorate in this regard. An example of such cooperation is the joint review and study of requests for radiological licenses and permits conducted by the Board of Directors of the Commission, composed of 11 experts and the said local institutions. OP 6, 7 and 8 (d) -- Control lists, Assistance, Information In addition to the discussions contained in this section, operative paragraph 6 of resolution 1540 (2004), which urges States to establish national control lists, and operative paragraph 8 (d), which calls on States to develop appropriate ways to work with industry, have been covered in the discussion of controls relating to the above-mentioned weapons. In operative paragraph 7, the Security Council recognizes that some States may require assistance in implementing the provisions of this resolution and invites States in a position to do so to offer assistance as appropriate in response to specific requests to the States lacking the legal and regulatory infrastructure, implementation experience and/or resources for fulfilling the provisions of the resolution. Here one must point to the continued support provided to the Jordanian Government by the American Government by way of nonproliferation training through the Export Control and Related Border Security Assistance (EXBS) programme, which aims to create an integrated programme in the Kingdom to enhance the performance of border posts so as to prevent smuggling or the entry of cargo that might be used for the production of weapons of mass destruction and ensure the safety of dual-use goods and materials. The programme aims, inter alia, to institutionalize cooperation among the national agencies concerned through the formation of a national committee charged with classifying materials that require special control and issuing import and export control lists. At the present time, therefore, each national agency concerned is responsible for issuing lists of materials requiring special control that fall within its legal purview. Each agency acts in coordination with the relevant national agencies, such as the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the Jordanian Customs Department. The programme also assists the national agencies in preparing and adopting lists of dual-use materials with the goal of creating a clear reference for cooperation between exporters and importers on the one hand and the relevant Government authorities on the other. Given that the Kingdom is located at an important commercial crossroads between the States of Asia, Africa and Europe, which compounds the efforts it must make to deal with various commercial cargo, the programme stresses that the goal of the lists is to control dual-use materials without conferring competitive advantage or interfering with the Kingdom's free-trade conditions. In the area of training and exchange of expertise, the programme has conducted a number of activities in cooperation with a number of relevant national agencies. Specialists from such agencies, for example, participated in a workshop held in August 2005 on the control of dual-use materials. A workshop on border security and terrorism was held in September 2005 in cooperation with the general command of the Jordanian armed forces, the security services and a number of civil governmental agencies. In addition, a delegation made up of the various governmental and security authorities undertook a visit to the United States of America to study American experience with coordination among border-control agencies. A workshop on nuclear technical exchange held in March 2006 was devoted to dealing with control of nuclear exports and related products. There were also a number of field visits by Jordanian and American officials, designed to enhance the effectiveness of the border posts, in particular the commercial port of Aqaba. In the course of the programme, training was additionally offered in a number of other areas, such as general awareness of the issue of weapons of mass destruction, inspection techniques, prevention and export licensing. Also as part of the programme, the Jordanian Government was supplied with inspection equipment. The American side expressed its complete readiness to study the needs of the Kingdom to enable it to meet its obligation in the area of non-proliferation, with a view to supplying the Jordanian Government with the necessary assistance. The subject of non-proliferation necessarily brings us to the American Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), which has been welcomed by a number of States, including Jordan, in view of the fact that it contributes to the prevention of proliferation. Indeed, the Initiative is aimed at strengthening cooperation among participating States in the control of land, sea and air cargo containing weapons of mass destruction, their components, their means of delivery or materials used in their manufacture. Jordan declared its support for the Initiative on 26 October 2005 (one should emphasize that the Initiative is merely a supplementary mechanism that does not replace currently existing disarmament and non-proliferation mechanisms such as the agreements that have resulted from international efforts). Jordan consequently plays an important role in supporting the Initiative through continued cooperation with the United States of America and other participating States, involving actual operations aimed at preventing proliferation, as well as information exchange and capacity-building for successful prevention. Also important is Jordan's role in promoting the Initiative with neighbouring States, seeking by diplomatic means to persuade them to support it. The Jordanian Government is resolved to review national laws and measures to ensure that they strengthen the initiative and the potential for carrying out successful operations against proliferation and intends to enhance such laws and measures if they do not fulfil those goals. The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan takes this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions adopted by the Security Council, in particular those relating to the elimination and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The Jordanian Government emphasizes that Jordan is free of weapons of mass destruction and that the Government is making earnest efforts to conduct a complete review of national legislation (including laws, regulations and directives) relevant to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with a view to closing any legislative gaps. It should be borne in mind that, as indicated in detail in Jordan's first report, the Jordanian Government has ratified or acceded to all agreements on the elimination and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. These include agreements relating to export control and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, which the Jordanian Government recently signed, on 16 November 2005. The provisions of such agreements become an integral part of national law and are incorporated into the national legal system as binding, based on article 93/2 of the Jordanian Constitution of 1952 and on judicial rulings to the effect that international agreements are part of national legislation simply by virtue of having completed the constitutional stages required for their entry into force. Finally, the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan would like to reaffirm its commitment to taking all measures necessary to strengthen international efforts towards the elimination and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It would also like to express its appreciation for the active efforts of the Chairman and members of the Committee, as well as Jordan's complete readiness to offer assistance to the Committee and to other States with a view to preventing weapons of mass destruction from reaching the hands of terrorists and non-State actors, an absolute necessity on its list of priorities. Finally, the Jordanian Government conveys its gratitude to the Committee for offering technical support for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and welcomes any clarification that might be offered to Jordan by the Committee on any issue connected with the implementation of the resolution. 