%%%PLEDGING CONFERENCES|BUDGET CONTRIBUTIONS|WORK ORGANIZATION|

98-40223 (E) 070199 United Nations A/CONF.186/1 General Assembly Distr.: General 22 December 1998 Original: English 1998 United Nations/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Pledging Conference for the World Food Programme 3 November 1998 Report of the United Nations/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Pledging Conference for the World Food Programme A. Opening and duration of the session 1. The Conference met at United Nations Headquarters on 3 November 1998. 2. The Conference was opened by the Secretary-General, who made a statement. B. Attendance 3. The Conference was attended by the representatives of the following States: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Burundi, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Mexico, Mongolia, Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Viet Nam. 4. Representatives of the following organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations and specialized agencies and related agencies also attended the Conference: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Population Fund. A/CONF.186/1 C. Election of officers 5. At its meeting on 3 November, the Conference elected by acclamation the following officials: President: Mr. Gian Nicola Filippi Balestra (San Marino) Vice-President: Ms. Zamira B. Eshmambetova (Kyrgyzstan) D. Documentation 6. The Conference had before it a World Food Programme background note. E. Announcement of pledges 7. The Conference heard the announcement of pledges by a number of Governments to the Programme and took note of the fact that several Governments were not in a position to announce their contributions but proposed to communicate their announcement of such contributions to the Secretary-General as soon as they were in a position to do so after the closure of the Conference. 