%%%ELECTIONS|ELECTION VERIFICATION|INTERNAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|POLICE|RULE OF LAW|VIOLENCE|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 5504th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 August 2006, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council pays tribute to the citizens of the Democratic Republic of the Congo who, on 30 July 2006, took part in great numbers, freely and peacefully, in democratic elections of historical importance for their nation. It appeals to them to receive the results with the same spirit of civic responsibility, and to display the same commitment in the subsequent polls, with a view to ensuring the success of the democratic process. "The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Independent Electoral Commission for the untiring efforts they made to ensure that the polls could take place in the best possible conditions, and looks forward to the official announcement of the results by the Commission. It expresses its support to the Committee of the Wise chaired by President Joachim Chissano, whose role contributes greatly to the serenity and fairness of the electoral process. "The Security Council expresses its gratitude to the United Nations Mission, MONUC, as well as to all the international partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo who provided support to the electoral process, in particular its African partners, and especially South Africa, as well as the European Union and the force it has temporarily deployed during this period. "The Security Council notes that the electoral campaign and the voting process took place largely in a calm environment. It deplores the incidents which occurred in recent days, in particular in Kinshasa, Mbuji Mayi and Mweka. It endorses the opinion of the International Committee in Support to the Transition (CIAT), who welcomed, in this context, the work of the National Police forces. "The Security Council urges all political actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to work to ensure that the electoral process proceeds in a free, transparent and peaceful manner, in accordance with the agreed timetable. The Council calls on political leaders to refrain from making inflammatory speeches. "The Security Council underlines that those elections will mark the completion of a long period of rule by transitional institutions, and the start of democratic rule. The people who will be destined to lead the country will bear the important responsibility to provide long term foundations for the restoration of peace and stability, national reconciliation and the establishment of the rule of law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo." 