%%%EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE|MARITIME BOUNDARIES|CYPRUS|CYPRUS QUESTION|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|

General Assembly Sixty-first session Agenda item 19 Question of Cyprus Security Council Sixty-second year Letter dated 8 August 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 8 August 2007 addressed to you by Kemal Gökeri, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 19, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Baki İlkin Ambassador Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government and further to our letter dated 2 February 2007 (A/61/727-S/2007/54, annex), I am writing to bring to your kind attention once again the continuing provocative policies of the Greek Cypriot administration, which undermine stability in the island, as well as in the Eastern Mediterranean. Attempts by the Greek Cypriot administration to delimit maritime jurisdiction areas and explore oil and natural gas deposits in the Eastern Mediterranean are being carried out at the expense of legitimate rights and interests of the Turkish Cypriot people. The Greek Cypriot administration does not represent the entire island. It neither has the legal right nor the legitimacy to claim to represent or act on behalf of Turkish Cypriots who have their own elected representatives and live under their own administration. It is most unfortunate that the Greek Cypriot administration pursues such policies in complete disregard of the facts that the Turkish Cypriot people are the equal partners under the 1960 Republic of Cyprus and, as such, have an equal right and say on the natural resources on the land and sea areas of the island of Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot side attempts to create a fait accompli by finalizing, in mid-August, the tender process it initiated for the 13 oil exploration fields unilaterally defined in the area. On various occasions, it was made abundantly clear by the Turkish Cypriot side that such unilateral acts are totally unacceptable. We witness, with regret, that the Greek Cypriot side continues to take such steps which undermine the prospect for a settlement in the island. The expectation of the Turkish Cypriot side, as well as the international community, from the Greek Cypriot leadership is not to take steps generating further tension in the region while efforts are under way to find a comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus problem. Such a settlement, among other things, will enable Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots to jointly benefit from the island's resources. As clearly mentioned in our above-mentioned letter dated 2 February 2007, any agreement signed and step taken on the matter by the Greek Cypriot administration under its purported capacity as the "Government of the Republic of Cyprus" is null and void and is not in any way binding on the Turkish Cypriot people or the island as a whole. In concluding, I would like to reiterate our firm commitment to a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem under your good offices mission and on the basis of the United Nations Comprehensive Settlement Plan. I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 19, and of the Security Council. (Signed) M. Kemal Gökeri Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 