%%%ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE|CONFERENCES|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 128 Administration of justice at the United Nations Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Mamadou Moustapha Loum (Senegal) I. Introduction 1. The Sixth Committee resumed its consideration of the item entitled "Administration of justice at the United Nations" at its 24th and 25th meetings, on 12 and 23 March 2007. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.6/61/SR.24 and 25). 2. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Redesign Panel on the United Nations system of administration of justice (A/61/205) and the note by the Secretary-General containing his comments thereon (A/61/758). 3. At its 24th meeting, on 12 March, the Committee decided to establish a working group on the administration of justice at the United Nations, chaired by Sivagurunathan Ganeson (Malaysia), a Vice-Chairman of the Committee. The Working Group held nine meetings from 12 to 23 March. At the 3rd meeting of the Working Group, on 13 March, representatives of the Secretariat answered questions raised by the delegations. At the 25th meeting of the Committee, on 23 March, the Vice-Chairman reported to the Committee on the work of the Working Group. II. Consideration of draft decision A/C.6/61/L.21 4. At its 25th meeting, on 23 March, the Committee had before it a draft decision entitled "Administration of justice at the United Nations" (A/C.6/61/L.21), which read: "The General Assembly decides to continue, at its sixty-second session in the Sixth Committee, its consideration under the agenda item entitled `Administration of justice', of the legal aspects, both institutional and procedural, of the comments of the Secretary-General on the recommendations contained in the report of the Redesign Panel on the United Nations system of administration of justice, and requests the Secretary-General [, in accordance with further decision that may be made by the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee at the sixty-first session of the General Assembly, to provide, as appropriate, terms of reference for the Office of the Ombudsman and for mediation and draft statutes of the first instance and of the appellate instance, taking into account the points annexed to the letter of the Vice-Chairman of the Sixth Committee addressed to the President of the General Assembly]". 5. At the same meeting, the Vice-Chairman orally revised the draft decision. 6. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft decision A/C.6/61/L.21, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 8). 7. After the adoption of the draft decision, statements were made by the representatives of the Russian Federation, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala and France (see A/C.6/61/SR.25). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 8. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decision: The General Assembly decides to continue at its sixty-second session, in the Sixth Committee, its consideration, under the agenda item entitled "Administration of justice at the United Nations", of the legal aspects, both institutional and procedural, of the report of the Redesign Panel on the United Nations system of administration of justice and the comments of the Secretary-General on the recommendations contained in the report of the Redesign Panel, taking into account the outcome of the deliberations of the Fifth Committee at the resumed sixty-first session of the General Assembly, and the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with any further decisions that may be taken by the Assembly on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee on this item during its sixty-first session, to provide more details on a proposal to strengthen the functions of the Office of the Ombudsman, including mediation, and draft elements of a statute or statutes of the first instance and the appellate instance, taking into account the points set out in appendix I to the letter from the Vice-Chairman of the Sixth Committee to the President of the General Assembly. 