%%%PETROLEUM INDUSTRY|HONDURAS|PETROLEUM|PURCHASING|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|COSTS|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 51 (b) Macroeconomic policy questions: international financial system and development Letter dated 23 January 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Honduras to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Honduras has issued a press communiqué concerning the situation pertaining to oil terminals in Honduras under executive decree PCM No.-03-2007. In the communiqué, issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (see annex), the Government provides information in order to ensure due transparency with regard to the procurement process. Excellency, I request that this letter and the attached communiqué be circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 51 (b). (Signed) Iván Romero Martinez Permanent Representative of Honduras to the United Nations [Original: Spanish] I have the honour to submit the attached press communiqué issued on 16 January 2006 concerning the regulation of oil terminals belonging to the company Petróleos de Tela, S.A., in order to provide official information pertaining to this subject matter: PRESS COMMUNIQUÉ The Ministry of Foreign Affairs hereby informs the national and international public that on 13 January 2007, the President of the Republic José Manuel Zelaya Rosales and the Council of Ministers passed executive decree PCM No.-03-2007, and in that connection, with a view to ensuring access to reliable information, points out the following: 1. Use of the term "expropriation" distorts the facts. The fact is that through the decree dated 13 January 2007, the State decided to regulate oil supply terminals in order to establish fair remuneration for such service, not to expropriate or to nationalize. 2. The regulation of the terminals pertains only to those of the company Petróleos de Tela, S.A., which holds a valid contract with the State. Paragraph 5.4 of the fifth clause of said contract, published in Decree No. 112-90 dated 20 September 1990 pertaining to the power of the State, literally reads: "The State shall use at cost the facilities of the contractor in order to store, transport, and ship the oil products that it may need in case of national emergency; furthermore, should the State so need, it shall lease the facilities at cost once the contract has expired." 16 January 2006 (Signed) Eduardo Enrique Reina García Acting Minister of State 