%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|BURUNDI|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|INVENTORIES|BURUNDI SITUATION|DISSOLUTION|

Sixty-first session Agenda item 133 Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi Report of the Secretary-General Summary Pursuant to regulation 5.14 (e) of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, the present report provides details on the proposed donation of the assets of the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) to the Government of Burundi. The inventory value of the Operation's assets proposed for donation as at 15 February 2007 amounted to $2,799,400, representing 5.1 per cent of the total ONUB assets inventory value of $55,253,300. The action to be taken by the General Assembly, as set out in section III of the present report, is to approve the donation of ONUB assets to the Government of Burundi. 1. The mandate of the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1545 (2004). By its resolution 1692 (2006), the Council decided to extend the mandate of ONUB until 31 December 2006 and welcomed the intention of the Secretary-General to establish, at the end of that period, an integrated office of the United Nations in Burundi. Accordingly, on 1 January 2007, the Operation commenced its administrative liquidation, including the process of the disposition of its assets, to be completed by 30 June 2007. II. Donation of assets to the Government of Burundi 2. Regulation 5.14 (e) of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations stipulates that any assets which have been installed in a country and which, if dismantled, would set back the rehabilitation of that country shall be provided to the duly recognized Government of that country in return for compensation in a form to be agreed by the Organization and the Government. This refers in particular to airfield installations and equipment, buildings, bridges and mine-clearing equipment. Where such assets cannot be disposed of in this manner or otherwise, they will be contributed free of charge to the Government of the country concerned. Such contributions require the prior approval of the General Assembly. 3. Accordingly, in the context of its administrative liquidation, ONUB has identified for donation to the Government of Burundi, on a free-of-charge basis, assets with inventory value as at 15 February 2007 of $2,799,400 (corresponding residual value of $1,726,300), representing 5.1 per cent of the total inventory value of the Operation's assets amounting to $55,253,300. 4. The selection of assets proposed for donation has been guided by the provisions of regulation 5.14 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and is based on a determination that the assets are not required, nor are they suitable for transfer to other missions or for temporary storage at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy. The donation of those assets, comprising primarily prefabricated buildings, would enhance the operational capabilities of the Government of Burundi. Furthermore, owing to the landlocked location of the Operation, the cost of dismantling, refurbishing, packing and shipping the assets would render such transfer largely uneconomical. 5. In accordance with financial regulation 5.14, the asset disposal plan currently in the process of implementation by the Operation provides for the progressive transfer of assets to other peacekeeping operations, where feasible and economical, to other United Nations activities funded from assessed contributions, as well as for their disposition through sale to United Nations agencies, funds and programmes present in Burundi, or commercial disposal. Information on the actual disposition of all assets of the Operation will be provided in the context of the final disposition of assets report of ONUB upon completion of the Operation's administrative liquidation. A summary of assets proposed for donation to the Government of Burundi is shown in the table below. Table Summary of assets proposed for donation to the Government of Burundi (Thousands of United States dollars) Category Inventory value Residual value as at 15 February 2007 Prefabricated buildings Generators Fuel tanks Water and septic tanks Accommodation equipment Miscellaneous equipment (electrical panels) Total III. Action to be taken by the General Assembly 6. The action to be taken by the General Assembly at its sixty-first session in connection with the financing of ONUB is to approve the donation of assets with an inventory value of $2,799,400 and a corresponding residual value of $1,726,300 to the Government of Burundi on a free-of-charge basis. 