%%%ELECTIONS|NEGOTIATION|ABKHAZIA (GEORGIA)|GEORGIA|GEORGIA SITUATION|POPULAR PARTICIPATION|RULE OF LAW|REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT|

General Assembly Sixty-first session Agenda item 27 Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development Security Council Sixty-second year * Reissued for technical reasons. Letter dated 9 March 2007 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General In my capacity as a representative of the country coordinator of GUAM (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova), I have the honour to transmit herewith a statement by GUAM on the so-called elections held in Abkhazia, Georgia, on 11 February and 4 March 2007 (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 27, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Viktor Kryzhanivskyi Chargé d'affaires a.i. Statement by GUAM on the so-called elections held in Abkhazia, Georgia, on 11 February and 4 March 2007 The GUAM member States once again express their deep concern over the socalled local and parliamentary elections held by the separatist regime of Abkhazia, Georgia, on 11 February and 4 March 2007. It is noteworthy that these spurious elections were accompanied by the repressive acts of the Sokhumi separatist regime, such as threatening the local population, forcing them to participate in the illegal voting, opening fire at a group of Georgian and Abkhaz young persons peacefully protesting against so-called elections, kidnapping and unlawfully arresting three protesters. We stress once again that elections in any region of Georgia should be carried out in accordance with the legislation of Georgia and with the direct participation of the entire population of the respective region. It is well known that the overwhelming majority of the peaceful population of the region of various ethnic origins was subject to mass expulsion from the places of their permanent residence. Thus, it is obvious that any kind of so-called elections carried out under such conditions are devoid of any legitimate basis and its results shall be considered a priori invalid by the whole international community, as has been done in the recent statements of the European Union and the United States. Any kind of reference to the legitimacy of these spurious elections is immoral and cynical as an attempt to neglect the right of refugees and to legitimize results of ethnic cleansing. The GUAM member States insistently urge the separatist regime to engage constructively in a direct dialogue with the Georgian Government and cease all unlawful activities against the peace process. 