%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|FIELD STAFF|STAFFING|CAREER DEVELOPMENT|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|LABOUR MOBILITY|MISSION ASSIGNMENT|RECRUITMENT|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|RECOMMENDATIONS|

Sixty-first session Agenda items 123 and 132 Human resources management Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Civilian career peacekeepers Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 61/244, section VIII. The report expands on the proposal set out in the addendum to the Secretary-General's report on investing in people (A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1) to establish a framework of up to 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers dedicated to the support of United Nations peace operations. It responds to the request contained in General Assembly resolution 61/244, on the advice of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, for a more complete analysis of the requirement for, as well as the management and operation of, the proposed 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers. The report seeks the approval of the General Assembly to establish a framework of up to 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers, to be funded against the approved budgets of authorized peacekeeping operations and special political missions, for the recruitment and management of staff dedicated to the support of United Nations peace operations. 1. The report of the Secretary-General entitled "Reforming the field service category: investing in meeting the human resources requirements of United Nations peace operations in the twenty-first century" (A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1) proposed the establishment of 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers, to be funded against existing authorized posts in United Nations peace operations and dedicated to the support of United Nations peace operations. The concept of a dedicated group of career staff to support United Nations peace operations is not new. By its resolution 297 (IV), the General Assembly established the Field Service category in 1949 as a unique group of staff dedicated to supporting United Nations field operations. As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, Field Service Officers were contractually obligated to deploy at short notice to any field operation. These staff were appointed through the normal recruitment process and were eligible for permanent appointments. Recruitment into the career Field Service category was frozen in 1994, when the appointment of limited duration was introduced. At the time of the freeze on recruitment into the Field Service category, there were 633 Field Service Officers, which through attrition has diminished to 300 as of April 2007. Field Service Officers, currently the only career peacekeeping staff, now represent just 5 per cent of the international staff in the field. 2. The Secretary-General's report further explained how and why the staffing requirements of United Nations peace operations have changed dramatically in the post-cold-war period to respond to the increasing scope and complexity of the mandates of integrated, multidimensional peace operations. The trend in peacekeeping activity since the 1990s has shown a sustained requirement for a minimum international staffing capacity of 2,626 international staff to support no fewer than 12 United Nations peace operations at any one time. Looking at the approach taken since the mid-1990s, it is clear that the short-term staffing solutions adopted at that time to address the then perceived temporary surge in peacekeeping have failed to address the continuing and evolving operational demands for high numbers of expert and experienced civilian specialists, leaders and managers required to conduct and manage the large, complex missions of the twenty-first century. Experience demonstrates that the continued reliance on a predominantly transitory workforce places United Nations peace operations at managerial and financial risk. 3. The human resources strategy for United Nations peace operations must work to provide a stable workforce with the expertise and experience, sustained by continuous training and development, required to deliver complex mandates and effective support to rapid pace operations. While it can be expected that staffing requirements will fluctuate depending on the number, type and complexity of operations, an analysis of experience, trends and medium-term projections identifies the need for a baseline capacity of 2,500 career civilian staff with skills, expertise and experience in key occupations required to ensure the successful planning, conduct and support of United Nations peace operations. The human resources requirements of modern peace operations go beyond the reform of the existing Field Service category to require a standing capacity of career staff in both the Field Service and the Professional categories. The conditions of service of the 2,500 career civilian staff would include an obligation to deploy on short notice to meet rapid deployment requirements and to undertake systematic rotation and development over time through job assignments and training. Standard organizational procedures would be applied to the selection of civilian career peacekeepers, including review by a joint staff-management central review body. They would be eligible for mobility across field missions as well as across the Secretariat. The management of these career staff will aim to ensure that the Organization benefits from a professionalized, stable workforce while meeting its duty to foster the legitimate career aspirations of its staff. 4. As the proposed 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers would serve against authorized positions within existing United Nations peace operations, the proposal relates primarily to the change in the status of the individuals who will be selected to perform critical functions and serve at grade levels and in numbers required to provide baseline support to peacekeeping and special political missions. The establishment of the framework of career positions does not, in and of itself, entail financial implications. The financial implications of introducing conditions of service harmonized with those of the other organizations and bodies of the United Nations common system are set out in a report of the Secretary-General on harmonization of conditions of service, which, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 61/244, will be submitted to the Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-first session. 5. In section VIII of its resolution 61/244, the General Assembly noted the proposal of the Secretary-General to provide for peacekeeping staffing on an ongoing basis and to enhance professionalism and the ability of the United Nations to respond quickly to peacekeeping needs by designating a cadre of continuing civilian positions from within existing capacity. The present report responds to a request in the resolution to provide additional details on the operation of the proposed cadre, taking into account the observations and views of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as contained in paragraphs 70 to 77 of its report on human resources management (A/61/537). For ease of reference, the present report also provides the salient elements of the proposals set out in the Secretary-General's report (A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1) and additional information provided to the Advisory Committee and the Fifth Committee during their deliberations on the subject at the sixty-first session of the Assembly. II. Identifying needs 6. The Secretary-General's report (A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1) responded to the recommendation contained in the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/305-S/2000/809) to reform the Field Service category to mirror the recurrent demands faced by all United Nations peace operations, especially at the mid-to-senior levels in the administrative and logistics areas. The report of the Secretary-General was also prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/257, in which the Assembly approved a series of recommendations contained in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on reforming the Field Service category in United Nations peace operations (A/57/78), to review the composition and management of the Field Service category. 7. In response to the requests, the Secretariat examined the mandates and types of peacekeeping missions supported, the historical, existing and projected medium-term staffing needs and the staffing strategies employed over time, to project the numbers and types of staff required to meet the evolving mandates and needs of United Nations peace operations. The review also examined historical data on the Field Service category, current staffing trends (such as the increased use of national staff and United Nations Volunteers) and newly emerging functional requirements expected to continue over the medium term (such as the rule of law, adviser positions in such thematic areas as gender, HIV/AIDS, and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the joint mission analysis cell, the joint logistics operations centre and conduct and discipline). The study concluded that the human resources requirements of modern peace operations go beyond the reform of the existing Field Service category to require a standing capacity of 2,500 career staff in both the Field Service and the Professional categories to: (a) Meet the baseline staffing requirements of United Nations peace operations; (b) Rapidly deploy staff in sufficient numbers in relevant occupational groups to new or expanding operations or operations that were being downsized/liquidated; (c) Develop broad organizational knowledge and capacity both to function effectively in United Nations peace operations and to support operations effectively from Headquarters; (d) Meet projected medium-term Secretariat requirements, both at Headquarters and in the field, for leadership, managerial and technical positions through targeted staff development. 8. As a first step, the study examined the number and type of peacekeeping operations in existence at any one time during the period from 1992 to 2006. The examination revealed that a minimum of 12 operations were being supported at any one time. A general pattern has emerged whereby, at any given time, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is supporting at least two large, multidimensional/ integrated missions, four multidimensional/integrated missions and six traditional peacekeeping missions. 9. The trends in international staffing requirements in United Nations peace operations were then analysed from two perspectives: first, in terms of overall numbers of international staffing requirements; and, second, in terms of the types and levels of functions to be performed. 10. In terms of overall numbers, international staffing requirements in the 10-year period from 1996 to 2006 ranged from a low of 2,626 authorized international posts in 1998 to a high of 7,080 in June 2006 (up to 7,377 as of December 2006). 11. To identify a baseline capacity to perform managerial, leadership, technical, substantive and support functions, the study then identified the skill mix and grade levels of those posts against criteria: (a) Required under the mandates of virtually all peace operations; (b) Of a long-term, enduring nature; (c) Critical to the rapid deployment of new/expanding missions; (d) Requiring significant expertise, experience and knowledge of the complex United Nations regulatory frameworks, as well as technical knowledge and managerial ability; (e) Not subject to any special recruitment procedures. 12. Functions found to meet the above criteria fell within the following occupational groups: political affairs, civil affairs, legal affairs, communications and public information, administration (human resources, finance, budget, procurement and management oversight) and logistics support (transport, aviation, movement control, information technology, communications, engineering, supply and medical), police and military advisory functions, conduct and discipline, and thematic policy guidance (including disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the rule of law, gender and HIV/AIDS). 13. To meet the level of expertise and managerial and/or leadership criteria required, the appropriate grade levels within the Professional category were found to fall primarily between the P-4 through D-1 levels and in the Field Service category between the FS-5 to FS-7 levels. A number of P-2 and P-3 positions were included for the managed mobility of staff and for successful candidates from the national competitive examination. In addition, a number of FS-4 posts were required for technical functions, in particular those critical to rapid deployment. 14. Positions at the D-2, Assistant Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General levels were not included in the civilian career concept, as such appointments are made by the Secretary-General. Appointees to senior mission leadership positions may, or may not, be made from the ranks of serving Secretariat staff. Also excluded were positions of seconded, active-duty military and police personnel serving on United Nations contracts, as well as the security, internal oversight (investigations and audit) and human rights occupational groups, in view of the responsibilities of the Department of Safety and Security, the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, respectively, in managing staff performing these functions. These categories of staff will not, therefore, be subject to the career development, rotation or rapid deployment programmes for career civilian peacekeepers. 15. To arrive at an indicative overall number of required career civilian positions, the study projected that the Organization would continue to support a minimum of 12 missions, and that those missions would continue to fall within the pattern consisting of at least two large, multidimensional/integrated, four multidimensional/ integrated and six traditional peacekeeping operations over the medium term. The study then extracted from the approved 2005/06 budgets of 12 existing missions the numbers of authorized posts at the P-2 to D-1 and FS-4 to FS-7 levels in occupational groups that meet the criteria set out in paragraphs 11 through 13 above. The 12 existing missions deemed to meet the profile included the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (large, multidimensional/integrated missions); the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Operation in Burundi, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Operation in the Congo (multidimensional/integrated missions); and the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (traditional peacekeeping operations). 16. The extraction of data on the functions and levels of the authorized posts in those 12 missions produced a total of 3,062 positions. Application of a 20 per cent vacancy rate to that total yielded a total of 2,450 positions. Additional positions were then provided to take into account projected needs in such evolving areas as the joint mission analysis cell, gender, best practices, police and military advisory positions (not on secondment), logistics and executive management (Chief of Staff) to reach a gross total of 2,500 positions. The composition of the occupational skills and profiles of the civilian career peacekeeper framework will be periodically reviewed and adjusted to reflect evolving requirements. 17. The attached annex provides a breakdown by function and grade level of the proposed framework of 2,500 civilian career positions. Overall, approximately 27 per cent of the positions will be in the substantive area; 28 per cent in administration; and 45 per cent in logistics support. In total, 53 per cent of the 2,500 positions are at the Professional level and above and 47 per cent at the Field Service level. 18. Experience demonstrates that United Nations peace operations demand a staffing strategy that produces a dynamic, flexible and reliable response. Such a response must be able to draw on a cadre of expert and professional career civilian staff in managing staff assignments to meet baseline staffing requirements. The proposed establishment of a framework of 2,500 civilian career positions, funded as part and parcel of the approved budget in which the career officer is serving, is designed as the managerial mechanism to enable such a response. 19. The baseline capacity will be augmented by senior leadership, active duty military and police personnel seconded to serve on United Nations contracts, staff members in the security and safety, human rights, audit and investigation occupational groups, staff on secondment or loaned by organizations of the United Nations common system and staff in other occupational groups recruited to meet the supplemental requirements of United Nations peace operations. III. Management of the career civilian peacekeepers A. Selection process 20. Staff will be selected for career positions through the same competitive process applied in the recruitment of staff in the Secretariat. Vacancy announcements will be developed on the basis of classified job descriptions or generic job profiles. The vacancy announcements and evaluation criteria will be vetted by a dedicated central review body prior to the posting of the vacancy announcement. Vacancy announcements will specify that the position is subject to rapid deployment at short notice to meet operational needs and to managed rotation between duty stations. Selections will again be vetted through a central review body to ensure that the evaluation criteria have been appropriately applied and that there is no prejudice, error of fact or error of law in the selection process. 21. When any of the 2,500 career civilian peacekeepers leaves the cadre, a determination will be made as to whether the position should remain within the career cadre. Staff serving in United Nations peace operations who are not part of the civilian career peacekeeping cadre will be eligible to apply for a position as a career civilian peacekeeper, along with other United Nations personnel and external candidates, when the numbers fall below 2,500. 22. At present, posts in United Nations peace operations are not subject to a system of desirable geographical ranges. Selection to positions in United Nations peace operations is guided by the principles enunciated in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations. The paramount consideration for selection of staff to a career civilian peacekeeping position will be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, with due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. The selection process will also be guided by General Assembly resolutions reaffirming the goal of 50/50 gender distribution in all categories of posts within the United Nations system and the provisions of Assembly resolution 55/238 (sect. 1), reaffirmed by the Assembly in its resolution 56/241, relating to the proper representation of troop-contributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 23. In his report on criteria used for recruitment to support account posts (A/58/767), the Secretary-General proposed options for applying a system of desirable ranges to posts financed from the peacekeeping support account. In section VIII, paragraph 12 of its resolution 59/296, the General Assembly deferred consideration of that report pending updated information to be provided at the sixty-first session in the context of human resources management. In the event that the Assembly should decide to subject the proposed 2,500 career civilian peacekeeping positions to a system of desirable ranges, the Assembly may wish to revisit the options set out in chapter III, sections B and C, of the report, bearing in mind the regular and peacekeeping budget sources of funding of the career civilian positions. B. Contractual arrangements 24. Staff appointed to the 2,500 career civilian peacekeeping positions will have the same contractual arrangements as those of other Secretariat staff. In line with the Secretary-General's proposals in his report on investing in people (A/61/255), staff appointed to a career position in United Nations peace operations will be eligible for a continuing contract that will not be limited to service at any specific mission. The contracts of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers will specify that the staff member is subject to rotation and rapid deployment to any field operation at short notice to meet operational needs. C. Mobility and rapid deployment requirements 25. Managing the mobility of civilian career peacekeepers will be a critical factor in enabling the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to fulfil the expectations of Member States to deploy missions within 30 or 90 days of the adoption of a resolution establishing a new, or expanding an existing, peace operation and to meet operational objectives through building a multi-skilled, experienced and highly mobile workforce. The proposed 2,500 career civilian peacekeepers will be subject to rotation between field missions, as well as to rapid deployment to any new or expanding operations, under the authority of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations as Head of Department. 26. The rotation policy for the proposed career civilian peacekeepers will bear in mind both professional and personal preferences and circumstances. Building on the experience gained with the Field Service Officer category, rotation will be linked to operational requirements and career development, and will take into account the hardship and security considerations at each location and work to share the burden of serving in hardship locations. Career staff will be expected to remain in a mission for three years and to voluntarily begin applying to posts in other missions after two years at a duty station classified by the International Civil Service Commission as a hardship duty station in category of A, B or C. Career staff serving at a hardship-level duty station in category D or E will be expected to rotate after two years of service at that duty station. If a civilian career peacekeeper does not voluntarily move within three years, the staff member will be included in a compendium of staff subject to lateral rotation. Staff members may express their preference for assignment to a particular duty station and/or function, and those staff who have served in non-family, hardship duty stations classified as being in category D or E will be given preference for rotation to less difficult duty stations or to family duty stations, to the extent possible. The Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as Head of Department, will have authority to move career civilian peacekeepers to another United Nations peace operation, with due regard to the need to develop the staff member's skills and share the burden of serving in hardship locations. 27. The 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers will also be eligible to participate in the Secretariat mobility programmes, thereby facilitating an exchange of personnel, experience and knowledge between the field and Headquarters. Such programmes will contribute to building a multi-skilled and versatile workforce and to developing a solid knowledge base of field and Headquarters activities, thereby better enabling the Secretariat to deliver the full range of its mandates. 28. To meet the expectations of Member States to deploy peace operations within 30 or 90 days of the adoption of a resolution establishing a new, or expanding an existing, mission, the proposed 2,500 career civilian peacekeepers will be subject to rapid deployment at short notice to any United Nations peace operation. The rapid deployment of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers will be managed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, under the authority of the Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as Head of Department. All career peacekeepers will be subject to rapid deployment. However, in an effort to provide some measure of stability, career staff will alternate between active rapid deployment service and reserve deployment service. At any one time, half of the career staff will serve on an active rapid deployment roster for two years. Those not on the active duty roster will be on a reserve roster for two years. Career staff on the active roster will be activated first to meet rapid deployment requirements. Staff on the reserve roster will be activated only in cases where the active roster has been depleted. After serving on the active rapid deployment roster for two years, the career peacekeeper will be placed on the reserve roster, and those on the reserve roster for two years will be placed on the active rapid deployment roster for two years. D. Career development and training 29. Civilian career peacekeepers will be developed systematically through targeted training and job assignments, including assignments to Headquarters, to ensure training in organizational standards. As part of an overarching career development strategy, career pathing models will be developed to articulate experience, qualification and training benchmarks at each level in each occupational group and to provide indicative information of the types of job assignments, experiences and training needed for each level. Succession planning will be undertaken based on projected operational needs matched with the skills inventories of serving staff. Career civilian peacekeepers will be provided with information and will be counselled to make informed decisions on training and assignment opportunities. The mobility of career civilian peacekeepers will be managed centrally to both meet the operational needs of the Organization and the legitimate career aspirations of the staff. Developmental programmes, such as the senior mission administrative and resource training programme currently under development, will be designed to train career personnel to a pre-subscribed level of competence in critical functions. E. Downsizing and changing the profile of the cadre 30. Should a mission in which a career civilian peacekeeper is serving close or be downsized, the staff member will be placed in another mission; thereby enabling the Organization to retain valuable skills, experience and expertise, address retention problems and remove one of the main factors contributing to the turnover of staff. In the event that the global staffing complement of United Nations peace operations should fall below 2,500 international staff and necessitate a reduction in the numbers of civilian career peacekeepers, a comparative review by function and grade level will be made of all career civilian peacekeepers across missions to determine those to be retained in service on the basis of competence, efficiency and integrity, with due regard to gender balance and geographic representation. 31. The composition of the 2,500 career positions will remain under continual review, to ensure that it evolves in keeping with changing operational requirements. Changes to the composition of the cadre may also be made when/if staff should wish to opt out of the cadre, including through successful competition for another position in the Secretariat or in the organizations of the United Nations common system. IV. Managing other civilian peacekeepers A. Selection 32. Staff selected for positions that are not part of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping functions will continue to apply to generic or post-specific vacancy announcements. Those vacancy announcements will clearly indicate that the positions do not carry career expectations. Staff serving in positions that are not part of the 2,500 civilian career cadre will be placed on a roster on the basis of a thorough vetting process that will include screening against the evaluation criteria, competency-based interviews and reference checks. Central review bodies dedicated to United Nations peace operations will review the vacancy announcements and evaluation criteria prior to their posting. At a later stage, they will review the roster process to ensure the correct and fair application of the evaluation criteria and to ensure that no error of fact or law has occurred in the creation of the rosters. Field missions will continue to conduct competency-based interviews and select candidates for positions that are not part of the career cadre. Selection decisions for appointments that are not part of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping cadre will be made on the basis of the necessity to secure the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, with due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible, in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations. 33. Staff recruited for mission service over and above the 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers will be appointed under fixed-term contracts. As the fixed-term appointment will not give rise to any expectation of renewal or conversion to another appointment, the management of staff on fixed-term appointments who are not part of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping cadre will enable the Organization to expand or contract its workforce for United Nations peace operations to meet operational demands. 34. While there will be no contractual barrier to the movement of staff who are not part of the cadre of 2,500 civilian career peacekeepers, such staff will not be under contractual obligation to undertake regular rotation or rapid deployment to a new or expanding mission. These staff will, however, be eligible to apply for, and be selected to, positions in other United Nations peace operations that are not part of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping cadre. D. Career support 35. While career staff will be given preference for professional and developmental training programmes, staff who are not part of the cadre of civilian career peacekeepers will be eligible to participate in such training programmes as opportunity permits. Staff who are not civilian career peacekeepers will be offered training opportunities relative to their functions. These staff will also be able to take advantage of such career development resources as career pathing models. They will not, however, be expected to participate in managed developmental programmes. V. Implementation 36. Immediately upon the approval of the framework and composition of the 2,500 career civilian peacekeeping positions, the job profiles of the functions included in the cadre will be reviewed to ensure that the competencies, qualifications, experience and organizational standards are updated and adequately reflect the needs of peacekeeping for a versatile and highly mobile workforce. Reprofiling of the chief administrative officer/director of administration, human resources and budget cadres has commenced to update and further professionalize these functions. 37. Recruitment will be undertaken in two stages. The first stage of recruitment for the 2,500 career peacekeeping positions will be prioritized according to the major critical functions, with the most senior levels filled first. Priority areas will include political affairs, administration, finance/budget, human resources, engineering, logistics, procurement, transport and communications and information technology. These functions account for 1,286, or 51 per cent, of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping positions. The reprofiling exercise and the first phase of the recruitment exercise will take approximately 12 months to complete, after which time the second phase of reprofiling and recruitment will commence for the remaining functions. Selection to all 2,500 civilian career positions should be completed within 24 months. 38. Candidates applying for one of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping functions will be applying to the core cadre and not to a specific post. Selection to one of the 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping functions will involve a change in the staff member's status as a career peacekeeper as well as the staff member's obligation to rapidly deploy at short notice to any field operation and to undertake regular rotation. VI. Financial implications 39. As indicated in the Secretary-General's report (A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1), the staffing of the proposed 2,500 career civilian peacekeepers will be financed through existing authorized positions in United Nations peace operations. There is no intention to add to existing staffing levels. Rather, the proposal will involve a change in the personal status of the staff selected as civilian career peacekeepers. Costs related to the harmonization of conditions of service, which would apply to both the 2,500 career civilian peacekeepers as well as to other mission staff, are provided in the Secretary-General's report on the harmonization of conditions of service. VII. Conclusion and recommendations 40. In his report (A/61/255/Add.1 and Corr.1), the Secretary-General traced the evolution of United Nations peacekeeping as a critical instrument in preserving international peace and security and presented the case for establishing a baseline capacity of dedicated, skilled and experienced staff to meet the identified human resource requirements of twenty-first century peace operations. 41. Those arguments are perhaps equally valid today, if not more so. In August 2006, at the time the Secretary-General's report was being issued, Member States were expressing confidence in United Nations peacekeeping operations. In that month alone, in its resolutions 1701 (2006), 1704 (2006) and 1706 (2006), related to Lebanon, Timor-Leste and Darfur/the Sudan, respectively, the Security Council authorized an increase of up to an additional 30,000 military personnel and 7,000 police, resulting in an increase of some 2,168 civilian personnel positions. In its resolution 1706 (2006), the Council also authorized a multidimensional presence in Chad and the Central African Republic, for which active planning is under way. In January 2007, by its resolution 1740 (2007), the Council established the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). United Nations engagement in an operation in Somalia is again on the horizon. 42. Since 2000, the United Nations has established a total of eight new peacekeeping missions and 13 new special political missions and has expanded five existing operations. Annual United Nations peacekeeping and special political mission budgets currently exceed $5 billion. The operational frameworks for these missions have grown increasingly complex, with the introduction of multidimensional operations, followed by integrated, and possible hybrid operations, requiring professionals capable of conducting the operations competently and in full compliance with the Organization's regulatory framework. The Organization's human resources frameworks must be adapted to recognize service in a United Nations peace operation as both a core function and a profession no greater than, but no longer inferior to, all other core functions within the Secretariat. The Organization simply cannot continue to be expected to rapidly deploy and competently manage and sustain large and complex operations without effective human resources structures that facilitate mobility and rapid deployment, attract and retain the best and the brightest, provide for predictable career development and adequately compensate staff for their difficult and hardship conditions of service. The establishment of a framework of 2,500 career positions in United Nations peace operations, managed in the manner detailed in the present report, represents a critical step in professionalizing the staff serving in United Nations peace operations, and, thereby, in professionalizing how the United Nations meets the exacting challenges set for it by the Member States in the preservation of international peace and security. 43. The General Assembly is requested to approve a framework of 2,500 career civilian positions in United Nations peace operations, funded against the approved budgets of authorized peacekeeping operations and special political missions, for the recruitment and management of career civilian staff dedicated to the support of United Nations peace operations. Annex Breakdown by function and grade of the proposed 2,500 civilian career peacekeeping positions Professional and above Field Service Function D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 Total Professional Principal level Other level Total Field Service Total Administration Aviation Best practices Budget Civil affairs Claims Communications and information technology Conduct and discipline Contingent-owned equipment Contracts management Corrections Counselling Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration Engineering Executive management Finance Gender HIV/AIDS Human resources Joint mission analysis cell Judicial Legal affairs Logistics support Medical Movement control Operations and planning Police advisory Political Procurement Property control and inventory Public information Supply Training Transport 