%%%MILITARY PERSONNEL|MILITARY ASSISTANCE|TURKEY|CYPRUS|CYPRUS QUESTION|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|

General Assembly Sixty-first session Agenda item 19 Question of Cyprus Security Council Sixty-second year Letter dated 12 April 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 12 April 2007, addressed to you by Kemal Gökeri, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 19, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Baki İlkin Ambassador Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 21 February 2007, addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative and circulated as a document of the General Assembly and of the Security Council (A/61/757-S/2007/102), which yet again contains well-known allegations about the presence of Turkish troops on the island, and to bring to your kind attention the following: In the face of unfounded allegations and distortions contained in the aforementioned letter, I feel compelled, once again, to set the record straight, by reminding the Greek Cypriot representative that the only "occupation" in Cyprus is the 43-year-old usurpation and continued occupation by the Greek Cypriot side of the seat of government of the bicommunal partnership Republic of Cyprus established under the 1960 treaties. The Greek Cypriot representative fails to recall that it was the Greek Cypriot armed onslaught in December 1963 against the Turkish Cypriot people and the bicommunal partnership order that led to the division on the island. There is no mention of the systematic campaign of atrocities, which was perpetrated against the Turkish Cypriot people until 1974, when Turkey acted in accordance with her rights and obligations under the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee in the wake of a bloody coup d'etat by Greece and its collaborators in Cyprus. Turkey's presence as a Guarantor Power in Northern Cyprus, especially in the absence of a settlement, is vital for the security of the Turkish Cypriot people. This is evidenced by the fact that the Turkish military presence, as a deterrent against Greek-Greek Cypriot aggression, has preserved peace and stability in the island during the past 32 years. It should be emphasized that, had the latest comprehensive settlement plan (Annan Plan) been accepted by the Greek Cypriot side, except for the symbolic number envisaged in the Plan, the Turkish as well as Greek troops would have left and the total disarmament of the island would have taken effect. The allegation by the Greek Cypriot representative on the legality of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus deserves also clarification. Suffice it to say that the Greek Cypriot regime or its representatives have no right to question the legality of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which was established through the free and democratic will of the Turkish Cypriot people, and over which they have no right of say whatsoever. By levelling unfounded accusations against Turkey, as being the "aggressor", the Greek Cypriot side is in fact trying to disguise the years of torment they inflicted upon the Turkish Cypriot people and conceal their rearmament frenzy. Ever since the inception of the Joint Military Doctrine with Greece in 1993, the Greek Cypriot administration has undertaken an unprecedented build-up of arms and armed forces, the latest of which is the recruitment of some 1,000 Greek mercenaries from mainland Greece to the Greek Cypriot National Guard. Together with 80,000 Greek Cypriot reservists, each of whom keeps a gun and ammunition at their homes, the cumulative number of Greek-Greek Cypriot armed personnel amounts approximately to a total of 100,000 in the island. I would like to emphasize that the continuing militarization campaign by the Greek Cypriot side, as well as the hostile and restrictive policies directed against the Turkish Cypriot people, constitute the underlying causes of tension and mistrust in Cyprus. My Government expects that the Greek Cypriot side will be urged by the international community to abandon its anachronistic policies against the Turkish Cypriot people and to stop the arming campaign, which exacerbate tension and hinder progress towards reconciliation between the two sides. I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 19, and of the Security Council. (Signed) M. Kemal Gökeri Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 