%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|BORDER INCIDENTS|ISRAEL|LEBANON|SOVEREIGNTY|AIRSPACE|TERRITORIAL SEA|CEASEFIRES|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

General Assembly Security Council Sixty-first session Agenda item 13 The situation in the Middle East Sixty-second year Identical letters dated 18 June 2007 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith a position paper from the Lebanese authorities on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) (see annex). I would be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 13, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Caroline Ziade Chargé d'affaires a.i. Lebanese Government position paper on the implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 1701 17 June 2007 In anticipation of the periodic review of the United Nations Secretary-General of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701, the Lebanese position on the outstanding key elements is as follows: 1. Lebanon remains totally committed to the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 and abides by its obligations under it. On the ground, cooperation and coordination between LAF and UNIFIL is ongoing to the satisfaction of both parties. Tripartite meetings are held periodically in Naqoura between LAF, UNIFIL and IDF. The situation south of the Litani remains relatively calm. 2. However, since the last review of the said resolution, IDF have persistently violated Lebanese air, maritime, and land frontiers in breach of the Blue Line and Security Council resolution 1701. The violations recorded by LAF between 14 March and 14 June 2007 total 155 air, 34 maritime, and 48 land violations. (Attached is the list of violations as provided by LAF.) We reiterate that violations of our territorial sovereignty cannot be justified under any pretext, including the enforcement of the arms embargo as per Security Council resolution 1701; the said resolution did not commission Israel with this task. Furthermore, with UNIFIL patrols on land and sea, these violations are totally unacceptable and constitute an affront to the international community. Possible emerging tensions along the Blue Line must be dealt with in the context of the tripartite meetings, which remain the appropriate venue. Unilateral actions by IDF on Lebanese territory are totally unacceptable. 3. Whereas the southern borders are defined exclusively by the 1949 Armistice Agreement, as reiterated in operative paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 1701, and in order to prevent friction and give clarity to those on the ground on both sides of the Blue Line, LAF agreed to mark this line with UNIFIL using coordinates established by the United Nations in the year 2000. However, the Israelis are now trying to introduce amendments to the technical document prepared by UNIFIL with the aim of creating confusion and new facts on the ground. 4. While UNIFIL and LAF deployed south of the Litani several months ago, Israel continues to occupy the northern part of Ghajar village in breach of the Blue Line, and of resolution 1701. Although we have agreed to discuss temporary security arrangements for the northern part of the village on humanitarian grounds, the Israelis are trying to take advantage of this situation to delay their withdrawal. Our position remains clear: Israel should withdraw from the Lebanese part of Ghajar with no prior conditions and work earnestly towards a final solution for this village within the specified time frame, after which it will be up to the Lebanese Government to decide on further action. 5. Lebanon has a vital interest in controlling its borders -- namely, the green borders to prevent the smuggling of arms, munitions and personnel into its territory. The Lebanese Government has welcomed the suggestion of the Secretary-General to dispatch an independent team to assess the situation along the Syrian-Lebanese frontier and looks forward to its recommendations. In this context, we reiterate that control of the northern and eastern borders is a responsibility shared by both Syria and Lebanon, as per operative paragraph 15 of Security Council resolution 1701. We request tripartite arrangements with the bilateral agreement of Lebanon and Syria under the auspices of the United Nations, and possibly with the help of the European Union, which will have to include technical assistance when needed. The German experience can be further developed in that spirit. Furthermore, we request again that any information about illegal smuggling of arms or persons in the possession of any third country be shared with us directly if possible or through the United Nations. Unsubstantiated allegations of illicit movements across the border will not be deemed adequate. The Lebanese competent authorities are maintaining a high level of vigilance of illegal movements of arms and materiel; further logistical support is needed for them to fulfil their tasks. 6. On the question of the Lebanese detainees in Israeli prisons, we continue to insist that these detentions are a breach of the basic rules of international humanitarian law and that those prisoners be released immediately and unconditionally. As to the Israeli abducted soldiers on 12 July 2006, the Lebanese Government reiterates that it has no knowledge of their status or whereabouts, and remains ready to cooperate with the Secretary-General, who is mediating on this issue, whenever he may deem it appropriate to do so. 7. On landmines, Israel claims to have submitted all maps related to landmines laid in Lebanon prior to its withdrawal in 2000. It has been agreed in the tripartite meetings that any further discoveries of landmines will be brought to the attention of this venue and that IDF will submit related maps if in their possession. In addition, IDF have not submitted all maps of the cluster bombs dropped on Lebanon during the July war. The cluster bombs remain a continuing threat to the civilian population in the south and represent a humanitarian crime for which Israel will have to bear responsibility, submit all maps, and pay compensation to Lebanon. 8. Lebanon requests that the Sheba'a Farms and Kfar Shouba hills be liberated from Israeli occupation according to Security Council resolution 425. As the geographic definition of the Sheba'a Farms nears completion by United Nations cartographers, we urge the Secretary-General to expedite the search for a suitable solution in line with our suggestion in the 7 Point Plan that this area be placed under United Nations custodianship after the withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces, and until such time as border delineation between Lebanon and Syria is possible. The continuing occupation hinders the extension of the authority of the Lebanese State throughout its territory, as called for by the international community, and stands as a direct affront to the resolve of the Lebanese Government to be the sole guarantor of Lebanese sovereignty. 9. Almost a year after Israel's unjustified assault on Lebanon, and taking into consideration the important measures taken by the Governmental and LAF to extend their authority throughout the Lebanese territory and guarantee peace and stability, it is essential to move from the precarious situation of cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire. To this effect, putting an end to the continuing violations by Israel of Lebanese sovereignty is primordial for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1701. Israel cannot be allowed to amend de facto Security Council resolution 1701 by enforcing on the ground that which it could not achieve in the negotiations of the said resolution; any conditionality or additions to its clauses are not accepted. The guiding principle for us remains the achievement and consolidation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and monopoly of the Government of Lebanon over its territory. Furthermore, while Israel continues to defy the international community in violating resolution 1701, UNIFIL's mandate should be renewed without amendment. 10. On the economic front, we reiterate the call in Security Council resolution 1701 on the international community to consider further assistance to contribute to the reconstruction and development of Lebanon. In that context, we urge the participating States in the conferences of Stockholm and Paris III to fulfil their pledges. 