%%%CONFERENCES|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|FOCAL POINTS|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|ECONOMIC GROWTH|BUDGET|

UNITED A NATIONS General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/RES/52/187 4 February 1998 Fifty-second session Agenda item 97 (b) RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY [on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/628/Add.2)] 52/187. Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 45/206 of 21 December 1990, in which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s,See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Paris, 3-14 September 1990 (A/CONF.147/18), part one. and its resolution 48/171 of 21 December 1993, in which it decided to convene a high-level intergovernmental meeting to conduct a mid-term global review, Recalling also its resolution 50/103 of 20 December 1995, in which it recalled that at the end of the decade, a global review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action would be carried out, in accordance with paragraph 140 of the Programme of Action and paragraph 7 (c) of its resolution 45/206, Taking note of The Least Developed Countries, 1997 Report, prepared by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.II.D.6. and the report of the Secretary-General on implementation of the Programme of Action,A/52/279. which highlights the main developmental difficulties the least developed countries continue to face, Recognizing that the significant policy reform efforts undertaken by the least developed countries, which in many cases have been wide-ranging and difficult to implement, should be pursued further and that structural adjustment poses real challenges and resource issues for those countries, and, in this context, encouraging the international community to support these further reform efforts by the least developed countries, including helping to minimize any social cost of adjustments, Page Noting with concern the reduced flow of development resources to the least developed countries, the resulting need to accord them priority in the allocation of concessional resources and their continued marginalization in world trade, as well as the fact that many least developed countries face serious debt problems and more than half are considered debt-distressed, Taking note of the outcome of the Trade and Development Board at its forty-fourth session on the item relating to the annual review of progress in the implementation of the Programme of Action,See A/52/15 (Part II), sect. II.C. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 15. including its agreed conclusions and its recommendation to the General Assembly to consider at its fifty-second session the convening of a third United Nations conference on the least developed countries, its preparatory process, and the designation of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as the focal point for the preparation of the conference, 1. Decides: (a) To convene the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries at a high level in the year 2001. The mandate of the Conference will be the following: (i) To assess the results of the Programme of Action during the 1990s at the country level; (ii) To review the implementation of international support measures, particularly in the areas of official development assistance, debt, investment and trade; (iii) To consider the formulation and adoption of appropriate national and international policies and measures for sustainable development of the least developed countries and their progressive integration into the world economy; (b) To convene an intergovernmental preparatory committee in due time to prepare for the Conference. That meeting would be preceded by three expert-level preparatory meetings, two in Africa, one of which would include the Americas, and one in Asia and the Pacific. These preparatory activities should be carried out within the budget level proposed by the Secretary-General for the biennium 1998-1999; 2. Also decides that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development will be the focal point for the preparation of the Conference; 3. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to include in future issues of the annual report on the least developed countries substantive contributions to the Conference and its preparatory process; 4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the sub-item entitled "Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s" and to consider, inter alia, the date, duration and venue of the Conference, its preparatory process and the funding for participation of representatives from each least developed country, both at the preparatory committee meeting and at the Conference itself, from extrabudgetary resources; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-third session a report on issues relevant to this item. 77th plenary meeting 18 December 1997 