%%%RACIAL DISCRIMINATION|XENOPHOBIA|CONFERENCES|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. Original: Sixty-second session Agenda item 68 (b) Elimination of racism and racial discrimination: comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action Report of the Human Rights Council on the preparations for the Durban Review Conference REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE ON ITS FIRST SESSION* Vice-Chairperson-Rapporteur: Mr. Resfel Pino Álvarez (Cuba) Paragraphs Page I. OPENING OF THE SESSION 1 - 10 4 II. ELECTION OF OFFICERS 11 - 12 5 III. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA 13 - 14 6 IV. ORGANIZATION OF WORK: ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS 15 - 19 6 V. OBJECTIVES OF THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE 20 - 26 6 VI. ADOPTION OF THE PROVISIONAL RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE 27 - 40 7 VII. RELEVANT MODALITIES FOR THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE 41 - 54 8 VIII. PREPARATORY MEETINGS AND ACTIVITIES AT THE INTERNATIONAL, REGIONAL AND NATIONAL LEVELS 55 - 59 9 IX. REPORTS, STUDIES AND OTHER DOCUMENTATION FOR THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE AND THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE AND CONTRIBUTION BY HUMAN RIGHTS BODIES AND MECHANISMS 60 - 64 10 X. ORGANIZATION OF WORK AND DATES OF THE SUBSTANTIVE SESSIONS OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE AND FORMULATION OF A CONCRETE PLAN FOR THE PREPARATORY PROCESS 65 - 74 10 XI. ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 75 - 78 11 continued) Page Annexes I. Decisions adopted by the organizational session of the Preparatory Committee of the Durban Review Conference 12 II. Agenda and programme of work for the session 39 III. General debate 41 IV. List of documents issued for the organizational session of the Preparatory Committee 44 V. Attendance 45 OPENING OF THE SESSION 1. The Preparatory Committee for the Durban Review Conference held its organizational session in Geneva from 27 to 31 August 2007, as mandated by the General Assembly in paragraph 33 of its resolution 61/149 of 19 December 2006 and by the Human Rights Council in paragraph 2 of its resolution 3/2 of 8 December 2006. It held nine meetings during the session. 2. The session was opened by Mr. Doru Romulus Costea, President of the Human Rights Council. 3. At its first meeting, on 27 August 2007, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights made a statement. 4. Also at its first meeting, the Preparatory Committee heard opening statements from the following States Members of the United Nations: Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Pakistan (on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference), Cuba (on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement), Brazil, Indonesia, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), Greece, Norway, India, China, Bangladesh, Chile, Ecuador as well as the observer, the Conference of Non-governmental Organizations in Consultative Relation with the United Nations (CONGO). 5. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee accepted the recommendation of its officers that: (a) The speaking-time limits for the session would be 5 minutes per statement for States Members of the United Nations and 3 minutes for all observers; (b) The speaking time for joint statements by States Members should not exceed 10 minutes; (c) The speaking-time limits for joint statements by non-governmental organizations would be as follows: 1 to 2 non-governmental organizations: 3 minutes; 3 to 5 non-governmental organizations: 4 minutes; 6 to 10 non-governmental organizations: 5 minutes; more than 10 nongovernmental organizations: 6 minutes. 6. At the 5th meeting, on 29 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee agreed to dedicate a special segment of 15 minutes at the beginning of each agenda item and before the consideration of draft proposals so as to also enable observers to contribute to the substantive discussion. 7. At the 7th meeting, on 30 August 2007, the Chairperson of the Preparatory Committee decided to designate the representatives of Armenia, Argentina, Brazil and the Russian Federation as facilitators to undertake informal consultations on draft decisions 2, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 11 as contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 8. For the list of documents issued for the organizational session of the Preparatory Committee, see annex IV. For the statements delivered as part of the general debate, see annex II. For a list of the decisions adopted by the Preparatory Committee, see annex I. 9. The session was attended by representatives of States Members of the United Nations, nonmember States and Palestine, specialized agencies, United Nations bodies, intergovernmental organizations, other entities, human rights bodies and mechanisms and nongovernmental organizations as found in the attendance list in annex VI of the present report. 10. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, concluding remarks were made by the following representatives: (a) Brazil (on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States); (b) Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States); (c) Iceland; (d) Pakistan (on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference); (e) Portugal (on behalf of the European Union); (f) Sri Lanka (on behalf of the Group of Asian States). II. ELECTION OF OFFICERS 11. At its 1st meeting, on 27 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee elected the following officers by acclamation: Chairperson: Ms. Najat Al-Hajjaji (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) Vice-Chairpersons: Mr. Jean Simplice Ndjemba Endezoumou (Cameroon) Ms. Glaudine J. Mtshali (South Africa) Mr. Moussa Bocar Ly (Senegal) Mr. Swashpawan Singh (India) Mr. Makarim Wibisono (Indonesia) Mr. Alireza Moaiyeri (Islamic Republic of Iran) Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan) Mr. Alberto J. Dumont (Argentina) Mr. Sergio Abreu E. Lima Florencio (Brazil) Mr. Juan Martabit (Chile) Mr. Juan Antonio Fernández Palacios (Cuba) Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanian (Armenia) Mr. Branko Socanac (Croatia) Mr. Tõnis Nirk (Estonia) Mr. Oleg Malginov (Russian Federation) Mr. Alex Van Meeuwen (Belgium) Mr. Franciscos Verros (Greece) Mr. Wegger Chr. Strømmen (Norway) Mr. Ahmet Üzümcü (Turkey) 12. Statements in connection with the election of officers were made by the representatives of Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Sri Lanka (on behalf of the Group of Asian States) and Brazil (on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States). III. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA 13. Also at its 1st meeting, on 27 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee had before it the provisional agenda for its first session (A/CONF.211/PC.1/1) and annotations thereto (A/CONF.211/PC.1/1/Add.1), prepared by the Secretary-General. 14. The Preparatory Committee adopted its agenda as well as its programme of work without a vote. For the text, see annex II. IV. ORGANIZATION OF WORK: ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS 15. At its first meeting, on 27 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 1, entitled "Rules of procedure for the Preparatory Committee", as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 16. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex III, decision PC.1/1. 17. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 3, entitled "Participation of, and consultation with, observers at the sessions of the Preparatory Committee", as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 18. An explanation of vote before the vote was made by the representatives of Bhutan and China who while joining the consensus on the decision expressed their desire to reserve their right to revisit the list of non-governmental organizations at a later stage. 19. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/2. V. OBJECTIVES OF THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE 20. The Preparatory Committee considered agenda item 5 at its 1st and 2nd meetings, on 27 August and at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 28 August, and at its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007. 21. For the documents issued under agenda item 5, see annex IV to the present report. 22. In the general debate on agenda item 5, statements were made by States Members and observers. For a detailed list of speakers, see annex III to the present report. 23. At the 3rd meeting, on 28 August, a non-paper as requested by the Chair was prepared by the Secretariat and circulated to the Preparatory Committee which summarized the views expressed under agenda item 5 on the objectives of the Durban Review Conference. Interventions in connection with the non-paper were made by the representatives of Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Greece, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mexico and Portugal (on behalf of the European Union). 24. At the 4th meeting, on 28 August 2007, interventions on the non-paper were also made by the representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), India, Mexico, Norway, New Zealand, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), Uruguay as well as the observers of the Group of National Human Rights Institutions (on behalf of the national human rights institutions of Venezuela, Mexico and Morocco) and the International Commission of Jurists. 25. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the facilitator, the representative of Armenia, introduced a revised version of draft decision 11 entitled "Objectives of the Durban Review Conference" (see A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2). 26. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision as revised without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex III, decision PC.1/13. VI. ADOPTION OF THE PROVISIONAL RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE 27. The Preparatory Committee considered agenda item 6 at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 28 August, at its 7th meeting, on 30 August, and at its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007. 28. For the documents issued under agenda item 6, see annex IV. 29. In the general debate on agenda item 6, statements were made by States Members and observers. For a detailed list of speakers, see annex III of the present report. 30. At the 3rd meeting, on 28 August 2007, the Chairperson introduced draft decision 2 entitled "Rules of procedure for the Durban Review Conference" as contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. Statements in connection with item 6 as well as draft decision 2 were made by the following representatives: Belgium, Ecuador, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Pakistan, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and South Africa. 31. At the 4th meeting, statements in connection with item 6 as well as draft decision 2 were also made by the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Greece, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), the Russian Federation and South Africa. 32. At the same meeting, statements on the contributions of non-governmental organizations on procedural issues were made by the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Greece, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and South Africa. 33. The representative of South Africa introduced a motion under rule 116 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly asking to adjourn the debate on the issue of contributions of non-governmental organizations on procedural issues and to return to discussion on item 6. The motion was supported by the representative of Egypt. 34. Interventions in connection with the motion were made by the representatives of Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and Greece. 35. The motion was adopted, without a vote, and the Preparatory Committee continued its discussion on item 6 and draft decision 2. 36. At the 7th meeting, on 30 August 2007, the Secretariat provided the Preparatory Committee with relevant information as requested with respect to rules of procedures of previous Conferences and Review Conferences. 37. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the facilitator, the representative of Argentina, introduced a revised version of draft decision 2 (see A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2). 38. Statements in connection with the revised draft decision were made by the representatives of Algeria, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Ghana, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), South Africa and the Syrian Arab Republic. 39. An explanation of vote before the vote was made by the representative of Bhutan who, while joining the consensus on the decision, referred to rule 66 of the provisional rules of procedure for the Durban Review Conference and to her delegation's previous statements during consideration of agenda item 4. She also recalled the clarification provided earlier by the President of the Preparatory Committee explaining that decision PC.1/2 of the Preparatory Committee was purely procedural in nature and did not imply agreement on the accreditation of the list contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/Misc.1. 40. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision as revised without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/9. REVIEW CONFERENCE 41. The Preparatory Committee considered agenda item 7 at its 5th meeting, on 29 August, at its 7th and 8th meetings, on 30 August, and at its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007. 42. For the documents issued under agenda item 7, see annex IV. 43. In the general debate on agenda item 7, statements were made by States Members and observers. For a detailed list of speakers, see annex III to the present report. 44. At the 5th meeting, on 29 August, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 5 entitled "Dates for the Durban Review Conference" as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 45. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/3. 46. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 6 entitled "Level of participation" as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 47. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision, without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/4. 48. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 9 entitled "Secretary-General of the Durban Review Conference" as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 49. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision, without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/5. 50. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 12 entitled "Venue of the Preparatory Committee sessions and Durban Review Conference" as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 51. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/6. 52. At the 7th and 8th meetings, on 30 August 2007, the Secretariat provided the Preparatory Committee with relevant information as requested with respect to modalities that governed the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, in 2001. 53. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the facilitator, the representative of Brazil, introduced a revised version of draft decision 10 (see A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2), entitled "Sources of funding and financial and technical assistance". 54. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision, as revised, without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/12. VIII. PREPARATORY MEETINGS AND ACTIVITIES AT THE INTERNATIONAL, REGIONAL AND NATIONAL LEVELS 55. The Preparatory Committee considered agenda item 8 at its 6th meeting, on 29 August, at its 7th meeting, on 30 August, and at its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007. 56. For the documents issued under agenda item 8, see annex IV. 57. In the general debate on agenda item 8, statements were made by States Members and observers. For a detailed list of speakers, see annex III to the present report. 58. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the facilitator, the representative of the Russian Federation, introduced a revised version of draft decision 8 (see CONF.211/PC.1/L.2), entitled "International, regional and national preparatory initiatives". 59. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/11. IX. REPORTS, STUDIES AND OTHER DOCUMENTATION FOR THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE AND THE DURBAN REVIEW CONFERENCE AND CONTRIBUTIONS BY HUMAN RIGHTS BODIES AND MECHANISMS 60. The Preparatory Committee considered agenda item 9 at its 7th meeting, on 30 August, and at its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007. 61. For the documents issued under agenda item 9, see annex IV. 62. In the general debate on agenda item 9, statements were made by States Members and observers. For a detailed list of speakers, see annex III to the present report. 63. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the facilitator, the representative of Brazil, introduced a revised version of draft decision 7 (see A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2), entitled "Reports, studies and other documentation for the Preparatory Committee and the Durban Review Conference". 64. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision as revised without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/10. X. ORGANIZATION OF WORK AND DATES OF THE SUBSTANTIVE SESSIONS OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE AND FORMULATION OF A CONCRETE PLAN FOR THE PREPARATORY PROCESS 65. The Preparatory Committee considered agenda item 10 at its 8th meeting, on 30 August, and at its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007. 66. For the documents issued under agenda item 10, see annex IV. 67. In the general debate on agenda item 10, statements were made by States Members and observers. For a detailed list of speakers, see annex III to the present report. 68. At the 8th meeting, on 30 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 4 entitled "Dates of the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee" as recommended by the Chairperson and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 69. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/7. 70. At the 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 13 entitled "Adoption of the draft provisional agenda for the first substantive session of the Preparatory Committee" as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 71. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/14. 72. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 14 entitled "Organization of the work for the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee and the formulation of a concrete plan for the preparatory process" as recommended by the Bureau and contained in document A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2. 73. The representatives of Morocco, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and South Africa made a statement in connection with the draft decision. 74. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision as revised without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex III, decision PC.1/15. XI. ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 75. At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee considered draft decision 15 entitled "Report of the Preparatory Committee", as recommended by the Chairperson. 76. The representative of South Africa made a statement in connection with the draft decision. 77. The Preparatory Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. For the text as adopted, see annex I, decision PC.1/8. 78. At the same meeting, the Preparatory Committee considered the draft report on the work of its organizational session. The draft report, including its annexes, was adopted ad referendum, and the Preparatory Committee decided to entrust the Vice-Chairperson-Rapporteur with its finalization. Annex I Decisions adopted by the organizational session of the Preparatory Committee PC.1/1. Rules of procedure for the Preparatory Committee At its 1st meeting, on 27 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided, without a vote, to use as rules of procedure for the Preparatory Committee the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, section XIII, insofar as applicable. PC.1/2. Participation of, and consultation with, observers at the sessions of the Preparatory Committee At its 1st meeting, on 27 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided, without a vote, to apply the following criteria and practices for participation by non-governmental organizations at the sessions of the Preparatory Committee: (a) The mechanism established by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1996/31 of 26 July 1996, and practices observed by the Commission on Human Rights, shall be the framework for participation of, consultations with, and accreditation of non-governmental organizations, while ensuring their most effective contribution; (b) Non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council are invited to participate fully in all the sessions of the Preparatory Committee, pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31; (c) In the case of non-governmental organizations not in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, but accredited to participate in the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and its follow-up mechanisms: The Secretariat will send to Member States an updated list of nongovernmental organizations not in consultative status, but accredited to participate in the World Conference and its follow-up mechanisms; Non-governmental organizations in this category shall be invited to participate fully at the sessions of the Preparatory Committee, unless there are observations made by Member States within 14 days from the date they receive the note verbale with the list of non-governmental organizations mentioned above. The standard process established in Council resolution 1996/31 will be applied; In the event that a Government raises questions concerning the accreditation of a non-governmental organization, the final decision shall be taken by the Preparatory Committee, in accordance with the standard process established in Council resolution 1996/31; (d) In the case of non-governmental organizations not in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and not accredited to participate in the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and its follow-up mechanisms: Non-governmental organizations interested in the processes for the first time and wishing to participate in the sessions of the Preparatory Committee should submit applications to the Secretariat, in accordance with the criteria established in Council resolution 1996/31; The Secretariat shall post on the website of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights the procedures and relevant forms regarding the participation of non-governmental organizations; The Secretariat shall continue to review all applications received to ensure that they meet the requirements established in Council resolution 1996/31; Where non-governmental organizations have had their consultative status withdrawn or suspended under paragraph 57 (a) or (b) of Council resolution 1996/31, the Secretariat shall include information as to the reasons for withdrawal or suspension including the date of the decision, in the list circulated to all Member States; The Secretariat shall send to Member States, on a periodic basis, the updated list of applications received. Member States may submit comments on any of the applications in the list within 14 days from receipt of the abovementioned list. The comments of Member States shall be communicated to the non-governmental organization concerned, which will be offered the opportunity to respond; In cases where the Secretariat believes, on the ground of the information provided, in accordance with Council resolution 1996/31 that the nongovernmental organization has established its competence and relevance of its activities with regards to the work of the Preparatory Committee, it shall recommend to the Preparatory Committee that the non-governmental organization be accredited. In cases where the Secretariat does not recommend the granting of accreditation, it shall make available to the Preparatory Committee its justifications for not doing so; In the event that a Member State raises questions concerning the accreditation of a non-governmental organization, the final decision on such cases shall be taken by the Preparatory Committee in accordance with the standard process established in Council resolution 1996/31; (f) Participation of national human rights institutions in the sessions of the Preparatory Committee shall be based on arrangements and practices agreed upon by the Commission on Human Rights, including resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005, while ensuring the most effective contribution of these institutions; (g) The sessions of the Preparatory Committee are also open to participation by other observers such as: Entities having received a standing invitation to participate as observers at the sessions and in the work of the General Assembly; Intergovernmental organizations having received a standing invitation to participate as observers at the sessions and in the work of the General Assembly; Specialized agencies; Associate member of regional commissions; United Nations organs, bodies, programmes and relevant mechanisms, including human rights bodies and mechanisms. PC.1/3. Dates for the Durban Review Conference At its 5th meeting, on 29 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote that the Durban Review Conference shall take place during the first half of 2009. PC.1/4. Level of participation At its 5th meeting, on 29 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote that participation in the Conference should be at the highest possible level. PC.1/5. Secretary-General of the Durban Review Conference At its 5th meeting, on 29 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote to request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to designate the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as Secretary-General of the Durban Review Conference, who, in this capacity, will assume the responsibility for the preparations for the Conference. PC.1/6. Venue of the Preparatory Committee sessions and Durban Review Conference At its 5th meeting, on 29 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote that: (a) The venue of the Preparatory Committee sessions will be Geneva; (b) The venue of the Durban Review Conference will be decided by the Preparatory Committee at a later date. PC.1/7. Dates of the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee At its 8th meeting, on 30 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote that its first substantive session shall be held in Geneva from 21 April to 2 May 2008 and that its second substantive session shall be held from 6 to 17 October 2008.* PC.1/8. Report of the Preparatory Committee At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote to recommend that the Human Rights Council adopt the following decision: "Recalling its resolution 3/2 of 8 December 2006, the Human Rights Council invites the Preparatory Committee to submit its reports to the General Assembly." PC.1/9. Rules of procedure for the Durban Review Conference At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote to recommend for the Durban Review Conference the provisional rules of procedure as contained in the appendix below. Provisional rules of procedure for the Durban Review Conference (hereinafter the Review Conference) CONTENTS I. REPRESENTATION AND CREDENTIALS 17 II. OFFICERS 18 III. GENERAL COMMITTEE 19 IV. SECRETARIAT OF THE REVIEW CONFERENCE 19 V. OPENING OF THE REVIEW CONFERENCE 20 VI. CONCLUSIONS OF THE REVIEW CONFERENCE 21 VII. CONDUCT OF BUSINESS 21 VIII. DECISION-MAKING 25 IX. SUBSIDIARY BODIES 28 X. LANGUAGES AND RECORDS 29 XI. PUBLIC AND PRIVATE MEETINGS 30 XII. OTHER PARTICIPANTS AND OBSERVERS 30 XIII. AMENDMENT AND SUSPENSION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 33 Composition of delegations Rule 1 The delegation of each State participating in the Review Conference and observer delegations, including the African Union and the European Community,* shall consist of a head of delegation and such other representatives, alternate representatives and advisers as may be required. Alternates and advisers Rule 2 The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an adviser to act as a representative. Credentials Rule 3 The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and advisers shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of the Review Conference, if possible not less than one week before the opening of the Review Conference. The credentials shall be issued either by the Head of the State or Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Credentials Committee Rule 4 A credentials committee of nine members shall be appointed at the beginning of the Review Conference. Its composition shall be based on that of the Credentials Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations at its sixty-third session. It shall examine the credentials of representatives and report to the Review Conference without delay. Provisional participation Rule 5 Pending a decision of the Review Conference upon their credentials, representatives of States shall be entitled to participate provisionally in the Review Conference. II. OFFICERS Elections Rule 6 The Review Conference shall elect from among the representatives of participating States the following officers: a President, 21 Vice-Presidents, a Rapporteur-General, and the Chairpersons of the Main Committee and the Drafting Committee established in accordance with rule 47. These officials shall be elected on the basis of ensuring equal geographic distribution and the representative character of the General Committee composed in accordance with rule 10. The Review Conference may also elect such other officers as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions. Acting President Rule 7 1. If the President finds it necessary to be absent from a meeting or any part thereof, he/she shall designate a Vice-President to take his/her place. 2. A Vice-President acting as President shall have the same powers and duties as the President. Replacement of the President Rule 8 If the President is unable to perform his/her functions, a new President shall be elected. Voting rights of the President Rule 9 The President, or a Vice-President acting as President, shall not vote, but shall appoint another member of his/her delegation to vote in his/her place. III. GENERAL COMMITTEE Composition Rule 10 The President, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General of the Review Conference and the Chairpersons of the Main Committee and the Drafting Committee shall constitute the General Committee. The President of the Review Conference, or in his/her absence, one of the Vice-Presidents designated by him/her, shall serve as Chairperson of the General Committee. The Chairperson of the Credentials Committee may participate, without the right to vote, in the General Committee. Substitute members Rule 11 If the President or a Vice-President of the Review Conference is to be absent during a meeting of the General Committee, he/she may designate a member of his/her delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In the case of absence, the Chairperson of a Main Committee shall designate a Vice-Chairperson of that Committee as his/her substitute. When serving on the General Committee, a Vice-Chairperson of a Main Committee shall not have the right to vote if he/she is of the same delegation as another member of the General Committee. Functions Rule 12 The General Committee shall assist the President in the general conduct of the business of the Review Conference and, subject to the decisions of the Review Conference, shall ensure the coordination of its work. IV. SECRETARIAT OF THE REVIEW CONFERENCE Duties of the Secretary-General Rule 13 1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or in his absence, the Secretary-General of the Review Conference shall act in that capacity in all meetings of the Review Conference and its subsidiary bodies. The Secretary-General of the United Nations or the Secretary-General of the Review Conference may designate a member of the secretariat to act in his/her place at those meetings. 2. The Secretary-General of the Review Conference shall direct the staff required by the Review Conference. Duties of the secretariat Rule 14 The secretariat of the Review Conference shall, in accordance with these rules: (a) Interpret speeches made at meetings; (b) Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of meetings; (c) Receive, translate and circulate the documents of the Review Conference; (d) Report the proceedings of the Review Conference in appropriate journals; (e) Publish and circulate the report and any official records of the Review Conference; (f) Arrange for the custody of the documents and records of the Review Conference in the archives of the United Nations; (g) Generally perform all other work that the Review Conference may require in connection with its proceedings. Statements by the secretariat Rule 15 The Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the Review Conference or any member of the secretariat designated by either for that purpose may, subject to rule 22, make statements concerning any question under consideration. V. OPENING OF THE REVIEW CONFERENCE Temporary President Rule 16 At the opening of the first meeting of the Review Conference, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, or in his absence, the Secretary-General of the Review Conference shall preside until the Review Conference has elected its President. Decisions concerning organization Rule 17 The Review Conference shall, to the extent possible, at its first meeting: (a) Adopt its rules of procedure; (b) Elect its officers and constitute its subsidiary bodies; (c) Adopt its agenda, the draft of which shall, until such adoption, be the provisional agenda of the Review Conference; (d) Decide on the organization of its work. VI. CONCLUSIONS OF THE REVIEW CONFERENCE Report Rule 18 The Review Conference shall adopt a report, the draft of which shall be prepared by the Rapporteur-General. VII. CONDUCT OF BUSINESS Quorum Rule 19 The President may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when at least one third of the representatives of States participating in the Review Conference are present. The presence of representatives of a majority of such States shall be required for any decision to be taken. General powers of the President Rule 20 1. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him/her elsewhere by these rules, the President shall preside at the plenary meetings of the Review Conference; he/she shall declare the opening and closing of each meeting, direct the discussions, ensure observance of these rules, accord the right to speak, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. He/she shall rule on points of order. The President, subject to these rules, shall have complete control of the proceedings and over the maintenance of order thereat. The President may propose to the Review Conference the closing of the list of speakers, a limitation on the time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times the representative of each participant in the Review Conference may speak on a question, the adjournment or the closure of the debate and the suspension or the adjournment of a meeting. 2. The President, in the exercise of his/her functions, remains under the authority of the Review Conference. Rule 21 During the discussion of any matter, a representative of a State may at any time raise a point of order, which shall be immediately decided by the President in accordance with these rules. A representative may appeal against the ruling of the President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote, and the President's ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the representatives present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of order, speak on the substance of the matter under discussion. Speeches Rule 22 1. No one may address the Review Conference without having previously obtained the permission of the President. Subject to rules 21, 23 and 25 to 28, the President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. 2. Debate shall be confined to the question before the Review Conference and the President may call a speaker to order if his/her remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion. 3. The Review Conference may limit the time allowed to speakers and the number of times participants may speak on a question. Permission to speak on a motion to set such limits shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and two opposing such limits, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. In any event, with the consent of the Review Conference, the President shall limit each intervention on procedural matters to five minutes. When the debate is limited and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the President shall call him/her to order without delay. Precedence Rule 23 The Chairperson or Rapporteur of a Main Committee or a representative designated by any other subsidiary body may be accorded precedence for the purpose of explaining the conclusions arrived at by the body concerned. Closing of the list of speakers Rule 24 During the course of a debate, the President may announce the list of speakers and, with the consent of the Review Conference, declare the list closed. When there are no more speakers, the President shall, with the consent of the Review Conference, declare the debate closed. Such closure shall have the same effect as closure pursuant to rule 27. Right of reply Rule 25 Notwithstanding rule 24, the President shall accord the right of reply to a representative of any State participating in the Review Conference who requests it. Any other representative may be granted the opportunity to make a reply. Representatives should attempt, in making such statements, to be as brief as possible and preferably to deliver their statements at the end of the meeting at which the request is made. The representatives of a State may make no more than two statements under this rule at a given meeting on any item. The first shall be limited to five minutes and the second to three minutes; representatives shall in any event attempt to be as brief as possible. Adjournment of debate Rule 26 A representative of any State participating in the Review Conference may at any time move the adjournment of the debate on the question under discussion. Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and two opposing the adjournment, after which the motion shall, subject to rule 29, be immediately put to the vote. Closure of debate Rule 27 A representative of any State participating in the Review Conference may at any time move the closure of the debate on the question under discussion, whether or not any other representative has signified his/her wish to speak. In addition to the proposer of the motion, permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives opposing the closure, after which the motion shall, subject to rule 29, be immediately put to the vote. Suspension or adjournment of the meeting Rule 28 Subject to rule 40, a representative of any State participating in the Review Conference may at any time move the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. No discussion on such motions shall be permitted and they shall, subject to rule 29, be immediately put to the vote. Order of motions Rule 29 The motions indicated below shall have precedence in the following order over all proposals or other motions before the meeting: (a) To suspend the meeting; (b) To adjourn the meeting; (c) To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion; (d) To close the debate on the question under discussion. Submissions of proposals and substantive amendments Rule 30 Proposals and substantive amendments shall normally be submitted in writing to the Secretary-General of the Review Conference, who shall circulate copies to all delegations. Unless the Review Conference decides otherwise, proposals and substantive amendments shall be discussed or put to a decision no earlier than 24 hours after copies have been circulated in all languages of the Review Conference to all delegations. The President may, however, permit the discussion and consideration of amendments, or of motions as to procedure, even though such amendments and motions have not been circulated or have only been circulated the same day. Withdrawal of proposals and motions Rule 31 A proposal or a motion may be withdrawn by its sponsor at any time before voting on it has commenced, provided that it has not been amended. A proposal or a motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any representative. Decisions on competence Rule 32 Any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the Review Conference to discuss any matter or adopt a proposal submitted to it shall be put to the vote before the matter is discussed or a vote is taken on the proposal in question. Reconsideration of proposals Rule 33 When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered unless the Review Conference, by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting, so decides. Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be accorded to only two speakers opposing reconsideration, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. VIII. DECISION-MAKING General agreement Rule 34 The Review Conference shall exert all possible efforts to ensure that its work and the adoption of its report are accomplished by general agreement. Voting rights Rule 35 Each State participating in the Review Conference shall have one vote. Majority required Rule 36 1. Subject to rule 34, decisions of the Review Conference on all matters of substance shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting. 2. Unless the Review Conference decides otherwise and except as otherwise provided, decisions of the Review Conference on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a simple majority of the representatives present and voting. 3. If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the President of the Review Conference shall rule on the question. An appeal against this ruling shall be put to the vote immediately, and the President's ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the representatives present and voting. 4. If a vote is equally divided, the proposal or motion shall be regarded as rejected. Meaning of the phrase "representatives present and voting" Rule 37 For the purpose of these rules, the phrase "representatives present and voting" means representatives casting an affirmative or negative vote. Representatives who abstain from voting shall be regarded as not voting. Method of voting Rule 38 1. Except as provided in rule 45, the Review Conference shall normally vote by show of hands, except that a representative may request a roll-call, which shall then be taken in the English alphabetical order of the names of the States participating in the Review Conference, beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the President. The name of each State shall be called in all roll-calls and its representative shall reply "yes", "no" or "abstention". 2. When the Review Conference votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall replace a vote by show of hands and a recorded vote shall replace a roll-call. A representative may request a recorded vote, which shall, unless a representative requests otherwise, be taken without calling out the names of the States participating in the Review Conference. 3. The vote of each State participating in a roll-call or a recorded vote shall be inserted in any record of or report on the Review Conference. Explanation of vote Rule 39 Representatives may make brief statements consisting solely of explanations of vote, before the voting has commenced or after the voting has been completed. The President may limit the time to be allowed for such explanations. The representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or motion shall not speak in explanation of vote thereon, except if it has been amended. Conduct during voting Rule 40 After the President has announced the commencement of voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order in connection with the process of voting. Division of proposals Rule 41 A representative may move that parts of a proposal or of an amendment should be voted on separately. If objection is made to the request for division, the motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to speak on the motion for division shall be given only to two speakers in favour and two speakers against. If the motion for division is carried, those parts of the proposal or of the amendment which are approved shall then be put to the vote as a whole. If all operative parts of the proposal or of the amendment have been rejected, the proposal or the amendment shall be considered to have been rejected as a whole. Amendments Rule 42 A proposal is considered an amendment to another proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises part of that proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word "proposal" in these rules shall be considered as including amendments. Rule 43 When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be voted on first. When two or more amendments are moved to a proposal, the Review Conference shall vote first on the amendment furthest removed in substance from the original proposal and then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom and so on until all the amendments have been put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one amendment necessarily implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter shall not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the amended proposal shall then be voted upon. Order of voting on proposals Rule 44 1. If two or more proposals, other than amendments, relate to the same question, they shall, unless the Review Conference decides otherwise, be voted on in the order in which they were submitted. The Review Conference may, after each vote on a proposal, decide whether to vote on the next proposal. 2. Revised proposals shall be voted on in the order in which the original proposals were submitted, unless the revision substantially departs from the original proposal. In that case the original proposal shall be considered as withdrawn and the revised proposal shall be treated as a new proposal. 3. A motion requiring that no decision be taken on a proposal shall be put to the vote before a vote is taken on the proposal in question. Rule 45 All elections shall be held by secret ballot unless, in the absence of any objection, the Review Conference decides to proceed without taking a ballot when there is an agreed candidate or slate. Rule 46 1. When one or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the same conditions, those candidates, in a number not exceeding the number of such places, obtaining in the first ballot a majority of the votes cast and the largest number of votes shall be elected. 2. If the number of candidates obtaining such a majority is less than the number of places to be filled, additional ballots shall be held to fill the remaining places, the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the largest number of votes in the previous ballot, in a number not exceeding twice the number of places remaining to be filled. IX. SUBSIDIARY BODIES Main Committee and Drafting Committee Rule 47 The Review Conference shall establish one Main Committee and a Drafting Committee, which may set up subcommittees or working groups. Each Committee, unless it decides otherwise, shall elect three Vice-Chairpersons and a Rapporteur. Representation on the Main Committee and the Drafting Committee Rule 48 Each State participating may be represented by one representative on each Committee established by the Review Conference. It may assign to these Committees such alternate representatives and advisers as may be required. Other committees and working groups Rule 49 1. In addition to the Committees referred to above, the Review Conference may establish such committees and working groups as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions. 2. Each committee may set up subcommittees and working groups. Rule 50 1. The Chairperson of a Committee may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when representatives of at least one quarter of the States participating in the Review Conference are present. The presence of representatives of a majority of the States participating in the Review Conference shall be required for any decision to be taken. 2. A majority of the representatives of the General or Credentials Committee or of any committee, subcommittee or working group shall constitute a quorum. Officers, conduct of business and voting Rule 51 These rules of procedure shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the proceedings of Committees, subcommittees and working groups, except that: (a) Unless otherwise decided, each committee, subcommittee and working group shall elect its own officers; (b) The Chairpersons of the General and Credentials Committees, and the chairpersons of the committees, subcommittees and working groups established in accordance with rule 49, may exercise the right to vote; (c) Decisions of the Committees, other committees, subcommittees and working groups shall be taken by a majority of the representatives present and voting, except that the reconsideration of a proposal or an amendment shall require the majority established by rule 33. X. LANGUAGES AND RECORDS Languages of the Review Conference Rule 52 Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the languages of the Review Conference. Interpretation Rule 53 1. Speeches made in a language of the Review Conference shall be interpreted into the other such languages. 2. A representative may speak in a language other than a language of the Review Conference if he/she provides for interpretation into one such language. Languages of documents, resolutions and other formal decisions Rule 54 All official documents, resolutions and other formal decisions of the Review Conference shall be published in the languages of the Review Conference. Languages of reports Rule 55 Any reports submitted by the General Committee, the Credentials Committee, or the Committees established in accordance with rule 47, as well as the report of the Review Conference referred to in rule 18, shall be published in the languages of the Review Conference. Rule 56 1. There shall be neither verbatim nor summary records of meetings. 2. Sound recordings of meetings of the Review Conference and of the Committees shall be made and kept in accordance with the practice of the United Nations. Unless otherwise decided by the Review Conference or the Committees, no such recordings shall be made of the meetings of any working group thereof. XI. PUBLIC AND PRIVATE MEETINGS General principles Rule 57 1. The plenary meetings of the Review Conference and the meetings of the Committees shall be held in public unless the body concerned decides otherwise. All decisions taken by the plenary of the Review Conference at a private meeting shall be announced at an early public meeting of the plenary. 2. As a general rule, meetings of other bodies of the Review Conference shall be held in private. Communiqués on private meetings Rule 58 At the close of a private meeting, the body concerned may issue a communiqué through the Secretary-General of the Review Conference. XII. OTHER PARTICIPANTS AND OBSERVERS Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the capacity of observer in the sessions and work of all international review conferences convened within the framework of the General Assembly Rule 59 Representatives designated by organizations, intergovernmental organizations and other entities that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and work of all international Review Conferences within the framework of the General Assembly have the right to participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Review Conference, its Committees and any other committee or working group. Associate members of regional commissions Rule 60 Representatives designated by associate members of regional commissions may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Review Conference, the Committees and any other committee or working group. Representatives of the specialized agencies Rule 61 Representatives designated by the specialized agencies may participate, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Review Conference, its Committees and any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. Representatives of other intergovernmental organizations and other entities Rule 62 Representatives designated by other intergovernmental organizations and other entities invited to the Review Conference may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Review Conference, the Committees and any working group on questions within the scope of their activities. Representatives of interested United Nations organs, bodies, programmes and relevant mechanisms, including human rights bodies and mechanisms Rule 63 Representatives designated by interested organs, bodies, programmes and relevant mechanisms of the United Nations, including human rights bodies and mechanisms, in particular the special rapporteurs who have contributed to the preparatory process, may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Review Conference, its Committees and any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. The chairperson of the Human Rights Council, the chairpersons or other designated members of human rights bodies and mechanisms, and of bodies established under international human rights instruments, as well as special and thematic rapporteurs or representatives and the chairpersons or designated members of working groups, may participate as observers in the deliberations of the Review Conference, any Committee and any committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. Representatives of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination Rule 64 Members of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination may participate as observers in the deliberations of the Review Conference, its Committees and any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of its activities. Representatives of national human rights institutions Rule 65 1. Participation of national human rights institutions in the Review Conference shall be based on arrangements and practices agreed upon by the Commission on Human Rights, including Commission resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005, while ensuring the most effective contribution of these institutions. Representatives designated by national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights may participate as observers in the deliberations of the Review Conference, any Committee and any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. 2. In the situation where a country does not have a national institution for the promotion and protection of human rights, representatives designated by ombudspersons or by specialized independent national bodies for the promotion and protection of racial equality may participate as observers in the deliberations of the Review Conference, any Committee and any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. Representatives of non-governmental organizations Rule 66 1. Non-governmental organizations accredited to participate in the sessions and processes of the Preparatory Committee of the Review Conference may designate representatives to participate as observers in the Conference, any Committee and any committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities. 2. The Review Conference decides to apply the following criteria and practices for participation by non-governmental organizations in its work: (a) The mechanism established by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1996/31 of 26 July 1996, and practices observed by the Commission on Human Rights, shall be the framework for participation of, consultations with, and accreditation of nongovernmental organizations, while ensuring their most effective contribution; (b) Non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council are invited to participate fully in the Review Conference, pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 of 26 July 1996; (c) In the case of non-governmental organizations not in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, but accredited to participate in the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and its follow-up mechanisms the Secretariat shall apply the same accreditation process as decided pursuant to PC.1/2; (e) Indigenous peoples' representatives that are accredited in accordance with the Economic and Social Council resolution 1995/32 of 25 July 1995, and who express willingness to participate, shall be accredited to the Review Conference. Other interested indigenous peoples' representatives can also be accredited, following standard procedures established under Council resolution 1996/31. 3. Upon the invitation of the presiding officer of the body concerned and subject to the approval of that body, such observers may make oral statements on questions in which they have special competence. If the number of requests to speak is too large, the nongovernmental organizations shall be requested to form themselves into constituencies, such constituencies to speak through spokespersons. Written statements Rule 67 Written statements submitted by the designated representatives referred to in rules 59 to 66 shall be distributed by the secretariat to all delegations in the quantities and in the language in which the statements are made available to it at the site of the Review Conference, provided that a statement submitted on behalf of a non-governmental organization is related to the work of the Review Conference and is on a subject in which it has a special competence. XIII. AMENDMENT AND SUSPENSION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE Method of amendment Rule 68 These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Review Conference taken by a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting, after the General Committee has reported on the proposed amendment. Method of suspension Rule 69 Any of these rules may be suspended by the Review Conference provided that 24 hours' notice of the proposal for the suspension has been given, which may be waived if no representative objects. Any such suspension shall be limited to a specific and stated purpose and to a period required to achieve that purpose. PC.1/10. Reports, studies and other documentation for the Preparatory Committee and the Durban Review Conference At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote, on the basis of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, General Assembly resolution 61/149 of 19 December 2006, and Human Rights Council resolution 3/2 of 8 December 2006, and in line with the objectives of the Durban Review Conference: (a) To request Governments, the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and relevant United Nations bodies, regional organizations, governmental organizations, national human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, the Five Independent Eminent Experts to follow up on the Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the Five Experts on Complementary International Standards, the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent and other relevant human rights mechanisms including other special procedures to assist the Preparatory Committee by undertaking review and submitting recommendations, through the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, as contributions to the outcome of the Review Conference; (b) To request the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in order to facilitate the review process, under the supervision of the Bureau to draft a questionnaire that will be sent immediately after the end of the organizational session of the Preparatory Committee to all stakeholders listed above. Responses to the questionnaire will be sent to the first substantive session of the Preparatory Committee; (c) To establish at its first substantive session an open-ended intergovernmental working group to follow up the work of the Preparatory Committee, review additional written contributions and to report thereon to the Preparatory Committee; (d) To request the Office of the High Commissioner to ensure the expeditious submission of the written contributions to the open-ended intergovernmental working group. PC.1/11. Preparatory meetings and activities at the international, regional and national levels At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote to call upon States and regional organizations to hold international, regional and national meetings and/or to undertake other initiatives in preparation for the Durban Review Conference in line with the objectives of the Review Conference, and to request that reports from such activities, on the outcome of the respective deliberations, be submitted to the Preparatory Committee through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote on the following provisions regarding sources of funding and financial and technical assistance: (a) To request the United Nations Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources for the preparations for the Durban Review Conference and to consider providing, as appropriate, the necessary financial and technical assistance for the convening of the regional preparatory meetings, according to established practices; (b) To request the High Commissioner for Human Rights to revitalize the voluntary fund for the Durban Review Conference. This voluntary fund would cover expenses, other than those covered by the regular budget, related to the preparatory process for the Durban Review Conference, including for the needs of the intersessional working group, the participation of the representatives of national human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations, especially those from developing countries, as well as human rights treaty bodies and thematic special procedures; (c) To appeal to all Governments, international organizations, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, the private sector and individuals, to contribute generously to the voluntary fund, and, to this end, requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to undertake initiatives to encourage contributions; (d) To encourage the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to assist States and regional organizations, which convene international, regional and national meetings and/or undertake other relevant initiatives, including at expert level, in the framework of the preparatory process for the Durban Review Conference; and also urges the United Nations bodies and specialized agencies and particularly the United Nations regional economic commissions, in coordination with the United Nations High Commissioner, to provide assistance for the organization of the above-mentioned preparatory activities and stresses that such assistance should be supplemented by voluntary contributions; (e) To recommend to the General Assembly to appeal for contributions from extrabudgetary resources to cover the cost of participation of representatives of least developed countries in the preparatory processes, including the first and second substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee, the relevant regional preparatory meetings and in the Durban Review Conference. PC.1/13. Objectives of the Durban Review Conference At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote that, on the basis of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, General Assembly resolution 61/149 of 19 December 2006, and Human Rights Council resolution 3/2 of 8 December 2006, the objectives of the Durban Review Conference will read as follows: 2. To assess the effectiveness of the existing Durban follow-up mechanisms and other relevant United Nations mechanisms dealing with the issue of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in order to enhance them; 3. To promote the universal ratification and implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and proper consideration of the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination; 4. To identify and share good practices achieved in the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. PC.1/14. Adoption of the draft provisional agenda for the first substantive session of the Preparatory Committee At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided without a vote to adopt an agenda for its first substantive session, which is set out below: 1. Opening of the session. 2. Adoption of the agenda. 3. Organization of work. 4. Submission of the provisional agenda of the Durban Review Conference. 5. Reports of preparatory meetings and activities at the international, regional and national levels. 6. Review of reports, studies and other documentation for the Preparatory Committee and the Durban Review Conference and contributions of human rights bodies and mechanisms. 7. Draft outcome document of the Durban Review Conference. 8. Organization of the work of the Durban Review Conference and other matters. 9. Adoption of the report of the Preparatory Committee. PC.1/15. Organization of the work for the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee and the formulation of a concrete plan for the preparatory process At its 9th meeting, on 31 August 2007, the Preparatory Committee decided, without a vote, to base its work over the next two years on a flexible timetable that takes into account the possibility of conflicting work agendas and other time constraints of the Committee members which would best facilitate the work of the Preparatory Committee (see timetable contained in the appendix below). Appendix Main elements for a timetable for the preparatory process of the Durban Review Conference A. First organizational session of the Preparatory Committee (August 2007) Elaboration of the objectives of the Durban Review Conference; First phase of the intersessional meetings of the Preparatory Committee (September 2007April 2008): To request the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in order to facilitate the review process, under the supervision of the Bureau to draft a questionnaire that will be sent immediately after the end of the organizational session of the Preparatory Committee to all stakeholders listed above. Responses to the questionnaire will be sent to the First substantive session of the Preparatory Committee; (see decision 10 (b)); To send the questionnaire (beginning of November, to receive replies by January 2008); Possible regional meetings (January-March 2008). B. First substantive session of the Preparatory Committee (April-May 2008) Establishment of an intersessional open-ended intergovernmental working group (see draft decision 10); Second phase of the intersessional meetings of the Preparatory Committee (MaySeptember 2008): Possible regional meetings (June-September 2008); Session of the intersessional open-ended intergovernmental working group to commence negotiations on the draft outcome document. To discuss outcome document; Third phase of the intersessional meetings of the Preparatory Committee (October 2008January/May 2009): Negotiations on draft outcome document to continue. D. Durban Review Conference (first half of 2009) Finalization and adoption of the outcome document. Agenda and programme of work for the session A. Agenda 2. Election of officers. 3. Adoption of the agenda. 4. Organization of work: adoption of the rules of procedure of the Preparatory Committee and other organizational matters. 5. Objectives of the Durban Review Conference. 6. Adoption of rules of procedure of the Durban Review Conference. 7. Relevant modalities for the Durban Review Conference. 8. Preparatory meetings and activities at the international, regional and national levels. 9. Reports, studies and other documentation for the Preparatory Committee and the Durban Review Conference and contribution by human rights bodies and mechanisms. 10. Organization of the work and dates of the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee and formulation of a concrete plan for the preparatory process. 11. Adoption of the report of the Preparatory Committee to the General Assembly. B. Programme of work Monday 27 August 2007 Tuesday 28 August 2007 Wednesday 29 August 2007 Thursday 30 August 2007 Friday 31 August 2007 Morning 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Item 1: Opening of the session Item 2: Election of officers Item 3: Adoption of the agenda Item 4: Organization of work: adoption of the rules of procedure of the Preparatory Committee and other organizational matters Opening statements Item 5: Continued Item 7: Relevant modalities for the Durban Review Conference Item 9: Reports, studies and other documentation for the Preparatory Committee and the Durban Review Conference and contribution by human rights bodies and mechanisms Finalization of the report by the secretariat Afternoon 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. Item 5: Objectives of the Durban Review Conference Item 6: Adoption of provisional rules of procedure of the Durban Review Conference Item 8: Preparatory meetings and activities at the international, regional and national levels Actions on draft decisions/resolutions Item 10: Organization of work and dates of the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee and formulation of a concrete plan for the preparatory process Item 11: Adoption of the report of the Preparatory Committee Annex III General debatea Agenda item Meeting number Speaker Organization of work: adoption of the rules of procedure of the Preparatory Committee and other organizational matters 1st States Members: Bhutan and China Objectives of the Durban Review Conference 2nd States Members: Algeria, Belgium, Brazil, China, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Morocco, Norway, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), Senegal, South Africa, Tunisia and Turkey Observers: National human rights institutions: Commission Nationale des Droits de l'Homme (France) Non-governmental organizations: B'nai B'rith International and Coordination Board of Jewish Organizations (joint statement); Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions; European Roma Rights Centre; Amnesty International; Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru and World Peace Council (joint statement); World Alliance of Young Men's Christian Associations and Pax Romana (joint statement); International Youth and Student Movement for the United Nations and Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (joint statement) Objectives of the Durban Review Conference (continued) 3rd States Members: Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Chile, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), France, Iceland, Mexico, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and the Russian Federation Non-governmental organizations: Ligue International contre le Racisme et l'Antisémitisme and Mouvement pour l'abolition de la prostitution et de la pornographie (joint statement); Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru Adoption of the rules of procedure of the Durban Review Conference Members: Belgium, Ecuador, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Pakistan, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and South Africa 4th Members: Algeria, Argentina, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and South Africa 7th Members: Nigeria and South Africa Relevant modalities for the Durban Review Conference 5th Members: Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Cuba, China, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mexico, Norway, Pakistan (on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference), Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey Specialized agency: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Non-governmental organizations: International Youth and Student Movement for the United Nations, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom and International League for the Rights and Liberation of Peoples (joint statement); Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru and World Peace Council (joint statement) Relevant modalities for the Durban Review Conference (continued) Members: Mexico, Nigeria and South Africa Preparatory meetings and activities at the international, regional and national levels 6th Members: Algeria, Brazil (on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States), China, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), Pakistan (on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference) and Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) Non-governmental organizations: International Youth and Students Movement for the United Nations, the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom and North-South 21 (joint statement) Reports, studies and other documentation for the Preparatory Committee and the Durban Review Conference and contribution by human rights bodies and mechanisms Members: Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Djibouti, Egypt (on behalf of the Group of African States), India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan (on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference), Portugal (on behalf of the European Union), the Russian Federation, South Africa, Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic and Switzerland National human rights institution: National Human Rights Institution of the Kingdom of Morocco Non-governmental organizations: Lutheran World Federation; Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru and World Peace Council (joint statement) Organization of the work and dates of the substantive sessions of the Preparatory Committee and formulation of a concrete plan for the preparatory process 8th Members: Morocco, Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and South Africa Annex IV List of documents issued for the organizational session Documents issued in the general series Symbol A/CONF.211/PC.1/1 Provisional agenda A/CONF.211/PC.1/1/Add.1 Annotations to the provisional agenda A/CONF.211/PC.1/2 7 and 8 Note by the Secretariat on previous review conferences. Review of follow-up to world conferences and summits in accordance with the established practice of the General Assembly Documents issued in the limited series A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.2 Draft decisions 1 to 14 A/CONF.211/PC.1/L.3 Draft report Attendance States Members of the United Nations Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Non-member State represented by observers Holy See. Other observer Palestine. United Nations specialized agencies United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Population Fund, International Labour Office. Intergovernmental organizations African Union, European Community, European Commission, European Union-Council of the European Union, International Organization for Migration, League of Arab States, Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie. National human rights institutions, international coordinating committees and regional groups of national institutions Comisión Nacional de los Derechos Humanos, Mexico; Commission nationale consultative de promotion et de protection des droits de l'homme, Algeria; Commission nationale consultative des droits de l'homme, France; Conseil consultatif des droits de l'homme du Royaume du Maroc; Defensor del Pueblo, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; International Coordinating Committee of National Human Rights Institutions. Non-governmental organizations General consultative status International Federation of Business and Professional Women, International Youth and Student Movement for the United Nations, Zonta International. Special consultative status Action internationale pour la paix et le développement dans la région des Grands lacs, AFRECURE - All for Reparations and Emancipation, African Canadian Legal Clinic, African Commission of Health and Human Rights Promoters, Amnesty International, AntiRacism Information Service, Asian Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Network, Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, Centre Simon Wiesenthal, European Roma Rights Center, Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru, Institute on Human Rights and the Holocaust, Interfaith International, International League for Human Rights, International Service for Human Rights, International Volunteerism Organization for Women, Education and Development - VIDES, IUS Primi Viri International Association, Ligue internationale contre le racisme et l'antisémitisme, Lutheran World Federation, Mandat International, Mouvement pour l'abolition de la prostitution et de la pornographie et toutes formes de violences sexuelles et discriminations sexistes, Pax Romana, Public Services International, Tiye International, Union of Arab Jurists, United Nations Watch, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, World Alliance of Young Men's Christian Associations, Worldwide Organization for Women. Roster status Association of World Citizens, International Organization of Indigenous Resource Development, Servas International. 