%%%ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|REGIONAL COOPERATION|

United Nations Report of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation Fifteenth session (29 May-1 June 2007) General Assembly Official Records Sixty-second Session Supplement No. 39 () United Nations * New York, 2007 ISSN 0255-2280 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. Contents Chapter Paragraphs Page Decisions adopted by the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation at its fifteenth session High-level plenary segment Opening of the session Introduction of reports on implementation Discussion Thematic discussion: the role of the United Nations in strengthening South-South and triangular cooperation Report of the Working Group Provisional agenda for the sixteenth session of the Committee Draft report Closure of the session Organizational matters Date and place of the session Attendance Election of officers Adoption of the agenda and organization of work Annexes I. List of those attending the fifteenth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation II. List of documents before the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation at its fifteenth session Chapter I 1. The High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation adopted the following decisions at its fifteenth session: Decision 15/1 South-South cooperation The High-level Committee, Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 33/134 of December 1978, in which the General Assembly endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Recalling General Assembly resolutions 60/212 of 22 December 2005, 57/270 B of 3 July 2003, and other resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation, Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, Recalling further General Assembly resolution 49/96 of 19 December 1994 on a United Nations conference on South-South cooperation, welcoming the support expressed for the convening of a United Nations conference on South-South cooperation, and recognizing the increased role undertaken by the United Nations to support activities in economic cooperation among developing countries, Taking note of the Havana Declaration and Havana Programme of Action adopted by the first South Summit of the Group of 77, held in Havana, Cuba, on 14 April 2000, and the Doha Declaration and Doha Plan of Action adopted at Doha, Qatar, by the second South Summit of the Group of 77, held from 12 to 16 June 2005, the Marrakech Declaration and Marrakech Framework for the Implementation of South-South Cooperation adopted by the Ministerial Conference on South-South Cooperation held in Marrakech, Morocco, on 16 December 2003, and other high-level follow-up conferences, which accorded South-South cooperation high priority in order for developing countries to meet new development challenges, Taking note of the reports prepared for the fifteenth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation, 1. Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South cooperation; 2. Encourages all Member States to deepen, intensify and enhance South-South cooperation, including through triangular cooperation, in all its aspects, as a continued and vital process to help meet the challenges facing the countries of the South, especially least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and countries in post-conflict and crisis situations; 3. Encourages the international community, including the international financial institutions, to support the efforts of developing countries, inter alia, through triangular cooperation; 4. Reiterates the importance of development assistance from developed countries to support, inter alia, South-South cooperation; 5. Urges organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to mainstream, in their programmes and through their country-level activities and country offices, modalities to support South-South cooperation through the enhanced use of local capacities available in the South and as a means to share best practices; and, in this regard, notes that South-South cooperation remains among the various areas most in need of resources and assistance from the funds and programmes; 6. Reaffirms that existing regular resources will continue to fund the activities of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation, and encourages the Special Unit to explore and undertake intensive, innovative and additional resource mobilization initiatives to attract more resources, both financial and in kind, to supplement regular resources and other funds for activities involving South-South cooperation; 7. Recognizes the need to strengthen and further invigorate South-South cooperation, and invites the General Assembly to consider convening a high-level United Nations conference on South-South cooperation on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action in 2008, or no later than the first semester of 2009, and in that regard, also invites the General Assembly to consider the nature, date and modalities of the conference, making maximum use of the existing coordination mechanisms of the United Nations system; 8. Welcomes the generous offer by Argentina to host a high-level United Nations conference on South-South cooperation; and recommends that the President of the General Assembly entrust the President of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation to undertake the necessary consultations in order to prepare for the proposed conference; 9. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to report on the implementation of the present decision to the High-level Committee at its sixteenth session. Decision 15/2 Provisional agenda for the sixteenth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation Taking into account the views expressed at its fifteenth session, Approves the following provisional agenda for its sixteenth session, to be held in 2009: 1. Opening of the session. 2. Review of progress made in implementing the Buenos Aires Plan of Action and the new directions strategy for South-South cooperation. 3. Actions arising from previous sessions of the High-level Committee, notably at its fifteenth session in 2007. 4. Consideration of reports of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme: (a) Implementation of the Guidelines for the Review of Policies and Procedures concerning Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries; (b) Organizational, administrative and financial arrangements of the United Nations Development Programme in support of South-South cooperation. 5. Thematic discussion (theme to be decided on the basis of consultations that will be undertaken with Member States by the Bureau of the High-level Committee). 6. Adoption of the report of the Working Group. 7. Approval of the provisional agenda for the seventeenth session of the High-level Committee. 8. Other matters. 9. Adoption of the report of the High-level Committee on its sixteenth session. Chapter II A. Opening of the session 2. At the 1st meeting, on 29 May 2007, the President of the fifteenth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation, the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the United Nations, opened the session and made an introductory statement. 3. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the President of the General Assembly. 4. Also at the same meeting, a statement was made by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). B. Introduction of reports on implementation 5. At its 1st and 2nd meetings, on 29 May 2007, and at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 30 May 2007, the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation considered items 2 and 3 of its agenda. 6. The Director of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation introduced the following reports: (a) Review of progress in the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action, the new directions strategy for South-South cooperation and the decisions of the Committee (SSC/15/1); (b) Consideration of reports of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (SSC/15/2). C. Discussion 7. The general debate of the High-level Committee reviewed South-South cooperation within the framework of implementation of the 1978 Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, the "new directions" strategy endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/119 of 20 December 1995 and the decisions of the Committee itself. 8. A key theme to emerge from the debate was the need to discuss South-South cooperation in the context of rapid globalization, in which new dynamics of trade and rapid advances in technology have been accompanied by changing social, economic and political realities, particularly among countries of the South. It was noted that the agenda for South-South cooperation has expanded to include broader, transnational development issues, including good governance; food security; pandemic diseases, such as malaria and HIV/AIDS; and the mitigation of natural disasters. In this regard, it was also highlighted that technical capacity among developing countries and capacity-building, in general, should still be recognized as the essential items of such an agenda. 9. Throughout the debate, Member States noted the increasing volume and rate of South-South exchanges in trade, finance, technology exchanges and development enterprises. South-South cooperation was seen to be a basis for promoting not only development but also broader values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including other aspects of human well-being. Many delegations were pleased to note the increasing pattern of cooperation among developing countries although some indicated that the potential of the South for South-South collaboration had yet to be fully realized. 10. South-South cooperation was also seen to be a key approach to accelerating development and assisting countries, particularly least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and countries in sub-Saharan Africa, in meeting internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. It was emphasized that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for North-South cooperation but rather a complement to North-South cooperation and other traditional forms of development assistance. That perspective was, however, seen by some delegations as expressing fear on the part of developing countries that they would lose development assistance from the North. 11. At the global level, it was agreed that the international development architecture should be designed to reflect the new dynamism of the South while promoting equitable representation of developing countries. While numerous countries have greatly improved their economic prospects, overall the forecast has been mixed, with an increase in income disparities among a number of countries in the South. A number of delegations expressed concern about the ongoing asymmetries and unequal distribution of gains among and within the countries of the global South. It was noted that even traditional indicators used to determine aid, such as levels of gross domestic product, could be misleading since such statistics had the potential to mask a country's domestic inequalities. 12. To address those inequalities, it was suggested that more work be done to create new and innovative partnerships within the South, particularly through triangular cooperation and encouraging the sharing of best practices. 13. Moreover, it was suggested that the impact of development initiatives could be maximized by ensuring innovative, inclusive partnerships through the participation of non-State partners, such as civil society, the private sector and informal networks. 14. In this context, numerous delegations highlighted the important role of middle-income countries as not only recipients but also partners through South-South exchanges, particularly in such areas as education, technical expertise and other kinds of expertise and knowledge, with other countries in the South. It was emphasized that those exchanges should not be considered as aid or as part of and a substitute for official development assistance. 15. Delegations affirmed the need for Member States and their development partners to undertake more vigorous efforts to consolidate, intensify and enhance South-South cooperation in all its aspects, particularly through triangular cooperation, as a continuous and vital process to meet the challenges facing the countries of the South and as a valuable contribution to development. 16. Developing countries urged their development partners to stand by the commitments they had made at major United Nations conferences and summits with regard to official development assistance and debt relief, an especially urgent issue given the drop in the volume of overseas development assistance in recent years. 17. A number of delegations requested that Member States and United Nations agencies strengthen their support for building triangular partnerships, particularly in assisting least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and sub-Saharan African countries in achieving the Millennium Development Goals and other international agreed development goals. A suggestion was made that donor countries allocate specific amounts of their official development assistance to the funding of triangular cooperation arrangements through the United Nations, particularly to countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Another delegation expressed a need for continued support of the United Nations in promoting triangular cooperation, particularly through the United Nations country teams. 18. In general, numerous delegations affirmed that South-South and triangular partnerships should be the result of a demand-driven process, whereby providers of development assistance and beneficiaries would be able to take ownership of relevant projects and programmes in order to effectively implement them at the national level. 19. It was agreed that the national capacities of developing countries should be strengthened to allow for more effective South-South cooperation. In addition, regional and subregional integration was highlighted as having the potential to improve the economic, social and political prospects of Southern countries. 20. It was observed that South-South cooperation should not be isolated conceptually from global development efforts. Rather it should be consistent with international agreements, such as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, and support the principles outlined in the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Those principles include country ownership, the primacy of the poverty strategies of the recipient countries, harmonizing with country processes and procedures, and a focus on institutional capacity-building of the recipient country. 21. The importance of South-South cooperation has been affirmed in a number of initiatives and in various conferences, such as those convened in recent years by the Group of 77, the 2005 World Summit and the Fourteenth Summit of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana in September 2006. The Special Unit for South-South Cooperation was encouraged to follow up, as applicable, on various decisions adopted at Group of 77 summits and other high-level conferences relating to South-South cooperation. 22. A number of delegations were pleased that United Nations entities and regional organizations were increasingly adopting South-South approaches in their policies and operational programmes, particularly in dealing with regional and transboundary development challenges. Furthermore, it was affirmed that organizations of the United Nations system, owing to their universal membership, neutrality and political independence, represented principal vehicles by which to catalyse, support and strengthen South-South cooperation. 23. United Nations organizations and agencies that participated in the debate highlighted aspects of their work that followed a South-South approach at the subregional, regional and global levels. 24. To further strengthen South-South cooperation, United Nations agencies were encouraged to play a key role in their respective areas of competence in strengthening partnerships among developing countries; promoting and disseminating best practices, indigenous knowledge, know-how and technology in the South; and facilitating networking among experts and institutions in developing countries. It was also recommended that the trade-related aspects of those topics be explored within the framework of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be held in Ghana in April 2008. Generally, it was recommended that South-South cooperation be an adequately resourced part of the United Nations operational activities for development. The Special Unit was therefore encouraged to strengthen information-sharing for South-South cooperation among the relevant agencies in various developing countries. 25. The United Nations was called upon to mainstream South-South cooperation as a cross-cutting issue at the heart of the development agenda of all United Nations organs at the headquarters and country levels. The aim was to facilitate increased data collection, reports and a more South-South-oriented approach on the part of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. 26. It was further proposed that the United Nations development system integrate South-South cooperation into the design, formulation and implementation of its regular programmes. In addition, the concept of South-South cooperation should be mainstreamed into the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review. 27. Further suggestions for the mainstreaming of South-South policies and programmes included drawing more effectively on the resident coordinator system for implementation at the country level. Also discussed was the need to strengthen and expand South-South focal points at the country level. 28. Indeed, another key theme to emerge from the debate was the need to strengthen and further consolidate South-South cooperation through national development frameworks and the work of development partners in both the public and private sectors and United Nations agencies. While some United Nations organizations had made progress in mainstreaming South-South cooperation within their own programmes, concern was expressed that such mainstreaming in this area had not been fully achieved. 29. The United Nations system, particularly the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation, was requested to address the existence of information and knowledge gaps relating to South-South cooperation. Delegations expressed support for an adequate, organized and efficient information system that would provide all countries with details of capabilities of the countries of the South and the cooperation opportunities available. This type of information reservoir would also enable the sharing of best practices. 30. Member States and the United Nations system were urged to generously support the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation and the Perez-Guerrero Trust Fund for Economic and Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries. Furthermore, it was recommended that the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation be enhanced as the main funding mechanism for South-South cooperation. 31. It was recommended that the High-level Committee meet more frequently, with a suggestion for convening informal intersessional meetings so that the implementation of decisions could be reviewed. 32. Delegations expressed a desire to increase funding for projects of the United Nations development system that employ South-South cooperation strategies. Moreover, Member States expressed the desire for the increased use of Southern resources, particularly experts and expertise, in United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations programmes. 33. The United Nations resident coordinator system was highlighted by some delegations as a potential contributor to South-South cooperation owing to the specific knowledge of resident coordinators regarding national priorities and the requirements and potential at the national and regional levels. 34. One delegation suggested that the revision of the "new directions" strategy being carried out by the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation should translate into a framework that would guide Member States and the organizations of the United Nations in the promotion of South-South cooperation in coming years. It was suggested that, among other things, the revised strategy could contain actions and instruments that would be included as part of an intersectoral theme of operational activities for development and as a part of the UNDP strategic plan for 2008-2011. 35. The Special Unit for South-South Cooperation needs to ensure greater coordination among United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations. However, while some delegations expressed the need for coordination and coherence, others emphasized the need to prioritize the use of scarce resources in a manner that would result in improved delivery of programmes. 36. A number of Member States emphasized the need to enhance the capacity of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation, particularly its staffing and funding requirements, through concrete proposals. It was stated that greater resources and enhanced capacity would provide the Special Unit with better means to deliver on its mandate. 37. Beyond the role of coordinating and facilitating meetings and seminars on South-South cooperation, it was recommended that the Special Unit extend its role in promoting innovative mechanisms for South-South cooperation, fostering business-to-business linkages and building public-private partnerships. 38. Some delegations emphasized the advocacy role of the Special Unit, publicizing and sharing knowledge among developing countries. These activities would need to be undertaken in coordination with other mechanisms and entities, such as the Asia-Africa Strategic Plan of Action and with the South Centre. Along those lines, Member States urged the Special Unit to intensify its resource mobilization efforts through new innovative mechanisms in order to help deepen the impact of South-South and triangular arrangements. 39. Delegations encouraged the Special Unit to help deepen South-South and triangular cooperation arrangements and in particular to prepare a detailed inventory of initiatives of South-South and triangular cooperation. The Special Unit was also asked to report on concrete measures and achievements that it had supported in South-South and triangular cooperation. The need for indicating the country-level impact of South-South cooperation was also expressed. 40. Among the various specific recommendations made to strengthen the work of the Special Unit was the updating and upgrading of the Web of Information for Development (WIDE) system to rapidly make this tool operational; it was acknowledged that the system must do a better job in collecting information and making it available. A suggestion was made that Governments be enabled to monitor the use of this tool. 41. The Special Unit should explore collaboration with the World Bank Group and regional development banks in fostering South-South investment in the private sector and the promotion of the development of small and medium-sized enterprises. An independent evaluation of the work of the Special Unit was needed to identify areas for improvement, and a discussion of the evaluation should be on the agenda of the sixteenth session of the High-level Committee. 42. Finally, noting the upcoming thirtieth anniversary of the establishment of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action, delegations called for the convening of a United Nations conference on South-South cooperation to review progress in the implementation of the Plan of Action in 2008. Argentina generously offered to host the conference in Buenos Aires and that offer was supported by country delegations. Chapter III 43. The High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation considered item 4 of its agenda at its 4th meeting, on 30 May 2007. 44. The Rapporteur of the High-level Committee, who served as the Moderator of the thematic discussion, introduced the six panel members. First presentation 45. The presenter of the theme "Enhancing United Nations system coordination and coherence of support to South-South cooperation" noted that, on the occasion of the Group of 77 South Summit held in Havana, Cuba, in April 2000 and in Doha, Qatar, in June 2005, the leaders of the South took significant steps reflecting a strong determination to increase the scope and dimension of South-South cooperation. The Doha Plan of Action, among other things, requested the Secretary-General to take concrete measures to further strengthen the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation. Mainly, more financial and human resources were needed so as to enable it to carry out its full responsibilities, in particular through mobilization of resources for the advancement of South-South cooperation, including through triangular cooperation. 46. The strategies and directions of mutual development cooperation must, of course, respond to addressing especially the problems and challenges facing the poorest among the developing countries. Those challenges could not be confronted by the developing countries alone. 47. The United Nations system must enhance its own coordination and coherence to effectively support the South-South agenda. 48. The Special Unit for South-South Cooperation had an important role to perform. That role included supporting technical cooperation within countries of the South, promoting South-South cooperation in the work of all United Nations funds and programmes and facilitating triangular cooperation between the North and the South. The Special Unit was also encouraged to intensify its efforts to respond to the various mandates assigned by the Group of 77 Summits and other high-level conferences relating to South-South cooperation in various fields. 49. There was also a need to support multilateral arrangements and mechanisms for South-South cooperation. In that context, the development partners of developing countries and the United Nations system were called upon to generously support the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation and the Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for Economic and Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries. The development partners of developing countries were also called upon to provide necessary support to the Group of 77 Consortium on Science, Technology and Innovation for the South established recently on the recommendations of the Second South Summit. 50. The challenge, therefore, was for all partners in the South as well as from the North to translate the new dynamism of the South into a force for the realization of an equitable and universal development paradigm. The United Nations system indeed had a key role to play in that regard. Second presentation 51. The presenter of the theme "The role of the United Nations in strengthening South-South and triangular cooperation" indicated that one of the cornerstones of enhanced South-South cooperation was the sharing of experiences and expertise. Partnerships for triangular cooperation, involving the expertise of countries of the South supported by funds of countries of the North or multilateral organizations, could be used to help countries at a less advanced stage of development. 52. The United Nations system, with its global reach, could contribute to the institutionalization of the South-South cooperation modality through its regional bodies. It could consolidate its cooperation efforts, moving from ad hoc projects to a more coherent, coordinated approach. In addition, it could establish methods of financing, including cost-sharing with clearly defined components. 53. The United Nations system could encourage the involvement of all stakeholders in the conceptualization, formulation and monitoring of programmes, which should be based on country-specific needs. This would help to ensure a sense of ownership and thus contribute to project completion. The effectiveness of any programme would depend on the rating by recipient countries and benchmarking against agreed indicators of the benefits of undertaking such activities. 54. UNDP and the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation could encourage United Nations bodies at the national level to work closely with national focal points for South-South cooperation. 55. The Special Unit for South-South Cooperation could conduct an audit of the strengths of development partners (i.e., the more advanced countries of the South) and the requirements of needy developing countries, and could share the information thereby obtained. The sharing of information regionally might result in better solutions to identified issues, particularly transboundary ones. It also could encourage increased participation of developed countries and greater involvement of the private sector and non-governmental organizations in South-South and triangular cooperation. General discussion 56. In the discussion following the first two presentations, it was noted that South-South cooperation should be demand driven since a supply-driven cooperation strategy could compromise the sustainability of South-South cooperation initiatives. However, difficulties sometimes arose in matching needs and resources. An interagency network to share knowledge and experiences would be one means of addressing this issue, and one such network is in place in Bangkok. Third presentation 57. The presenter of the theme "The role of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in strengthening South-South and triangular cooperation" noted that UNIDO was responsible for providing industrial development and manufacturing support to developing countries and countries in transition. It played a role in analysis, mapping, building of partnerships among countries in the South and promoting regional trade and cooperation. The objective of South-South cooperation activities was to facilitate the effective participation of developing economies in the global economy. 58. UNIDO was establishing centres for South-South cooperation in a number of middle-income countries to strengthen and facilitate the sharing of experiences, know-how and management techniques to develop productive capacity in the South. These South-South centres would also promote the identification and replication of best practices in wealth creation through industrial growth. They would network among themselves in developing joint programmes, taking into consideration the participants' comparative advantages. Fourth presentation 59. The presenter of the theme "Building effective mechanisms for multilateral South-South cooperation" focused on two pillars of a South-South cooperation architecture: a South-South development forum and a network of South-South academies. The presenter observed that South-South cooperation was a complex issue, requiring both an interdisciplinary approach and a new approach to South-South relationships in which it would be important to take advantage of South-South capacities. 60. Since all aspects of human development could be the subjects of South-South cooperation, including security and interrelated challenges, that created complex demands and called for skills in multilateral diplomacy. Developing countries would thus need to work closely with all stakeholders, such as civil society and the business community, in developing common objectives. 61. A South-South forum would give a coherent voice to the South, serving as a recognized venue for consensus-building. It could be informal but would function like a parliamentary institution; that is, it would be a deliberative and non-rule-making structure. It would seek to, among other things, contribute to the implementation of plans of action adopted by the Group of 77 Summit, catalyse the mobilization of financing for cooperation, influence public opinion in favour of such cooperation and advance South-South cooperation programmes. 62. A network of South-South academies would meet the need for capacity-building in multilateral development diplomacy. It would provide intellectual support for the conduct of such diplomacy and serve as an intellectual network that could increase coherence in policymaking. It would support the United Nations system with respect to actions on development. 63. In the discussion following the third and fourth presentations, it was observed that the United Nations system needed to help countries to build internal capacity so that they would be better equipped to handle matters outside their own borders. 64. One delegation noted the lack of efficient institutions for the promotion of South-South cooperation. While institution-building was important, it was incumbent upon Member States to indicate their priorities in this area. Member States should also indicate the extent of the involvement of each multilateral institution with South-South cooperation. Another delegation observed that international cooperation for development should respond to the needs of aid recipients. 65. Care should be taken, however, not to view South-South cooperation from the perspective of traditional cooperation. The presenter of the theme "The role of UNIDO in strengthening South-South and triangular cooperation" indicated that while South-South cooperation was an old concept, the new UNIDO model of South-South cooperation involved the private sector, civil society and nongovernmental organizations. 66. Further efforts of the United Nations system in strengthening South-South cooperation could focus on ways to remove the stigma attached to South-South cooperation through the sensitization and dissemination of information. The United Nations system could also identify and foster diversity and innovation among developing countries so that it would be possible to see where South-South cooperation could be promoted. The identification of synergies and complementarities among North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation and the dissemination of that information would contribute to overcoming the misconception that these are competing types of cooperation. Since the United Nations system and developing countries could do little without resources to facilitate activities, the United Nations system should enhance its resource mobilization efforts for South-South cooperation. 67. Greater cooperation among the organizations of the United Nations system would help to strengthen South-South cooperation. There was also a need for increased coordination of efforts to improve the use of resources and synergies that could be created among the agencies. 68. One delegation indicated that consideration could also be given to ways in which the United Nations system could help to usher in new approaches to South-South cooperation, how it could use its expertise to identify priority areas where developing countries could cooperate to formulate corresponding policies, how Member States could strengthen the capacity of United Nations entities (e.g., the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation and the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation) for South-South cooperation, and how the United Nations system could mobilize financial resources for such cooperation. It was noted that policies developed should be practical and action oriented, provide macroguidance and help to communicate information. Fifth presentation 69. The presenter of the theme "The role of the United Nations in strengthening South-South and triangular cooperation to foster links between the environment and development" signalled the importance of South-South and triangular cooperation in achieving the Millennium Development Goals, including goal 7 on environmental sustainability and goal 8 on global partnership for development. 70. The United Nations played a pivotal role in South-South and triangular cooperation and it could institutionalize those types of cooperation. A South-South cooperation strategy for the environment and development was needed along with implementation mechanisms. Moreover, regional programmes for implementing the Millennium Development Goals were needed and existing regional organizations should be strengthened. The United Nations could support initiatives for the dissemination of information and expertise. Sixth presentation 71. The presenter of the theme "The role of the United Nations in strengthening private-sector South-South and triangular cooperation" stated that South-South cooperation was an approach, a tool in a toolkit for meeting development challenges. In terms of the private sector, South-South cooperation involved risk-sharing by a bilateral donor with a multilateral lender in cooperation with the Government. 72. As part of the United Nations system, the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation could disseminate best practices regarding partnerships. It could also fund a study of the role of the private sector in achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In addition, the Special Unit could be a source of data on, for example, the volume of contributions to South-South cooperation from countries that were not members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 73. The United Nations system could also support the principles of global corporate social responsibility. In addition, it could look at the laws and regulations of countries relating to local corporate and private philanthropy with a view to encouraging such funding. 74. In the discussion following the fifth and sixth presentations, it was reiterated that South-South cooperation extended beyond the sphere of the United Nations. It was suggested that the United Nations, given its global reach, could help to identify complementarities and synergies in the North and in the South in order to strengthen South-South and triangular cooperation. 75. In closing the session, the Moderator referred to the need for new mechanisms to promote South-South cooperation, greater coordination among the organizations of the United Nations system and increased support to resource mobilization. UNDP country offices should help countries to develop South-South cooperation strategies. Chapter IV 76. At its 5th meeting, on 1 June 2007, the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation considered item 5 of its agenda. 77. The Chairman-cum-Rapporteur of the Working Group and Vice-President of the Committee introduced the report of the Working Group. 78. The Committee adopted the report of the Working Group. Provisional agenda for the sixteenth session of the Committee 79. At its 5th meeting, on 1 June 2007, the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation considered items 6 and 7 of its agenda. 80. At the same meeting, the Committee approved the provisional agenda for its sixteenth session (see chap. I, decision 15/2). 81. By the same decision, the Committee authorized its President to consult with the representatives of Member States on the thematic discussion for the sixteenth session and to communicate the decision taken based on those consultations to Member States in advance of the sixteenth session in order to enable delegates to take appropriate preparatory actions. 82. At its 5th meeting, on 1 June 2007, the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation considered item 8 of its agenda. 83. The Rapporteur, Raymond Landveld (Suriname), introduced the draft report of the Committee. 84. The Committee adopted the draft report and entrusted the Rapporteur with its completion. 85. At the 5th meeting, on 1 June 2007, the Associate Administrator of UNDP made a closing statement. 86. At the same meeting, closing statements were also made by the Group of 77 and China, the European Union and the Director of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation as well as the President of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation. A. Date and place of the session 87. The High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation held its fifteenth session at United Nations Headquarters from 29 May to 1 June 2007. The Committee held five meetings (1st to 5th). The Committee also held an organizational meeting on 8 May 2007. 88. The establishment, background, history, chronology and reports of previous sessions of the Committee are contained in the reports of the Committee to the General Assembly. 89. In accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 35/202, the session was convened by the Administrator of UNDP under the usual procedural arrangements. B. Attendance 90. The fifteenth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation was attended by representatives of States Members of the United Nations participating in UNDP. Also attending were non-member States maintaining a permanent observer mission at headquarters; regional commissions; United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes and other entities; intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations that received a standing invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and work of the General Assembly; intergovernmental organizations attending as observers; private-sector organizations, institutions and agencies that received an invitation to attend the thematic discussion; and individuals who received a special invitation to attend the session as panellists. For a list of those attending the fifteenth session, see annex I. C. Election of officers 91. The following officers were elected by acclamation: President: Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser (Qatar) Vice-Presidents: Isabel de Jesus da C. Godinho Manuel (Angola) Sergei A. Rachkov (Belarus) Natalia Quintavalle (Italy) Rapporteur: Raymond Landveld (Suriname) 92. The High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation approved the President's recommendation that Sergei A. Rachkov serve as Chairman of the Working Group. It was subsequently agreed that the Chairman should also serve as Rapporteur of the Working Group. D. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 93. The High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation held its organizational meeting in New York on 8 May 2007 to elect the Bureau of the fifteenth session and to adopt the provisional agenda and programme of work. 94. The Committee adopted the provisional annotated agenda (SSC/15/L.2) and organization of work (SSC/15/L.3) for its fifteenth session. A general debate was held in the plenary from 29 to 30 May 2007 on items 2 and 3. The Working Group, scheduled to begin its work on 31 May 2007, was assigned agenda items 2, 3, 4 and 5 for substantive discussion and charged with making recommendations to the Committee. The list of documents before the Committee at its fifteenth session is contained in annex II. List of those attending the fifteenth session of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation States Members of the United Nations or States participating in the United Nations Development Programme Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United Republic of Tanzania, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe United Nations bodies, funds and programmes Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations Children's Fund, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment Programme, United Nations Human Settlements Programme, United Nations Institute for Training and Research Specialized agencies Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; International Labour Organization; United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; World Health Organization; World Tourism Organization Intergovernmental organizations Central American Integration System, International Organization for Migration, Partners in Population and Development Non-governmental and other organizations invited to participate as observers Islamic Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Islamic Conference Youth Forum for Dialogue and Cooperation Individuals invited to participate as keynote speakers and/or panellists Munir Akram (Chairman, Group of 77) Dato' Raja Zaharaton Raja Zainal Abidin (former Director-General, Economic Planning Unit, Prime Minister's Office, Malaysia) Fatou Haidara (Director, Special Programmes Group, UNIDO) Awni Behnam (President, International Ocean Institute) Khaled Abu-Zeid (Regional Director, Water Resources Management Programme, Centre for Environment and Development for the Arab Region and Europe) Daniel Runde (Head, Partnership Development, International Finance Corporation) List of documents before the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation at its fifteenth session Provisional agenda and annotations for the organizational meeting held in New York on 8 May 2007 (SSC/15/L.1) Provisional annotated agenda, including list of documents, for the fifteenth session (SSC/15/L.2) Note by the Administrator on the adoption of the agenda and organization of work (SSC/15/L.3) Review of progress in the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action, the new directions strategy for South-South cooperation and the decisions of the Committee (SSC/15/1) Consideration of reports of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (SSC/15/2) 