%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|GREECE|THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|GOOD NEIGHBOURLINESS|

General Assembly Security Council Sixty-second session Agenda item 8 General debate Sixty-second year Letter dated 17 October 2007 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I am writing to you in connection with the letter of the distinguished Permanent Representative of Greece to the United Nations, John Mourikis, addressed to you and circulated, at his request, as document A/62/470-S/2007/592 on 5 October 2007. I would like to take this opportunity to recall that, although the Security Council, in its resolution 817 (1993), concluded that the Republic of Macedonia fulfilled all the criteria for membership in the United Nations laid down in Article 4 of the Charter, it imposed an unprecedented additional condition for membership, namely, that the State would be provisionally referred to as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" pending settlement of the difference that had arisen over the name. Even though Macedonian authorities were aware that such an additional condition ran contrary to the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice of May 1948 (endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 197 (III)), ever since the discussions started, we have been demonstrating strong commitment to engage constructively and in good faith in the talks with Greece to settle the difference over the name. May I recall at this point that we have made a number of concessions, all in the spirit of good-neighbourly relations. Furthermore, we openly stated that we found the last proposal made by your Personal Envoy, Matthew Nimetz, a good basis for a settlement. It is in this context that I wish to reiterate once again the readiness of the Republic of Macedonia to discuss further the so-called double formula solution. In the light of the fact that the issue is primarily of a bilateral nature, this implies that, together with Greece, we should work on finding an acceptable compromise formula for our bilateral relations. I would like to assure you that the Republic of Macedonia will continue to uphold the principles and values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and that advancement of cooperation and good-neighbourliness will remain among the top priority issues on our foreign policy agenda. I should be grateful if you would arrange for the present letter to be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 8, of the Security Council. (Signed) Goran Stevcevski Chargé d' affaires a.i. 