%%%INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY|MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS|INFORMATION MANAGEMENT|PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS|PROJECT MANAGEMENT|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|STAFFING|SUPPORT SERVICES|

Sixty-second session Agenda items 128 and 140 Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Information and communications technology Enterprise systems for the United Nations Secretariat worldwide Report of the Secretary-General* Summary The present report addresses the request of the General Assembly contained in resolution 60/283 concerning the proposals submitted by the Secretary-General in his report on investing in information and communications technology (A/60/846/Add.1). The report presents proposals and plans for the phased implementation and deployment in all offices of the United Nations Secretariat, including offices away from Headquarters, regional commissions, peacekeeping and political missions, and other field missions, of a new generation of systems to replace the Integrated Management Information System and other ancillary systems. The core of the new system will be based on a commercially available enterprise resource planning (ERP) software. The absence of an integrated information system for managing resources is seriously hampering the ability of the United Nations to deliver results effectively and efficiently. The goal of implementing an ERP system is to build an integrated global information system that fully supports the needs of the United Nations and enables the effective management of human, financial and physical resources, and that is based on streamlined processes and best practices. The report also proposes enterprise-wide systems for managing day-to-day services, through a customer relationship management system (CRM), and managing knowledge of the Organization, by way of an enterprise content management (ECM) system. The General Assembly is requested to endorse this proposal and approve the initial funding of this project. Estimated requirements for the period 2008-2009 for the implementation of systems for ERP, CRM and ECM amount to $19.5 million, $8.2 million, and $14.8 million before recosting, respectively, for a total amount of $42.5 million (before recosting). While the start-up costs for the implementation of ERP would be funded under the regular budget, the costs for CRM and ECM would be shared between the regular budget and the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations, based on the underlying projects proposed in the present document. As indicated in annex I to the present report, the total requirements of $42.5 million (before recosting) for the 2008-2009 period would be borne by the regular budget ($25.0 million before recosting) and by the peacekeeping operations support account budget ($17.5 million). The amount of $17.5 million related to peacekeeping operations support account includes an amount of $6.7 million for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2008 to be funded from the approved 2007/08 support account budget and reported to the General Assembly in the context of the support account performance report for the same period; and an amount of $10.8 million, which would need to be reflected in subsequent support account budget proposals. Paragraphs Page Introduction Information and communications technology in the United Nations Secretariat Yesterday's solutions: Integrated Management Information System Today's situation: an imperative for change Managing resources: enterprise resource planning system Goals and objectives of developing an enterprise resource planning system Expected benefits of an enterprise resource planning system Progress to date Next steps Project governance and organization Implementation approach Operation and resource requirements Complementary systems: what an enterprise resource planning system will not cover Managing services: customer relationship management Managing knowledge: enterprise content management system Conclusion Summary of resource requirements for the enterprise systems for the United Nations Secretariat worldwide and request for action to be taken by the General Assembly Summary of resource requirements Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Annexes Summary of resource requirements by object of expenditure Customer relationship management system Enterprise content management system 1. In his report of 6 March 2006 entitled "Investing in the United Nations: for a stronger Organization worldwide", the Secretary-General proposed "to replace the Integrated Management Information System (IMIS), Galaxy and other stand-alone information and communications technology (ICT) management support systems with a fully integrated global system supporting the full range of management functions" (A/60/692 and Corr.1, proposal 10). 2. In a subsequent report (A/60/846/Add.1), the Secretary-General provided preliminary findings and a high-level road map for maximizing the value of ICT to the United Nations Secretariat worldwide. As part of his in-depth fact-finding study, the Secretary-General explained the need, anticipated benefits and unique opportunities for replacing IMIS and other ancillary information systems. The Secretary-General further anticipated that he would complete the study and provide detailed costing and a timetable for consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-first session. Unforeseen delays in the recruitment of the Chief Information Technology Officer and the need to have the report reviewed by this senior-most ICT officer, however, have led to this delayed submission. 3. In its resolution 60/283, under part II on information and communications technology, the General Assembly decided "to replace the Integrated Management Information System with a next-generation enterprise resource planning system or other comparable system". The Assembly further requested the Secretary-General to submit at its resumed sixty-first session a comprehensive report, which should include, inter alia, (a) information on previous reform proposals, their impact on the existing proposals and references to previous relevant resolutions and decisions of the Assembly; (b) costs and administrative implications; (c) assessment of previous investments in ICT, lessons learned and expected time frames for the introduction of the system and arrangements for continuation of the current system during the transitional period. 4. The present report addresses the above request and proposes an approach for the implementation of enterprise systems and a number of measures for approval by the General Assembly. II. Information and communications technology in the United Nations Secretariat A. Yesterday's solutions: Integrated Management Information System 5. The development of IMIS, launched in 1990, was a milestone as it marked the emergence of information technology as a discipline touching all areas of administration and management in the Organization. IMIS was developed as a functionally integrated system to support key processes such as human resources management, payroll, finance and accounting, requisitioning and funds control, budget execution and travel management. IMIS was introduced in conjunction with desktop, networked computing and office automation tools, such as electronic mail, to all offices where IMIS was being used. 6. In 2002, the Secretary-General submitted his information and communications technology strategy for the Secretariat (see A/57/620). The 2002 ICT strategy focused on strengthening the global ICT infrastructure so that it could take full advantage of advances in telecommunications and Internet technologies. The strategy was successful in establishing worldwide standards and adding significant coherence in the manner ICT investments were being managed and aligned. The strategy also stated a clear direction in relation to IMIS, which was to remain as the core administrative system for a period between five and seven years. 7. Both the launching of IMIS and the 2002 strategy were subsequently affected and conditioned by major developments in the technology market, and an accelerated shift of focus in the United Nations to field activities. In short, IMIS was designed and developed at a time when the context began to change rapidly and profoundly. As a consequence, a few years after its implementation, the following became evident: (a) IMIS could not take full advantage of significant advances in global communications; (b) Although functionally integrated, IMIS was deployed and operated locally at each duty station. Integrating information for online reporting and global management purposes became difficult; (c) Although partially implemented in peacekeeping operations, IMIS was not adapted to support the specific needs of the peacekeeping environment, such as supply chain and logistics management. 8. The functional gaps of IMIS were addressed by relatively modest investments in tactical systems, some of which were integrated into IMIS through interfaces while others remained as stand-alone systems. 9. Both the implementation of IMIS and the 2002 ICT strategy rendered significant benefits. However, the Organization today faces challenges that demand profound transformation beyond the capabilities of IMIS and its ancillary systems currently being used. B. Today's situation: an imperative for change 10. After 13 years of operations, IMIS has reached the end of its useful life. Cost of maintenance and ongoing support no longer match the benefits staff and managers expect from the information system upon which their day-to-day operations and decisions depend. Moreover, the commitment to adopt the International Public Sector Accounting Standards will require the Organization to introduce significant changes to accounting processes in order to achieve compliance. 11. The Organization also needs to improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of the services it provides to a vast array of "customers". The systems which are currently in place to support customer-service areas are obsolete, not integrated, duplicative, and inefficient. 12. The lack of integrated and complete data on resources, both at Headquarters and in the field, is a serious impediment to effective management, planning and decision-making. This deficiency is becoming increasingly acute as the complexity of the Organization's activities continues to grow. 13. Furthermore, as a knowledge-intensive organization, the Secretariat spends significant resources in the production, management, and distribution of rapidly increasing amounts of documents and other information residing in a variety of media. The processes and systems currently utilized in managing this knowledge capital are ineffective, inefficient and vulnerable. 14. But perhaps the most compelling imperative for a new ICT system is the changing nature of the Organization itself. The Secretariat is very different today than it was just a decade ago. United Nations Headquarters in New York is one of many duty stations around the world, rather than the centre of gravity it once was. Peacekeeping operations have proliferated at an unprecedented pace and have grown in both size and complexity, often in regions with poor basic infrastructure. To ensure a minimum of reliable automation and telecommunication capacity, a series of new information systems have had to be developed rapidly, but it has proven difficult to integrate these systems, as well as other ancillary information systems operating in different duty stations, with IMIS -- the United Nations system of record. This has led to a patchwork of fragmented, support-intensive, home-grown systems that are not sustainable and efficient for the long term. 15. In recognition of the increasingly global arena of work and the many new challenges of the twenty-first century, Member States have approved several reform initiatives to better equip the Organization in meeting these challenges. In consonance with those reform initiatives, the Secretary-General is fully committed to fundamentally modernize the way the Organization carries out its day-to-day work, by streamlining and simplifying processes. Information technology is a critical tool for achieving this kind of transformation, by introducing global enterprise systems that are more efficient, nimble and rational. 16. Recognizing the strategic importance of ICT, the General Assembly approved the establishment of the position of Chief Information Technology Officer at the level of Assistant Secretary-General in the Office of the Secretary-General (see resolution 60/283). 17. In addition to establishing a global management framework for ICT, a new generation of business systems is being introduced that will form key pillars in implementing management reform and modernizing the Organization. These include an enterprise resource planning system (ERP), for managing the financial, human and physical resources; a customer relationship management (CRM) system, for better handling the vast array of day-to-day services; and the enterprise content management system (ECM), for managing the exploding amount of documents and other information in a variety of media, such as website, e-mail, picture and video. III. Managing resources: enterprise resource planning system A. Goals and objectives of developing an enterprise resource planning system 18. The replacement of IMIS presents an opportunity to fully and globally integrate all resource management functions across the Organization through the implementation of an ERP system. An ERP system provides an integrated suite of information technology applications that support activities such as finance and budget management, human resources management, supply chain management, central support services, and other corporate core functions. But most importantly, the main value of an ERP system is the opportunity to streamline and improve the operations of an entire organization through process re-engineering, sharing of common data, and implementation of best practices and standards. 19. The goal of the ERP project is to build an integrated, global information system for the Secretariat that enables the effective management of human, financial and physical resources, and that is based on streamlined processes and best practices. 20. The main objectives of the ERP project can be summarized as follows: (a) To have a global system that captures accurate and timely core resource data from the global Secretariat at all duty stations, including peace operations and other field missions; (b) To support decision-making by linking programmes and operations with the resources allocated and showing what has been utilized; (c) To reduce the average time required for administrative processes, by streamlining and integrating business processes, make them simpler and use greater automation, reflecting best practices; (d) To increase organizational efficiency by reducing the amount of staff time spent on manual processes, and redirecting resources to high priority and value-added work; (e) To support the implementation of International Public Sector Accounting Standards by the Secretariat; (f) To enable easy access to reports by Member States, United Nations staff, and the public, as appropriate; (g) To support management reform by enhancing accountability, transparency, and internal controls for all transactions relating to resources. 21. The main functionalities sought from the new ERP system are expected to encompass functions such as programme planning, budgeting, contributions and performance; human resources management and administration; payroll, including management of benefits and contribution to pension, medical and insurance schemes; supply chain management, including procurement; assets and facilities management; general accounting, travel and other administrative flows; reporting to management and stakeholders, and more. 22. The new ERP system will need to have the capability to support functions specific to peacekeeping operations in the area of logistics, transportation, fuel and rations systems and other requirements which are not common in other organizations of the United Nations system. B. Expected benefits of an enterprise resource planning system 23. The new ERP system would be at the core of the Organization's reform of financial, administrative and management operations. It has the potential to fundamentally transform the way business is conducted and to significantly improve the Organization's overall effectiveness and efficiency. 24. Typical key benefits of an ERP system include effective and efficient business processes; access to accurate, timely, and authoritative data; informed decision-making; faster responses to issues and problems; consolidation and/or elimination of current systems; compliance with best practices and standards; opportunity for resource redeployment and skills development; and improved transparency and accountability. Figure I below shows how disparate systems could become an integrated resource management system for the entire organization after the ERP system has been implemented. Figure I Systems integration 25. Following are some examples of specific improvements the new ERP system is expected to bring to the Organization: (a) In line with the adoption of results-based budgeting, for every project and programme it would be possible to report on the status of activities and outputs, the resources engaged and expended, and the latest situation of contributions and available balances against budgets; (b) Real-time, enterprise-wide consolidated financial and other quantitative information would help expedite the preparation of the proposed budgets by reducing the time it currently takes to review budget proposals by the Secretariat and would facilitate the decision-making process by the legislative bodies. The ERP system will integrate, streamline and further automate a large number of manual and paper-based administrative processes; (c) The Office of Human Resources Management will be able to provide managers with up-to-date integrated reporting and analysis on human resources information; (d) It would be possible to build and maintain an accurate and current inventory of staff skills covering the entire Organization; (e) For managers at Headquarters and in the field, it would be possible to track every step of the procurement, shipment, receipt and delivery of goods to their final destination; (f) With a global system it would be possible to share common vendor databases and make effective decisions of where and when to best buy. That in turn could lead to significant cost savings; (g) At the operational level, the use of a common system and of an electronic signature would improve significantly the day-to-day administration of staff and facilities. Not only would it be possible to track every transaction from any office of the Organization, but the resulting action would be accelerated and considerable time would be saved. C. Progress to date 26. Current processes and administrative procedures still mirror old working methods that no longer add value to a modern and dynamic international environment. There is therefore considerable work that will need to be accomplished to simplify administrative processes, establish common standards and raise staff skills, in order for the new system to bring the expected results. 27. The first task is to establish a complete list of the main functionalities the Organization seeks from the new ERP system: what it wants to preserve from current systems, what no longer works, the processes and functions that would benefit from re-engineering and what needs to be introduced to enable better management and utilization of resources. With this compilation on hand, the best software solutions can be objectively evaluated and sustainable solutions developed. The process of establishing these main functionalities is currently under way and is expected to be completed by the end of 2007. 28. An initial core project team has been assembled, and has been working with experts in all the main functional areas in the Department of Management, the Department of Field Support, other Headquarters departments, and offices away from Headquarters to compile and document existing processes. This inventory of processes, known as Business Process Review, constitutes the "As Is" model which will be the subject of a thorough analysis aimed at the streamlining of paper-based and manual or redundant processes. 29. An ERP Steering Committee has been formed, chaired by the Under-Secretary-General for Management. It has met regularly throughout the year and provided management guidance on the project. 30. In late August, the Chief Information Technology Officer officially took up his duties. He has engaged in extensive consultations with stakeholders, and has formed a small team composed of representatives of different Secretariat offices to contribute to the high-level planning process of the ERP project. D. Next Steps 31. Once current processes have been mapped and inventoried, the next step is to look at ways of re-engineering them to attain the "To Be" model and fully leverage the capabilities of the ERP software. This task is already under way in some areas, and will be accomplished with the assistance of a consulting firm with proven expertise in the implementation of ERP systems in large organizations. 32. Working alongside the team of specialized consultants, practitioners in all relevant functional areas of the Secretariat will define the major system requirements and assess the practical solutions offered by an ERP system, including reviewing the systems already operating in funds, programmes or specialized agencies of the United Nations system. This will form valuable inputs in designing the functional and process models that will best meet the needs of the Secretariat. The outcome of the functional review will enable the Organization to initiate the procurement and evaluation process with sufficient information to make the best possible selection. 33. The procurement exercise will consist of two main elements: (a) the acquisition of ERP software and (b) the acquisition of services of a system integrator, with the latter representing the bulk of the project cost. In order to proceed as expeditiously as possible, the Secretariat is exploring a procurement strategy where these two elements can be done in parallel, rather than sequentially, within the parameters of the procurement rules. Such a fast-track approach is feasible with the help of external expertise, and with dedicated resources of legal, procurement and ICT staff. 34. During the past year, a small core team has been engaged in the planning of the ERP project. It is now essential to assemble a full-time, dedicated project team, including a robust project management office and expert teams for each main functional area. The team must be highly professional and diverse, including staff from peace operations and offices away from Headquarters. E. Project governance and organization 35. On a project of this magnitude, strong governance is essential: to steer the project, monitor progress against plans, resolve conflicts without delay, decide on work priorities, help manage changes and communicate progress to all stakeholders. The primary purpose of the ERP system is to enable the Secretariat to effectively and efficiently carry out the work that Member States expect. The ERP project is a "business" project, and therefore needs to be led by senior management. The main policy decision-making body is the ERP Steering Committee, chaired by the Under-Secretary-General for Management and consisting of the Chief Information Technology Officer; the Assistant Secretary-General of the Department of Field Support; the Assistant Secretaries-General for Human Resources Management, for Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts, Controller, and for Central Support Services, of the Department of Management; and the Deputy Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna. 36. The detailed planning and execution of the project will be done by the ERP project team, coordinated and led by a programme management office headed by a Project Director, reporting to the Chief Information Technology Officer, who is ultimately accountable for the execution of the project in collaboration with the Assistant Secretaries-General responsible for the four main functional areas: human resources, finance and budget, supply chain, and central support services. The project team includes experts on change management, process management, finance and administration, and technology management, as well as four sub-teams, one for each of the functional areas. 37. To ensure an institutional link with user departments in the course of planning and implementation, advisory groups will be established. This will serve as a mechanism for two-way communications and help embed the ERP project as an organization-wide endeavour that will require engagement by managers and staff at large, but will ultimately yield benefits for the United Nations Secretariat worldwide. 38. Figure II below illustrates the composition, structure and reporting lines of the proposed governance framework: Figure II Proposed governance framework Abbreviations: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; BPR, business process re-engineering; CITO, Chief Information Technology Officer; DFS, Department of Field Support; DM, Department of Management; HR, Human Resources; OAH, Offices away from Headquarters; OCSS, Offices of Central Support Services; OHRM, Office of Human Resources Management; OPPBA, Office of Programme Planning, Budgets and Accounts; SME, subject matter expert; USG, Under-Secretary-General. F. Implementation approach 39. The ERP system will be implemented in a phased manner, with those functionalities making up the core infrastructure or requiring urgent attention completed in the early part of the project. In reviewing possible implementation scenarios, certain key priorities need to be considered, among them human resources reform and supply-chain management for peacekeeping operations. The modernization of recruitment processes is well under way (see the report of the Secretary-General on investing in people (A/61/255 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1)), and it is expected that the home-grown Galaxy software will be replaced in 2008 by a web-based talent management system, which will integrate with the chosen ERP software. 40. Another imperative is the shift to the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. This may require the accounting module of the ERP system -- including payables, receivables and asset management -- to be implemented on a priority basis. 41. The planning and implementation of the ERP project will be guided by the following principles: (a) The ERP software selected must be capable of providing satisfactory performance even under the demanding conditions in peacekeeping environments; (b) The aim should be to operate a single central system ("single-instance data") to ensure global transactions and reporting capabilities and alignment of information across different offices; (c) Customization of the ERP software should be kept to a minimum, to avoid unnecessary costs. Instead of customizing, existing administrative processes should be changed in line with the chosen software; (d) Common business practices should be used to increase uniformity and compatibility within the global Secretariat; (e) Self-service options should be emphasized to a greater extent, making it possible for staff to access, verify and update resource data; (f) The ERP system should be designed and implemented in a manner to ensure accuracy, integrity, consistency and timeliness of data, and avoid duplicative data entry; (g) The system should be developed in a way to ensure that the needs of offices away from Headquarters, peace operations and other missions are fully taken into account; (h) There should be regular and open communication with Member States, managers and staff throughout the project period. 42. An important aspect of preparing for the successful implementation of an ERP is also to ensure that there is the proper technical and human support to maintain IMIS as the system of record until such time as the various portions of the new system are operational. In this connection, several data-exchange interfaces between IMIS and the new system will be built to enable a phased implementation approach. Such interfaces will be necessary until IMIS and its ancillary systems are phased out. G. Operation and resource requirements 43. All enterprise systems, including the ERP system, will operate from two data-centres situated in the United Nations Logistics Bases at Brindisi, Italy, and at a proposed secondary site in Valencia, Spain. Those sites, which would be at the core of the disaster recovery/business continuity plan for the Secretariat, would host the two hubs for telecommunications and computer operations for all offices of the Secretariat. Detailed information on the disaster recovery/business continuity plan is included under a separate report entitled "Information and communications technology security, disaster recovery and business continuity for the United Nations" (A/62/477). 44. Resources requested under the above-mentioned report will cover telecommunications, computer and data-storage equipment and human resources earmarked for the operation of the disaster recovery/business continuity facilities. Until the new ERP system is fully implemented, these facilities will provide business continuity capabilities for critical systems such as IMIS, currently operating in all offices and peacekeeping missions. Upon full implementation of the ERP system, the same facilities will serve as the operational platform for the new system. 45. The core elements of the ERP system are expected to be implemented by the end of 2010. The Secretary-General will submit to the General Assembly yearly progress reports during the sixty-third, sixty-fourth and sixty-fifth sessions. 46. The full deployment of an ERP system in an organization of the size and complexity of the global United Nations Secretariat will require significant resources over the course of its implementation, which is expected to take three to five years. Once implemented, there will be recurring expenditures relating to the upgrade, maintenance, and operation of the system. It is important to note, however, that the adoption of a commercial solution in addition to the system's centralized operation will substantially reduce recurrent costs provided that customization is kept to a minimum. 47. It is difficult at this early stage to estimate the total cost of the ERP project. Once a comprehensive and detailed inventory of functional and technical requirements has been completed and implementation priorities have been established, one can project the cost with an acceptable level of confidence and accuracy. 48. Nevertheless, on the basis of current market pricing of software and information on projects of comparable magnitude in other large organizations, an indicative estimate for the total cost of the project is between $150 million and $250 million. This would represent costs for software, system integration, and the related staff for implementation. 49. Once the current phase of determining the full scope and technical requirements of the project is completed and the results of the tender processes are known, the Secretary-General will submit a firmer estimate of the overall costs of the project, and a request for additional funds required for the biennium 2008-2009. It is expected that the Secretariat will be in a position to provide this information at the resumed sixty-second session of the General Assembly. 50. At this stage, resources are proposed for the ERP project team and the related immediate operating requirements. These start-up requirements amount to $19.5 million (before recosting) as detailed in table 1 below: Table 1 Start-up requirements, ERP project (Thousands of United States dollars) Object of expenditure 2008-2009 estimate before recosting Recosting estimate Posts Other staff costs Consultants and experts Travel of staff Contractual services General operating expenses Supplies and materials Furniture and equipment Staff assessment Total 51. The above resources are proposed to be funded under the regular budget for the biennium 2008-2009 under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management $13,939,400 (before recosting), section 28D, Office of Central Support Services $3,803,100 (before recosting) and section 35, Staff assessment $1,732,000 (before recosting) to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment. This includes post costs to fund the project team ($10,712,800 before recosting) for the biennium 2008-2009 corresponding to 44 temporary posts for ERP project staff, made up of 37 positions in the Professional category and seven at the General Service (other level) as well as non-post resources amounting to $7,029,700 (before recosting) for start-up costs, including office space, consulting services, travel and training requirements. 52. The ERP project team would be responsible for identification of requirements, process re-engineering, software configuration and implementation of the various releases. In detail the project team would carry out the following functions: (a) Identification of requirements suitable for software selection; (b) ERP software evaluation and selection; (c) Business process standardization, streamlining and re-engineering and adoption of best practices; (d) Change management and communications; (e) Software configuration and software customization, as a last resort; (f) Development of temporary and permanent interfaces; (g) Evaluation and coordination of ICT infrastructure requirements to enable efficient data interchange; (h) Data cleansing and conversion and reference table preparation; (i) Report specification, design and development; (j) User training in all locations; (k) Procurement and acquisition support for system integration and software; (l) Project planning, management and administrative support, including management of consultancy contracts. 53. The Project Director, at the D-2 level, would be responsible for the overall management of the project, including change management, process management, technology architecture and project administration, and for supervising the work carried out by the four functional teams in the areas of human resources, supply chain, finance and budget, and central support services. Each of these areas is detailed in figure III below: Figure III Organizational structure and proposed post distribution 54. The temporary posts proposed for change management (1 P-5, 1 P-3, 1 GS (OL)) would focus on assessing the impact of the ERP system on staff and management, designing and implementing a strategy for support activities in areas such as communication, organizational development, and training to promote a smooth transition. A communications programme would be aimed at making all staff aware of the ERP, its goals and objectives, impact on work, and keeping the user community at large up-to-date, including by developing a website. 55. The temporary posts proposed for process management (1 D-1, 1 P-5) would assess the overall effect on process change and guide and manage the phase-in strategy of the ERP system. The function would involve coordinating the cross-functional business process re-engineering and system integration, and ensuring adequate quality controls in project delivery, integration and workflows. 56. The temporary posts proposed for technology management (1 D-1, 1 P-5) would deal with activities encompassing the definition of the enterprise-wide ICT architecture, setting technical standards, projecting enterprise-wide ERP needs, evaluating the suitability of infrastructure operations and identifying gaps between existing infrastructure and ERP requirements. 57. The temporary posts proposed for finance and administration (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 GS (OL)) would ensure that resources are timely and efficiently utilized, monitored and reported accordingly. The functions to be carried out include certifying funds, monitoring budget performance, preparing budget estimates and performance reports, and ensuring that contractual arrangements are fulfilled. 58. A total of 32 temporary posts are proposed to staff the four functional teams representing human resources, supply chain, finance and central support services. Each team, accountable to the Project Director, would be headed by a Team Leader (D-1), supported by two senior analysts (P-5), three ERP/functional experts (P-4), one ICT officer (P-3) and one ICT assistant (General Service (Other level)). The teams are responsible for carrying out the functions below in respect to their specific domain: (a) Identification and validation of business requirements; (b) Business process re-engineering within the functional area and adoption of best practices; (c) Engagement of cross-functional activities under the coordination of the process management function; (d) Enabling functional software configuration; (e) Utilization and coordination of subject matter experts whenever the releases necessitate; (f) Technical support for development of interfaces, reports, and customizations; (g) Implementation support: conversion, training, procedures, user support. 59. Non-post requirements amounting to $7,029,700 before recosting are proposed for the biennium 2008-2009 and comprise operational provisions for the project team covering contractual services, consultants, travel, general operating expenses, supplies and furniture and equipment. General temporary assistance provisions are also included for acquisition activities and procurement related issues, research and developing appropriate contracting models for the ERP software, integration services and other associated contractual arrangements. 60. While these initial start-up costs are proposed to be funded from the regular budget, it is expected that future funding for implementation of the project will follow a proposed cost-sharing formula which would reflect the usage distribution throughout the Organization. Taking into account the magnitude of the peacekeeping component within the overall deployment, 80 per cent of the costs would be borne by the peacekeeping support account and 20 per cent by the regular budget. Hardware and infrastructure costs are not included in the present report as they are covered in the aforementioned report of the Secretary-General on disaster recovery and business continuity (A/62/477). IV. Complementary systems: what an enterprise resource planning system will not cover 61. The ERP system will provide the Organization with the required tools to effectively plan, allocate, monitor and report the flow of resources globally. It will also add efficiency through the streamlining, standardization and automation of administrative processes. 62. However, an ERP system, in and of itself, will not address all inefficiencies. Nor will it ensure the quality of the "products" developed and delivered by the United Nations Secretariat. Of particular relevance to the Secretariat are two areas which absorb significant resources: (a) the delivery of services and (b) the creation, preservation, dissemination, archival and disposal of documents and other information in a variety of media. A. Managing services: customer relationship management 63. While the ERP system will streamline and automate the core financial, administrative and management operations, the CRM system will deal with the specific processes connected with providing day-to-day services for end-users, which are not normally dealt with by an ERP system. 64. The primary objective of a CRM system is to improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of services provided to end-users, which includes a wide range of customers and constituents. 65. While ERP focuses on the flow of resources throughout the Organization at the macro level, CRM addresses the detailed processes involved in the provision of specific services for specific end-users. The following are examples of how these two systems relate with each other: (a) While the acquisition of computers or furniture will be dealt with in an ERP system, the assignment of such assets to specific individuals will be handled by the CRM system; (b) While the overall inventory and the costs of maintaining equipment in working condition will be managed by the ERP system, the detailed process of maintaining a specific item, such as identifying the need for a repair, executing the repair, and tracking the assignment of the item to an individual technician, will be handled by the CRM system; (c) While human resources will be managed at a higher level by the ERP system, the workforce management for service-related activities will be managed at a micro level within the CRM system. 66. The CRM system will be very important in large offices, where the high number of users and the variety and complexity of services provided demand efficient methods to optimize the use of available resources. In the field, however, the provision of services to civilian and military personnel acquire a critical dimension, as the field mission is likely to be the sole provider of basic and often vital day-to-day services. 67. Resources required for the implementation of CRM relate to three specific priority areas. These cover facilities and Member States services management, peacekeeping troop contribution management, and peacekeeping telecommunications billing. Given the nature of these three areas, it is proposed that the costs related to facilities and Member States services management would be borne by the regular budget, while the costs related to the other two areas would be borne by the peacekeeping support account. The costs associated with these three areas are summarized in table 2 below. Further information on the implementation of the CRM system in these areas is detailed in annex II to the present report. Table 2 Resource requirements for CRM implementation, by priority area Regular budgeta Facilities and Member States services management Subtotal Peacekeeping operations support account Peacekeeping troop contributions management Peacekeeping telecommunications billing a Before recosting. 68. The total resource requirements for the implementation of the CRM amounting to $8,159,100 (before recosting) are detailed in table 3 below: Total resource requirements for CRM implementation Regular Budget Peacekeeping support account 2008-2009 estimate 1 January 2008 to 30 June 2008 1 July 2008 to 31 December 2009 a Total peacekeeping support account Grand total a Amount relates to the peacekeeping period 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 and first six months of the subsequent period. 69. From the total amount of $8,159,100 (before recosting) in estimated requirements, it is proposed that the General Assembly appropriate an amount of $1,449,000 (before recosting) to be funded under the regular budget for the biennium 2008-2009 under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, and an amount of $2,523,400 to be funded from within the approved peacekeeping operations support account budget for the period ending 30 June 2008. An additional amount of $4,186,700 would need to be funded under subsequent peacekeeping support account budget proposals. B. Managing knowledge: enterprise content management system 70. The ECM system can be seen as the counterpart of ERP for the substantive areas of the Organization. While ERP deals with resources (people and financial assets), ECM addresses information assets of a substantive nature. 71. In common with most organizations, the Secretariat has much more "unstructured" information than "structured" information. Figure IV provides a summary of what typically constitutes unstructured information and its importance and volume within an organization such as the Secretariat: Summary of structured and unstructured content 72. In a knowledge-intensive organization where information is a key enterprise asset and enabler, ECM is recognized as a core competency and capability. Loss of information or inability to access it can be crippling for most organizations. An ECM system addresses these fundamental requirements in many ways: (a) The ECM system brings structure to unstructured content, by requiring the entry of certain data-attributes called "metadata" for every document or other form of content that is created and stored; (b) By establishing clear ownership of content and audit trails of access and reuse of content, the ECM system can provide unmatched security for information assets and enable the Secretariat to reliably provide access to information, internally and externally, to increase the transparency of its operations. Member States, Permanent Missions, partners, telecommuters, and so on, can be provided secure access to relevant information from any location; (c) The ECM system will provide an efficient records management system that meets mandated standards for archiving and disposing enterprise content; (d) Optimizing the management of content through version control and reuse of existing content, will make the content volume more manageable and help the Secretariat contain the storage growth rate which is outstripping industry averages, resulting in high costs for storage infrastructure and recurring costs for storage and backup; (e) The ECM system also facilitates knowledge-sharing within the Secretariat and with other international organizations, non-governmental organizations and the public at large through its capabilities for the creation and dissemination of content on internal and external websites; (f) By providing a simple, browser-based capacity to create content, it empowers staff with minimal ICT skills to create and manage dynamic content of both internal and external websites; (g) By standardizing web content authoring, the ECM system can easily enforce Secretariat standards for visual content, such as user interfaces, accessibility requirements, and facilitate the branding of internal and external websites; (h) The ECM system can rigorously enforce security and control over the release of information to websites, especially external websites. For example, the release of content simultaneously in all the official languages could be automatically enforced; (i) The ECM system will enable website administrators to manage multiple global sites (United Nations Headquarters, offices away from Headquarters, etc.). 73. The examples listed above clearly indicate the benefits of an ECM solution as an effective knowledge-sharing facility. In the field, an ECM system constitutes an indispensable complement to the ERP. Peacekeeping and political missions conduct business with local entities largely based on paper transactions. The ability to digitize, classify, store and electronically link these documents to the ERP ensures the integrity of financial transactions. In this connection, several reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services have highlighted the poor mechanisms which exist today to ensure proper asset and financial controls in the field. 74. Resources required for the implementation of the ECM relate to priority areas covering the Official Documents System (ODS), the United Nations Internet site, collaboration capabilities, the peacekeeping reporting process automation and guidance content repository as well as overall ECM governance. Given the nature of these areas, it is proposed that the costs related to ODS and the United Nations Internet site would be borne by the regular budget, while the costs related to the peacekeeping reporting process automation and guidance content repository would be borne by the peacekeeping support account. The costs related to the other areas (ECM governance and collaboration capabilities) would be equally shared between the regular budget and peacekeeping support account. The costs associated with the above-mentioned areas are summarized in table 4 below. Further information on the implementation of the ECM system in these areas is detailed in annex III to the present report. Table 4 Resource requirements for ECM implementation, by priority area ECM Governance United Nations Internet site ODS Collaboration capabilities Peacekeeping Reporting Process Automation Peacekeeping Guidance Content Repository 75. Total resource requirements for the implementation of the ECM would amount to $14,820,500 (before recosting) and are detailed in table 5 below: Table 5 Total resource requirements for ECM implementation 1 January 2008 to 30 June 2008 Grand total 76. From the total amount of $14,820,500 in estimated requirements, it is proposed that the General Assembly appropriate an amount of $4,032,000 (before recosting) to be funded under the regular budget for the biennium 2008-2009 under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, and an amount of $4,219,300 to be funded from within the approved peacekeeping operations support account budget for the period ending 30 June 2008. An additional amount of $6,569,200 would need to be funded under subsequent peacekeeping support account budget proposals. V. Conclusion 77. The present report sets forth the Secretary-General's vision of the role that ICT can play in transforming the way the Secretariat works. In accordance with that vision, there is a need to simplify and streamline rules, policies, and processes so that the Secretariat is not totally mired in process, but becomes proactive, responsive and results-oriented. The enterprise systems proposed -- the ERP system, CRM system, and the ECM system -- in the present report will make that vision achievable, and have the potential of serving as the engine for supporting management reform and modernizing the Organization. 78. It is not only a matter of simplifying processes, however. Current systems are at the breaking point, and woefully inadequate for carrying out the increasingly complex, far-reaching operations of the Organization. It is urgent that the Secretariat proceed with building core modern information management systems that can sustain the vastly increased operations the United Nations is undertaking across the globe. 79. The resources required are considerable. As explained earlier in the report, it is not possible at this point to present detailed cost figures for the ERP system; these will be presented to Member States at regular updates at different points in the project. What is clear is the overwhelming need to embark on this project without delay, in order to better equip the Secretariat to successfully meet the increasing demands and commitments. It is an investment for the future. VI. Summary of resource requirements for the enterprise systems for the United Nations Secretariat worldwide and request for action to be taken by the General Assembly A. Summary of resource requirements 80. The following table summarizes the resource requirements for the ERP, CRM and ECM projects. The total resources required under the regular budget for the biennium 2008-2009 amounts to $24,955,500 (before recosting). Resources to be funded from the peacekeeping operations support account covering the period from 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2009 total $17,498,600. Of this amount, $6,742,700 would be funded from within the approved support account budget for the 12-month period ending 30 June 2008 and reported to the General Assembly in the context of the support account performance report for the same period. (In this connection, it is noted that in the event that total expenditure under the support account exceeds the total budget level approved by the General Assembly for the support account for the 12-month period ending 30 June 2008, funding authorization will be sought from the General Assembly to cover such shortfall). The balance of $10,755,900 would need to be funded under subsequent peacekeeping support account budget proposals. A summary of resource requirements by object of expenditure is provided in annex I. Table 6 Summary of resource requirements, by project Regular budget 1 January 2008 to 30 June 2008 1 July 2008 to 31 December 2009a Enterprise resource planning system Customer relationship management Enterprise content management B. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 81. The General Assembly is requested: (a) To approve the proposals and approach described in the present report for the replacement of the IMIS system and related ancillary systems in all offices of the United Nations Secretariat, including offices away from Headquarters, regional commissions, peacekeeping and political missions, and other field missions; (b) To authorize the Secretary-General to establish a multi-year special account to record income and expenditures for this project. 82. The General Assembly is requested to approve resource requirements for the biennium 2008-2009 of $24,955,500 (before recosting) as follows: (a) An amount of $19,474,500 (before recosting) is required for the implementation of the ERP system consisting of $13,939,400 (before recosting) under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, $3,803,100 (before recosting) under section 28D, Office of Central Support Services and $1,732,000 (before recosting) under section 35, Staff assessment to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment; (b) An amount of $1,449,000 (before recosting) for the implementation of the CRM system under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management; (c) An amount of $4,032,000 (before recosting) is required for the implementation of the ECM system under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management. 83. Consequently, an additional provision of $24,955,500 before recosting would be required over and above the resources of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009. In accordance with the terms of General Assembly resolution 41/213, that provision would represent a charge against the contingency fund and, as such, would be incorporated in the initial appropriations at the time of the adoption of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009 in December 2007. At the same time, it is noted that the initial requirements, approved in resolution 60/283, for the implementation of an enterprise resource planning system, were appropriated for the 2006-2007 biennium without recourse to the contingency fund. While it may be premature at this stage to propose similar treatment to the requirements for the biennium 2008-2009, consideration could be given, in the context of the consolidated statement of charges to the contingency fund, to dealing with these requirements in a similar manner. 84. The General Assembly is requested to approve a total amount of $6,742,700 to be financed from the approved budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, comprising an amount of $2,523,400 for the implementation of the CRM system and an amount of $4,219,300 for the implementation of the ECM system. (United States dollars) 1 July 2008 to 31 December 2009 Enterprise resource planning 1. The procurement of leading CRM software has been completed recently. Using this software, ICT Service Management and Facilities Service Management in United Nations Headquarters, are expected to be implemented within 12 months, to urgently replace current aging systems. 2. All the central ICT service providers within the Secretariat, ITSD in the Department of Management, the Communications and Information Technology Service of the Department of Field Support and the seven offices away from Headquarters, have agreed to adopt standardized business processes using the ICT Infrastructure Library (ITIL), an industry best practice, as the basis for managing their ICT services and to implement the procured CRM software with little or no customization. Effectively, this means that the software will be ready for implementation in all duty stations and peacekeeping missions, after the initial implementation in New York using a centralized model, whenever technically feasible. 3. Although no additional software development will be needed for the implementation of ICT Service Management in other duty stations, each implementation involves considerable effort in migrating current data to the new software, changing the current business processes and workflows, retraining staff and managing the project. The Secretariat will adopt a cautious and phased approach of replacing existing ICT Service Management systems over a period of two years, after completing the implementation in New York. Resource requests for these implementations will be presented in the next progress report at the resumed sixty-second session of the General Assembly. 4. The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) has already undertaken a detailed business process review for all its facilities related operations. The use of the central CRM system will provide an opportunity to implement the revised business processes and, depending on the lessons learned in the implementation in New York and ESCAP, facilities management services will be sought to be standardized in all duty stations. Customer relationship management in peacekeeping operations 5. Currently approximately 40 per cent of the peacekeeping budget is allocated to establishing military and police capacity in support of mission mandates. Military capacity is achieved through the provision of equipment, personnel and capacity by troop-contributing countries, and requires a verification of that capacity and appropriate reimbursement for it. Similarly the Member States provide civilian police components of peacekeeping operations either as individual civilian police personnel or formed police units. The management of the military and police capacity in field missions is a significant undertaking in terms of scale and complexity and integrates the disciplines of finance, logistics as well as strategic and tactical military and police operations. The service management components of these operations will be automated using CRM technology. The project will focus on the management of the lifecycle of activities required to manage and sustain military and police capacity in field missions. 6. At present, the telephone billing review, approval and cost recovery process is highly manual and time-consuming. Analysis of call data is difficult and tracking of the process is cumbersome. In several field missions and in some offices away from Headquarters, this process has been automated using a variety of automation tools, but a single global system does not exist. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations intends to implement an end-to-end standard automated telephone billing process supported by CRM technology that will provide increased accuracy, greater accountability and transparency of the process. The scope of the project is expected to include the automated calculations of calls and costs, clearly defined routing and approvals, and interfaces with telephone switches and financial systems for electronic payment and recovery resulting in savings in time and efficiency. 7. The proposed system will be initially implemented for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support at United Nations Headquarters, followed by an extension to one or two field missions after performance testing. The Communications and Information Technology Service will work closely with the Information Technology Services Division during the requirements-gathering process to ensure that the solution developed can introduce a standardized process across the Secretariat in all duty stations. 8. Another key constituency for the CRM system will be the Permanent Missions. Leveraging the CRM system being implemented for other services, United Nations Headquarters and ESCAP will jointly explore the possibility of building a Member States relationship management capacity from both the Headquarters and field perspectives. The project's initial focus will be on the analysis of the interaction of Member States with the Secretariat and the gathering of requirements, to develop a "To Be" set of processes, in consultation with the Member States, through the Working Group on Informatics, which has been championing such efforts. 1. The ECM system will be a foundation for consolidating several discrete systems that manage the creation, storage and distribution of content. The migration of current systems to an ECM "platform" will be undertaken over several years, prioritizing them on criticality for business continuity, potential for cost-savings or efficiency gains, and compliance requirements. On this basis, a few important projects have been identified for the initial roll out of ECM. 2. The Official Documents System (ODS) requires upgrading technologically as soon as possible. Migration to an ECM platform will make it more robust in its performance and availability 24 by 7, improve controls over the simultaneous publication of documents in all official languages, and eliminate several cumbersome processes in document handling from multiple duty stations. Further, ODS requires upgrading functionally to allow authoring departments and offices, regardless of geographic location, to collaborate on creation and approval of documents, with detailed audit trails of the review, approvals and translations. 3. Initially, a functionally and technically re-engineered ODS will be prototyped in a lab environment, using a commercial ECM solution. This will enable the Secretariat to standardize the business processes for official documents and embark on an automation of these processes in a later phase. 4. The United Nations Internet site, www.un.org, has to be expeditiously migrated to the ECM platform as it has become difficult to manage both functionally and technically, owing to the myriad tools and technologies that sustain its current state. The site has evolved over nearly a decade with mainly incremental enhancements; a technological upgrade is necessary for the site to meet the increasing expectations about both its content and its availability. 5. A standard content management system across authoring departments and offices will enable the Department of Public Information to enforce global policies for content creation, publishing and security, standards for presentation and compliance with accessibility requirements, in line with best practices for distributed content management. Such a system will improve the controls, for example, over the release of content to the live environment in all official languages simultaneously, or the retirement of obsolete content. 6. The first phase of the migration of the United Nations Internet website will include the creation of the technical infrastructure and the implementation of web content management in the Department of Public Information and other departments and offices in United Nations Headquarters that directly contribute their content to the United Nations website. 7. Another priority is to exploit the collaboration capabilities of ECM. These can help Member States and delegations in many of their consultative processes that involve secure, web-based exchange of documents and ideas. Features such as threaded discussions, instant messaging, quick polling, version control and audit trails to track changes, workflows for approval, and so on, can facilitate the coordination of formal and informal agendas and the drafting of resolutions and other outputs of all committees and working groups. Electronic team rooms can be created nearly on demand, using standard templates, even during the session of a committee or group. 8. Simple or elaborate content classification can also be enabled to facilitate easy retrieval and enhance the institutional memory of the committees and working groups. Such content can also be made available securely to the Permanent Missions based on access rules that can be established by the committees and working groups. 9. A successful enterprise-wide implementation of content management requires strong governance. Therefore, the Secretariat has decided to adopt an industry standard framework, created by the Association of Information and Image Management. The framework prescribes a rigorous ECM implementation life cycle. One of its prerequisites is a "business classification scheme", a classification scheme based on the business of the organization to be used for organizing, accessing, retrieving, storing and managing its information. Such a scheme would need to be easy to use, and yet sophisticated enough to meet the diverse needs of the Secretariat. Enterprise content management in peacekeeping operations 10. The Department of Field Support, in collaboration with the Department of Management (Information Technology Services Division and Archives and Records Management Section) is currently developing an ECM road map following a strategic analysis of the business needs and the operational and technical environment of the Department. This activity will essentially orient the Department's future ECM initiatives and embed sound practices in them and as such is a foundational element in embracing an enterprise vision. The lessons learned are expected to facilitate the development of similar road maps for other departments. 11. Following the development of the ECM road map, the Department of Field Support will initially address the core document workflows related to the observation and reporting activities undertaken in field missions. Many of the core functions of military observers, civilian police and substantive functions in field missions depend on the gathering of raw data, its consolidation, analysis and finally its formulation into meaningful information. In order to ensure that peacekeepers have the information they require to fulfil their core functions, to ensure information-sharing and greater collaboration and enhanced situational awareness (tactical and strategic) among the geographically dispersed peacekeeping community, the Department proposes to examine and map the associated processes and target an initial implementation in a complex, multifaceted mission in order to identify content management requirement linkages with mandate. Having analysed the manner in which mandate drives content and the management of that content, repeatable content management models will be developed and applied as appropriate to other field missions. 12. In July 2005, the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section, under the aegis of its Guidance Project, developed a guidance development system centred on a robust Expanded Senior Management Team supported by policy and procedure. The Guidance Project developed a framework of all known activities, numbering in excess of 1,200 activity lines. Set against that framework, the Guidance Project has sought to populate a database of all known guidance material in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support with a view to creating a central repository which can act as the focus of institutional knowledge. That knowledge is then delivered to staff in the field through the peace operation's Intranet. The ECM solution will facilitate the formulation, enhancement and publication of guidance material and can be leveraged to provide both a structured repository for the guidance material developed to date, including external web-based informational resources, and the tools to foster collaboration in and between field missions, by providing a shared space for subject matter experts throughout peacekeeping field missions. 