%%%INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION|DEVELOPMENT|MIGRATION|REMITTANCES|HUMAN DEVELOPMENT|LABOUR MOBILITY|LABOUR MARKET|PARTNERSHIP|

Sixty-second session Second Committee Agenda item 56 Globalization and interdependence Letter dated 5 October 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour of transmitting to you the summary report of the First Meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development, which took place in Brussels, from 9 to 11 July 2007 (see annex). The idea of the Global Forum on Migration and Development was proposed by the United Nations Secretary-General and his Special Representative for Migration at the United Nations High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development in September 2006. The First Meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development was organized by the Government of Belgium in consultation with the Special Representative for Migration of the United Nations Secretary-General and an open-ended group of United Nations Member States. During the Governmental meeting of 10 and 11 July 2007, more than 800 delegates from 156 United Nations Member States and more than 20 international organizations as well as the European Commission and an observer State participated in two plenary sessions and 12 round-table sessions running parallel on specific issues. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat established a virtual Marketplace to enable countries to "market" their migration/development-related needs and find partners to meet those needs. Some 200 participants from the civil society attended the Civil Society Day organized by the King Baudoin Foundation on 9 July. The interactive exchanges during the Governmental meeting resulted in a number of conclusions and recommendations leading to short-, medium- and long-term actions for consideration by the Governments. I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 56. (Signed) Johan Verbeke Ambassador Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations Annex to the letter dated 5 October 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General [Original: French] Global Forum on Migration and Development First meeting Brussels, 9-11 July 2007 Summary report* 1. Summary The Global Forum on Migration and Development was established as a venue for discussing issues related to international migration and development in a systematic and comprehensive way. The idea of the Global Forum was proposed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his Special Representative for Migration at the United Nations High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development in September 2006. There was widespread support by United Nations Member States for the Forum to be informal, voluntary and government-led, and to operate in a transparent and open manner, without producing negotiated outcomes or normative decisions. The first meeting was initiated, prepared and organized by the Government of Belgium, in consultation with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and an open-ended group of United Nations Member States, the "Friends of the Forum", and took place in Brussels on 9-11 July 2007. The aim was to deepen understanding, through enhanced dialogue and partnerships, of the opportunities and challenges of migration for development and vice versa, and to identify practical and action-oriented ways to address and operationalize these at national, regional and global levels. It brought together Government and international expertise in this endeavour. To bring this process to a productive end within the brief space of nine months, the Belgian Government set up an international task force under the directorship of Ambassador Régine De Clercq, who was specifically charged with the overall organization and coordination of the meeting. Although Belgium provided the bulk of financial resources required, it was necessary to obtain additional financial and human resources from a number of Governments and international partners to supplement the in-house resources. All these resources were managed under the rules and regulations applicable to the Belgian public services. Belgium launched in November 2006 an enquiry with all United Nations Member States to define the themes to be addressed by the Global Forum and requested them to nominate a focal point, at high level, responsible for national coordination and policy coherence. One hundred and twenty-three countries responded to those requests. They played a key role in the Global Forum process. Belgium followed a working method based on close collaboration with these country focal points and active engagement of those willing to work in teams. These teams were managed and coordinated by the task force and set up to represent cross-sectoral expertise and the views of all on the migration spectrum in a balanced way across developing and developed countries. The objective was to foster frank exchange and discussion and broad state ownership of the process. Forty-three country representatives, 12 international organizations and seven civil society representatives as well as the European Commission were engaged in these teams. Many of the international organizations became involved at the behest of the Governments preparing the sessions. The task force and the teams held multiple meetings and conference calls to complete the background papers and plan the round-table discussions. Close guidance and preparatory support were provided to the round-table chairs to ensure concrete discussion and outcomes, and to avoid lengthy theoretical speeches without real exchange of experience and ideas. The following key conclusions can be drawn from this first meeting and its preparatory process: :: The Global Forum has established a new approach to migration by squarely moving development to the centre of the migration debate; and enabled a shift of the migration and development paradigm by promoting legal migration as an opportunity for development of both origin and destination countries, rather than as a threat. :: It paves the way for a longer-term common global vision on migration, based on the recognition of mutual benefits to origin and destination countries; and for restoring trust in migration systems worldwide. Nevertheless, divergent interests and situations will always preclude "one size fits all" solutions. :: It opens the space for migration and development policymakers to reach their respective objectives more effectively by both acknowledging and addressing the benefits and risks of migration for poor people and developing countries. :: It has shown that sharing responsibilities between developed and developing countries can make migration work better for development and vice versa; and that development can lead to migration by choice and not by necessity. :: It provides a platform for discussing experiences, innovations and good practices, and for identifying concrete ways of ensuring the positive contribution of legal migration to development (see more details in the round-table reports). :: It has created, through the country focal points, a vehicle for greater coherence and a more comprehensive approach towards migration, development and other policies at national level. As pointed out by the Global Commission on International Migration, this can lead to more coherence in these areas at the international level. The first nine months of the Global Forum process have also set in place a structuring framework -- in regard to the content and the process -- for addressing migration and development issues at the global level. This framework provides the basis for actively following up the outcomes of the first meeting and reporting on their progress at the next Global Forum meeting. It comprises: :: A global survey, launched in November 2006, in which Governments defined thematic priorities to be addressed by the Forum; :: In the meantime, a global network of more than 150 national focal points, acting across ministries and Government departments and maintaining the link with the Global Forum, as well as focal points appointed within international organizations; :: The Friends of the Forum, a consultative body open to all United Nations Member States, which acts as a sounding board for the Global Forum process and advises the Chair-in-Office on the agenda, structure and format of each Forum meeting; :: The creation of teams between Governments, international organizations and civil society around themes of mutual interest. Some of these are likely to continue working on issues in future meetings; :: Operating modalities for continuation of the Forum, including its link with the United Nations and the beginning of a support structure (see annex). This first meeting of the Global Forum was hailed by many participants as a landmark in the migration and development debate. Participants, however, also stressed that, while development may have moved centre stage in the migration debate, development aid should not be used for the regulation of migration flows; nor should migration be seen as an alternative to national development strategies, or the money flows generated by migrants as a substitute for official development assistance. A special tribute should be paid to the many Governments, international organizations, academics and other civil society actors who contributed financial and human resources, and those who invested time and resources in the background papers and the planning of the sessions, to help make this first Global Forum meeting a success. We would also like to thank the King Baudouin Foundation for ably organizing the civil society consultations, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his support and contributions throughout the process. The first meeting of the Global Forum comprised two interrelated parts: :: Civil Society Day (9 July) At the request of the Belgian Government, the King Baudouin Foundation organized, on 9 July, consultations among civil society entities, which brought together more than 200 representatives of NGOs, diaspora organizations, the private sector, universities and trade unions from throughout the world to discuss the issues on the agenda of the governmental days. A report on this meeting was presented in the plenary session of the governmental meeting. :: Governmental meeting (10-11 July) During the governmental meeting of 10-11 July more than 800 delegates -- representing 156 United Nations Member States and more than 20 international organizations as well as the European Commission and the Holy See -- participated in two plenary sessions and 12 round-table sessions running in parallel on specific issues related to human capital development and labour mobility (Round table 1), remittances and other diaspora resources (Round table 2) and policy and institutional coherence (Round table 3). Each session was prepared and presented by voluntary teams of Governments with common interests in the theme, and representing the developing and developed regions of the world in a balanced way. The round tables yielded concrete project proposals ranging from working groups to feasibility studies, which will need to be implemented and reported on at the next Global Forum meeting by willing Governments and/or relevant international organizations. During the round-table sessions, the cross-cutting issues of root causes of migration, human rights and gender, which had been identified by some Governments as crucial for the migration-development debate, were examined in a horizontal way. Some recommendations were made to help Governments better integrate these into their future respective policymaking. Present at the opening session were HRH Prince Philippe of Belgium, representing His Majesty King Albert II, Mr. Guy Verhofstadt, Prime Minister of Belgium and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, H.E. Mr. Ban Ki-moon. The meeting was chaired by the Belgian Executive Director of the Global Forum, Ambassador Régine De Clercq. In his address, Mr. Guy Verhofstadt, Prime Minister of Belgium, emphasized the importance of development for sound migration policies. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, H.E. Mr. Ban Kimoon, observed that the lead-up to the Global Forum offered a basis for a less politicized discussion about migration. The keynote speech was delivered by H.E. Mr. José Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission. Other speakers were H.E. Mr. Couaovi A. L. Johnson, Secretary General of the Commission of the African Union, H.E. Sir John Kaputin, Secretary-General of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States and Professor Ernesto Zedillo, former President of Mexico, who pointed to the links between the Global Forum discussion and broader international policy debates, such as trade and development, and to the consequences that the failure of the Doha Round would have for international migration. At the closing session of the meeting of the Global Forum, reports on the three round tables and the horizontal issues were presented by Mrs. Patricia Sto. Tomas, Chairwoman of the Development Bank of the Philippines and former Secretary of Labour, the Philippines (Round table 1); H.E. Professor Oumar Hammadoun Dicko, Minister for Malians Abroad and African Integration, Mali (Round table 2); Mr. Richard Manning, Chair of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (Round table 3) and Mr. Jozef De Witte, Director General of the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism, Belgium (Horizontal issues). In his closing remarks, the Hon. Arturo D. Brion, Secretary of Labour, the Philippines, described the meeting as a milestone in world history and urged Governments to continue the existing consultative mechanisms and the informal discussions towards more firm commitments, partnerships and international cooperation. In the final conclusions and recommendations of the Chair, Ambassador Régine De Clercq spelled out how the achievements of this first meeting could be taken forward in a productive and coordinated manner. In conjunction with the Forum meeting and its preparation, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs established a virtual Marketplace to enable countries to "market" their migration/development-related needs and find partners to help meet those needs. This led to a considerable number of meetings between interested parties during the July meeting and possible follow-up projects. The Marketplace will continue as part of the Forum, and cooperation will likely be pursued after Brussels to the Manila meeting and beyond. 2. The Civil Society Day (9 July) The first day of the Global Forum meeting was devoted to discussions among civil society actors on migration and development issues; it offered input into the governmental discussions on 10 and 11 July. The agenda largely mirrored the governmental agenda (human capital and labour mobility; remittances and diaspora; institutional and policy coherence) and was organized in eight sessions. It was stressed during the meeting that migration by itself would not bring about development. The structural barriers to development cannot be overcome without responsible governmental actions in countries of origin and destination. Without a major change in course, migrants and their contributions will not fulfil effectively their potential role as partners in the articulation and implementation of inclusive, equitable and sustainable development policies. Non-State actors also have an important role to play in working towards this change. Participants expressed a clear commitment to pursue this process in the years to come. Joint projects in this area and practical partnerships resulting from the increased cooperation achieved through the Forum will keep the global human development of migrants at the core of their actions. 3. The governmental meeting (10-11 July) The discussion within the three thematic round tables of the governmental meeting focused on (i) human capital development and labour mobility, (ii) remittances and other diaspora resources, and (iii) enhancing institutional and policy coherence and promoting partnerships. Cross-cutting aspects relating to gender, human rights and root causes of migration were examined in a horizontal manner in the sessions. The interactive exchanges resulted in a number of recommendations leading to short-, medium- and longer-term actions. While some are in the realm of national policy and can be unilaterally implemented, others will require bilateral and/or multilateral action. Some will involve Governments at different levels, and others may need coordination and partnership with international organizations or civil society. Participants recognized the importance of considering the appropriate support mechanisms for Governments and other actors to take these initiatives forward to the next meeting of the Global Forum. Following is a summary of the conclusions and recommendations of the first Global Forum meeting. A full report will be produced and disseminated by the end of 2007. 3.1 Round table 1 -- Human capital development and labour mobility: maximizing opportunities and minimizing risks (Coordination: Ms. Irena Omelaniuk, Global Forum Task force) Round table 1 discussed human capital development and labour mobility and the question of how, in the pursuit of both goals, opportunities can be maximized and risks minimized for the migrants, their families and home communities. Four areas were addressed where migration and development interface directly and where new policy approaches are emerging: :: Highly skilled migration and the fear of brain drain in developing countries; :: Temporary labour migration, particularly of lower skilled persons; :: The role of the private sector and other non-State agencies in temporary labour migration; and :: Circular forms of migration and skills sharing. Main observations and findings Highly skilled migration is growing and likely to continue to grow, in part because of the easier access of the highly skilled to information and job opportunities abroad, but also because of a lack of opportunities at home. The movement of skilled and trained professionals can put countries of origin at risk, particularly if they have not reached their optimal development level. This is most likely in vulnerable sectors such as health and education. But migration is not the principal or only cause of weak health systems in developing countries, and policies to address skill needs are likely to work best if they are multipronged and based on partnerships. Some joint approaches are emerging both within and between origin and destination countries, also among learning and training institutions, in order to better contain brain drain and ensure brain gain. These include better human resource development and deployment policies, sectoral development, sharing of skills and training and capacity-building. However, the effectiveness of these initiatives needs to be assessed. Temporary labour migration can be a flexible way of meeting labour surplus and shortage across countries. Assuring legal access to a varied labour market, protecting the basic rights of migrants, especially women, and assuring temporariness of the migration are key to maximizing the mutual benefits of such migration. In the absence of a functional multilateral system, bilateral arrangements have been found to operate effectively in certain countries, particularly if based on standard contracts and assured social security for migrants. Individual countries can also adopt institutional and policy frameworks that contribute to realizing the objectives of temporary migration. Joint arrangements between origin and destination countries, particularly for lower-skilled migrants, can help enforce the laws to protect temporary migrants and enhance their contribution to their families and home communities. More needs to be known about the linkages between temporary labour migration and development, and how to deal with large existing illegal migrant worker populations. Other-than-government partners, particularly the private sector, are key drivers of global labour mobility today, yet they remain less active in ensuring that it benefits development efforts. Recruitment and other upfront migration costs can be prohibitive and severely reduce migrants' capacities to recoup their migration costs and support development efforts at home. Limited and sometimes distorted information on opportunities, rights and obligations can also make migrants vulnerable to abuse and exploitation during migration and while abroad. Few coherent programmes exist that systematically and effectively engage Government, private sector, international organizations and others in partnerships that could ensure safer, more productive labour mobility. More circular forms of migration and sustainable return would enable temporary labour movements to be better linked to the skills and development needs of the source country, and to be factored into the skills requirements of the destination country. Also, the return or circulation of skills and other assets of more permanent migrants can reinforce development efforts in origin countries. By agreement, destination countries could make their entry and work permit policies more flexible in return for commitments by origin countries to strengthen the incentives for migrants and their skills to return home, either temporarily or permanently; and to factor multisectoral training into their labour emigration planning. Some European countries in particular were exploring this more comprehensive linking of labour migration planning to development in the context of the European Commission's current broader policy thinking on mobility partnerships. Recommendations and proposed actions Collate good policies and practices that will allow countries better to manage human resource development and deployment in highly skilled sectors, particularly the health sector, and ensure effective partnership between origin and destination countries. Gender-specific data on skilled migration should be collected. The following actions were agreed during the session: 1. Establish a matrix of good practices for countries of origin and destination and for joint actions between them that can help retain, train and recover skilled health personnel for development. This could be based on the Global Forum background paper and the discussions in the round table and passed on by the session chairpersons to the Global Health Workforce Alliance to inform its work in this area. 2. Consider further development of codes of ethical recruitment in the health sector and the dissemination of lessons learned from existing codes of conduct. The Global Health Workforce Alliance has already begun the development of a global code of conduct, and will report on the findings at the next meeting of the Global Forum in 2008. A compendium of good policies and practices for safe and orderly temporary labour migration is needed, that also enforces its legality, temporariness and potential contributions to development. This can draw from some good partnership practices between countries, presented during the session and in the background paper, and from some of the ready-made policy tools offered by international expert organizations. The following action was agreed during the session: 3. Develop a compendium of good practice policies on bilateral temporary labour arrangements that can contribute to development and give access to foreign labour markets, notably for the low skilled, while controlling irregular migration and protecting the human and social rights of migrants. This could be taken forward by the round-table session Chairs in collaboration with relevant international organizations and presented to a Friends of the Forum meeting in the near future. Private sector and other non-State actors should play a stronger role in reducing the costs of migration, ensuring better work conditions and informing and protecting migrants abroad. The following actions were agreed during the session: 4. Undertake a feasibility study of financial intermediation services that allow workers to borrow at market or if possible at concessional rates for their upfront expenses prior to migration. Bangladesh has expressed keen interest in undertaking this study in partnership with relevant agencies, including commercial banks, and reporting on the outcomes in Manila 2008. 5. Organize a workshop among interested Government and other partners to discuss ways of identifying good recruitment and employment practices and set up benchmarks/criteria for performance evaluation of recruitment agents and employers in origin and destination countries. Bangladesh has shown interest in co-organizing this workshop with relevant partners and reporting on progress in Manila 2008. 6. Establish migrant resource centres along a well-traversed migration corridor, and interconnect these to ensure timely and linked-up services to migrants. This may be a real Migrant Resource Centre or a virtual or Internet-based one and may be considered for longer-term action. 7. Based on the Guatemala-Canada seasonal worker model, consider developing such projects as pilots in other countries along a well-used migration corridor. This could be taken forward by interested international organizations. Circular migration should be tested concretely as a mutually beneficial policy arrangement between origin and destination countries. More information is needed about the effectiveness of current schemes, with a view to improving them; and the broad working definition should be more detailed to facilitate future evaluations. Pilot projects should be attempted, with proper monitoring in order to assess their effectiveness and relevance. The following actions were agreed during the session: 8. Hold a workshop on circular migration prior to the next Forum meeting to lay the groundwork for future partnerships: for action by the European Commission, the initiator, and Mauritius, which is likely to host it. The workshop would use the Mauritian model and sharpen the definition of circular migration to operationalize the opportunities and benefits it holds for origin and destination countries to be held at the end of 2007 or early 2008, and to be reported in Manila in 2008. 9. Undertake an independent assessment of the development impacts of skills circulation models, such as MIDA (Migration for Development in Africa) and TOKTEN; and assess the feasibility of scaling them up and/or expanding them for greater development impact in the country of origin. This would be discussed with the implementing international organizations; and progress reported at the Global Forum meeting in Manila in 2008 by interested Governments. 3.2 Round table 2 -- Remittances and other diaspora resources: Increasing their net volume and development impact (Coordination: Mr. Romeo Matsas, Global Forum Task force) Round table 2 looked at remittances and other diaspora resources as private initiatives to which Governments should respond by leveraging their positive impact on development. Four areas were addressed: :: Reduction of cost, formalization of transfers and the role of new technologies; :: Options to leverage the development impact of remittances at the micro level and prevent their negative impact; :: Options to leverage the development impact of remittances at the macro level and respond to their negative impact; :: Partnerships to be established between Governments and diasporas to enhance their positive impact on the development of the country of origin. Migrants originating from developing countries transfer money worldwide, North-South but also South-South. They can remit part of their earnings to their relatives, they can invest, or they can support philanthropy activities on their own. However, government policies are essential in order to leverage their positive development potential. Remittances to developing countries are one of the largest sources of external finance for these countries, and can represent a large share of GDP for some of them. The World Bank estimates that recorded remittances to developing countries (i.e. excluding informal flows) reached $206 billion in 2006, almost two thirds of foreign direct investment ($325 billion), and almost twice as much as official aid ($104 billion) received by these countries. Remittances are also considered to be more stable and evenly spread than other financial flows such as official development assistance or foreign direct investment, and are also considered to be countercyclical. By their very nature, remittances are private flows, the allocation of which often relates more to personal reasons and incentives than to objective economic analysis. Remittances can also constitute a financial burden for the migrants themselves. Given their private nature, remittances cannot be appropriated by Governments, but their positive impact on development can be increased through options, incentives and tools designed and implemented by Governments in partnership with other relevant actors. Remittances do not diminish the need for ODA and they are not an alternative to national development efforts by the Governments concerned. Apart from the fact that migration should never become an alternative to individual or national development, Governments should be aware that when diaspora members are provided with government support to be active in their country of origin, local populations of these countries may interpret this as an encouragement to migrate. Such a message should be avoided. The potential links between remittances and development are numerous and complex, as their impact is not just economic but also social and cultural. Remittances have been associated with increased household investments in education and health and also have an impact on gender relations. On the other hand, they can also have negative effects, such as creating recipients' dependency or increasing exchange rates. The benefits of remittances for development are, therefore, conditional upon the broader economic and political context. In this regard, reducing remittance costs can create incentives for migrants to use formal remittance channels, if supported by capacity-building both for the financial sector and for remittance senders and recipients. In turn, improving the formalization of transfers offers opportunities to leverage the development impact of remittances by providing options for individual savings, investments or support to local development projects. Increased formalization of remittance transfers also makes possible better policy planning for development and for responding to the possible negative impact of these flows. Beyond remittances, diasporas also carry out various activities -- such as exchange of skills, professional capacity-building, philanthropy, increasing trade and investment links, etc. -- which have an important development potential for their country of origin. While this potential is broadly acknowledged, Governments of both countries of origin and destination face similar challenges in engaging with these partners in activities such as devising new tools, identifying interlocutors, or ensuring ownership of development projects by a country or community of origin. A generic recommendation that came out of the round-table sessions was to continue exchanging best practices among Friends of the Forum, possibly including through the Global Forum website, as participants strongly felt that the international community is still at a learning-by-doing stage on improving the development impact of remittances and diaspora activities. On the reduction of remittance costs and improvement of their formalization, participants proposed the following actions for consideration by Governments: 1. Enhance competition on the remittance market by (i) avoiding monopolies and promoting partnerships that enable more actors to enter this market, including through more relative flexibility of regulations for the remittance industry, taking into account the legitimate need for security regulations (fight against money-laundering and terrorism financing, etc.); and by (ii) engaging with financial institutions to raise their awareness of the relevance of remittances. 2. Facilitate transfers by supporting partnerships between: :: Commercial banks, money transfer operators and microfinance institutions; :: Commercial banks located in sending and receiving countries; :: Central banks of sending and recipient countries, to enhance payment systems. 3. Implement financial literacy programmes tailored to the needs of remittance senders and recipients (including in pre-departure programmes) and ensure transparent dissemination of information on transfer costs. 4. Promote public/private partnerships for the use of new technologies to facilitate transfers and reduce costs. 5. Support research on remittance senders' behaviour. On the need to ensure positive micro-impacts of remittances on development, participants proposed the following actions for consideration by Governments: 6. Make possible a diversified supply of financial services (from micro-insurance, micropension, etc. to investment opportunities, etc.) by the private sector for remittance senders and recipients, e.g. through the creation of multi-stakeholder partnerships, while retaining the possibility for Governments to intervene as necessary and ensuring full use of existing services. 7. Set up intermediary structures for on-the-ground management of migrant investments in the country of origin, taking into account the necessary gradual approach from individual to collective, local and national investment. 8. Provide financial literacy programmes and better information on financial services to remittance senders and recipients. 9. Support research on tools and incentives needed for Governments to make remittances become investments, as well as on the impact of remittances on the situation of women and children. On the need to ensure positive macro-impacts of remittances on development, participants proposed the following actions for consideration by Governments: 10. Improve remittance statistics to enable their inclusion in calculations of country creditworthiness, to facilitate access to international financing that can fund development projects. 11. Support securitization of future remittance flows to access international financing that can fund development projects. 12. Promote the issuance of diaspora bonds where appropriate to access international financing that can fund development projects. 13. Redress remittances' possible negative macro-economic impacts through long-term structural solutions rather than short-term solutions. On partnerships with diasporas to enhance the development impact of their activities, participants proposed the following actions for consideration by Governments: 14. Identify partners within the diaspora (numbers, location, skills, etc.) and support diaspora organizations' organizational and representation capacities. 15. Establish triangular partnerships between diasporas, home and host countries and increase coordination among different ministerial departments in home and host countries, between home and host countries and between host countries harbouring diaspora of the same origin. 16. Enhance links between diasporas and countries of origin, including over generations, through regular dialogue and information channels (formal or informal, political involvement) and provide accurate information to diasporas about development and investment opportunities in countries of origin. 17. Create an enabling environment for diaspora activities, for instance by providing multiple re-entry visas, dual citizenship, recognition of skills and portability of social welfare. 18. Make possible the consultation of diasporas as well as the coordination of their interventions with national and local development plans to enhance their sustainability. 19. Research further the reciprocal influence between diasporas' integration in the host country and their involvement in the development of their country of origin. 3.3 Round table 3 -- Enhancing policy and institutional coherence and promoting partnerships (Coordination: Ms. Valérie Van Goethem, Global Forum Task force) Enhancing policy and institutional coherence between migration and development requires, at all levels: (i) a strong political commitment by Governments to develop a common view on the interrelationship between migration policies and development policies, shared responsibilities between countries of origin and countries of destination, an institutionalized framework for government coordination, inter-State cooperation and informal international consultative processes; and (ii) a concerted effort for government capacity-building and further research and impact assessment to define and implement better evidence-based policies. Three main areas were addressed by round table 3: :: Latest initiatives and progress for measuring migration and development-related impacts; :: Coherent policy planning and methodology to link migration and development; :: Regional consultative processes on migration, and development: advancing cooperation. There are both synergies and tensions between development policies and migration policies and there is a need to improve policy coherence in these fields without manipulating or subordinating either policy. How this is done needs to reflect the realities and circumstances of each country. However the political impetus is needed in all countries for this to happen. Institutional capacity, including mechanisms for cooperation and systematic dialogue, will to a large extent define how well a country can create coherence between its national policies and the roles of various ministries and agencies engaged in migration and development-related issues, in particular those in charge of migration, development, trade, agriculture, employment and social affairs, environment, finance and security. Having a "migration and development" focal point within each of the relevant ministries, a "migration and development" budget line or an inter-ministerial consultative body on migration and development at the central government level could constitute very helpful first steps towards that end. However, adequate staff, financial and other resources are necessary to this end. There is a continued need for research on thematic priorities and for data gathering on the migration and development nexus, and the dissemination and sharing of such data and research, including on the social impact of migration, the propensity to migrate, and to return. Easily accessible and concise policy-oriented research is required and should be made available to policymakers. It is also necessary to make better use of existing data and encourage relevant international bodies to further enhance their data development efforts in order to devise appropriate policy strategies. There is also a need for more active sharing among States of their experiences related to the migration and development nexus, including through national Global Forum focal points, or through online databanks, newsletters etc. Similarly, better information on legal, social and otherwise relevant conditions should be made available to migrants, both before they leave their country of origin and when they arrive in the country of destination. A clearer view is needed of current policies of government donors and development agencies and how these actors could more usefully contribute to the debate and action on migration and development. The role of regional consultative processes (RCPs) in enhancing the contribution of migration to development is recognized, but needs to be strengthened and supported. Closer linkages between RCPs and formal regional government processes should be encouraged, and there should also be a system in place for regular information exchange between RCPs and the Global Forum. Greater intertwining of migration and development policies is required in order to shift the existing paradigm and make migration work better for development and vice versa. There is a need to ensure continued political commitment and work towards shared responsibilities between origin and destination countries in promoting and achieving greater policy coherence and a common view on the potential mutually beneficial interrelationship between migration and development policies. Participants proposed the following recommendations and actions for consideration by Governments: 1. To include migration in national development planning processes including, where relevant, Poverty Reduction Strategies. For this purpose, consultations should be held with civil society actors, including diaspora organizations. A first step towards this end could be the production of a national policy and action plan on how to promote synergies between migration and development policies and actions. 2. To establish formal and informal mechanisms, adequately resourced, to enable those government officials responsible for migration policies and development policies to communicate and consult with one another on ways to promote synergies between their respective policies and decisions. It is essential that these consultations take place at all levels of government. The following concrete actions were suggested: :: All Governments should maintain and reinforce the Global Forum focal points in order to facilitate further dialogue at the national level, as well as networking at the global level between Governments participating in the Global Forum. These focal points shall be regularly in contact with each other at the national level and shall be established at a sufficiently high level of policymaking or at least, shall regularly report to policymakers. :: The establishment of a working group to look at good practices and lessons learned in promoting policy coherence within Governments, building on the thematic survey undertaken by Sweden in the leading-up to the first Forum meeting. A follow-up survey could be undertaken before the next Global Forum meeting and a subsequent progress report with analysis of the responses. Sweden, as chair and coordinator of session 3.2 of the first Global Forum meeting, is ready to continue to work actively on these issues in the future, together with other countries willing to take the lead of such a group. A report from the working group could be presented in Manila next year. :: Developed countries and international organizations should support the strengthening of capacity-building in developing countries both at the levels of policymaking and of institutional set-up better to address migration and development-related impacts. There is a need to support initiatives aimed at gathering policy-relevant data on migration and development-related impacts, and to produce analytical information and knowledge to be made available to policymakers. This will benefit from new partnerships to identify priority areas where cooperation and joint action could lead to better results. Such support would be a signal of a serious commitment to examining the impacts of migration and development. Participants proposed that the following recommendations and actions be considered by Governments: 3. To support capacity-building initiatives to develop more effective systems for monitoring migrant flows to and from developing countries and better policy planning; and to provide support to Southern and Northern data-gathering institutions. This needs to be developed with the support of the donor community and relevant international organizations. 4. The Forum is invited to consider the possibility of: :: Establishing an expert working group of government policymakers, researchers and civil society, from both migration and development communities, in order to assess and coordinate research priorities. Key persons would be drawn together and sponsors could help support the research. :: Developing a brief report on key policy lessons from existing research, to be presented in Manila 2008. :: Establishing a working group between relevant institutions on better data gathering and sharing. Finland, as chair and coordinator of session 3.1 of the first Global Forum meeting, is willing to continue working on these issues and is looking into options for beginning to implement policies and findings, in close cooperation and coordination with other countries and agencies. Given the State-led nature of RCPs, any decisions regarding the activities of RCPs need to be taken by participating Governments. Greater integration of development considerations into the agendas of RCPs can be achieved in particular through the following measures: 5. To promote greater sharing of information about activities and achievements of RCPs in the fields of migration and development. This could be achieved for instance through: :: Regular meetings for greater cross-fertilization between RCPs; :: A common database on good practices and a website; :: An RCP newsletter. 6. To encourage a more systematic evaluation of RCPs' achievements and impacts in the fields of migration and development in order to promote a better understanding of the contribution of RCPs to managing migration for development. 7. To encourage the involvement of government departments and agencies of developing and developed countries (and where appropriate, civil society actors) responsible for development in RCPs meetings and projects. 8. To reinforce donor support for migration and development-related activities of RCPs, especially in regions of high migration and development interest to the donor community (e.g. Migration Dialogue for Southern Africa (MIDSA) and Migration Dialogue for Western Africa (MIDWA)). 9. To promote more linkages between RCPs and other regional forums (e.g. regional trade systems and integration regimes) and further to develop links between RCPs and interregional political level dialogues. 10. To ensure a sustainable two-way information flow between RCPs and the Global Forum, for example: :: By undertaking regular surveys of RCPs from a migration and development perspective; :: And/or by establishing a network of Global Forum focal points in different RCPs to support this exchange. 3.4 Horizontal issues (Coordination: Ms. Véronique de Ryckere, Global Forum Task force) The programme of the governmental part of the Global Forum meeting was based on the results of the global survey conducted in November 2006. During the meetings of the Friends of the Forum, a number of States requested that root causes of migration, human rights and gender should be examined in the framework of the first meeting of the Global Forum, although the majority of States had not prioritized these subjects in the survey. These cross-cutting issues were therefore examined in a horizontal manner throughout the meeting. General observations Root causes of international migration are diverse, complex and require further research. They mainly relate to economic, demographic and social disparities and in particular to poverty, political instability, conflict, non-respect of human rights and climatic and environmental degradation. These result essentially in a lack of development prospects for which migration is too often considered to be the only alternative. However, migrants often lack information on many aspects related to migration, including costs, travel conditions and conditions in the destination countries as well as real prospects in those countries. Migrants contribute to the development of both host and home countries and can help address the root causes of migration. While it is widely assumed that their development contribution is closely linked to the protection of their rights as well as their integration in host countries, further research regarding the latter aspect would be valuable. Fundamental rights apply to all human beings. Existing international human and labour rights instruments are the backdrop for the debate on migration and development. However, there is evidence that these instruments are not always respected where migrants are concerned. Channels of legal migration are limited, and the mismatch between legal migration channels and labour migration paves the way for human smuggling and trafficking. Illegal migrants are generally more vulnerable to abuse. Regarding the gender dimension, migration has a significant impact on the economic role played by migrant women and/or households headed by women who remain in the home country and on the dynamics of communities and society. Data on migration and development generally do not consider the gender aspect. It is, however, recognized that currently women constitute almost half of all migrants worldwide; they are strongly represented in the high- and low-skilled labour sectors. As senders and recipients of remittances, migrant women are major contributors to economic growth and poverty reduction. On the other hand, migrant women have specific vulnerabilities. In low-skilled, unprotected and poorly regulated sectors in particular they are vulnerable to exploitation. Women are also often excluded from or marginalized in diaspora organization activities. Governments, where appropriate in cooperation with non-State actors, are invited to: Root causes of migration 1. Create an enabling environment for international migration to occur by choice rather than out of necessity through the following actions: :: Addressing the root causes of migration and, in some instances and if appropriate, targeting development and other policies to areas subject to strong prospective migratory outflow. This implies notably a greater coherence in the policies which have an impact on development of countries of migrant origin; :: Providing information to potential migrants on the costs and conditions of migration as well as on their real prospects in destination countries; :: Creating in countries of origin the enabling environment that offers endogenous prospects, particularly through good governance and employment-generation strategies. 2. Optimize migrants' contributions to development of their country of origin through the following actions: :: integrating, where relevant, migrants' contributions into national development strategies of countries of origin, while preserving the free choice of migrants to engage in development-related activities; :: fostering links and partnerships among diasporas, countries of origin and host countries; :: creating an enabling environment for diaspora activities. 3. Undertake further research in particular on the root causes and their consequences for migratory flows and on the impact of diasporas' integration in host countries on their development activities in home countries. Human rights 1. Combat racism and xenophobia. Integration of migrants in host countries is one important element in this context. 2. Respect and implement relevant international instruments (United Nations and International Labour Organization) on human and labour rights and, further to the appeal made by a number of States in favour of the ratification of the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (1990), address in a concerted and consensual manner the current stalemate on this issue. 3. Adopt legislation and procedures to ensure protection and nondiscriminatory treatment of migrants and give due consideration to family life. The following actions were suggested: :: establishing mechanisms to negotiate decent and equitable wage and working conditions, including health and social aspects; :: enacting and implementing legislation allowing action against employers who do not respect the labour rights of migrant workers; :: establishing standardized systems of recruitment, licensing and regulating private recruiters and a code of ethical recruitment. 4. Empower migrants in particular by: :: providing information and orientation in origin (including for potential migrants) and destination countries notably on rights and obligations; :: establishing support structures in destination countries; :: recognizing qualifications acquired abroad; :: providing options for re-entry to the host country; :: facilitating migrants' access to banking services and financial instruments. 5. Combat human trafficking and address the mismatch between legal migration channels and labour migration. 6. Monitor the impact of initiatives taken in the field of migration and development on the human and labour rights of migrants. Gender 1. Promote legislation, policies and practices for gender-based development and create an enabling environment emphasizing gender equity. The empowerment of women, through the following actions, is an important element in this context: :: training and skills upgrading; :: providing information and orientation on rights, obligations, risks, opportunities, integration or return options in origin and destination countries; :: ensuring greater access and equity in access to financial services and livelihood opportunities; :: strengthening female engagement in diasporas' development activities. 2. Protect mainly female -- but also male -- migrants, notably through: :: the adoption of gender-sensitive labour migration policies and practices ensuring decent working conditions; :: the establishment of gender-sensitive support structures in destination countries. 3. Improve gender-related data collection and analysis of the impact of migration on families. 4. Marketplace During the preparatory process leading up to the first meeting of the Forum, new partnerships were forged under the leadership of Governments, and it is expected that this cooperation will be pursued after Brussels, to the Manila meeting and beyond. An important mechanism in developing such partnerships was the creation of a "Marketplace", facilitated by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. This Marketplace has as its objective to allow countries to "market" their needs in connection with migration and development and to find partners who could assist them. In the course of the meeting in Brussels, 32 Marketplace consultations were held during which a large number of project ideas were discussed. Governments as well as international organizations discussed concrete proposals for information, advice, training, equipment, capacity-building, project implementation and other initiatives to enhance the mutual benefits of migration and development. The Marketplace thus offered another means for the Forum process to gain momentum, by bringing together partners and by generating specific and practical outcomes to meet the concrete needs of Governments. Given its success, the Marketplace will continue as part of the Forum process. It will be reopened soon in order to offer interested Governments the opportunity to submit proposals related to the outcomes of the first Global Forum meeting. Funding, however, will be critical, and interested donors are invited to reflect on ways to meet this need. It will be essential for the Forum to be kept abreast of the results of this cooperation in future meetings. A first report is expected in Manila in 2008. 5. Conclusions, the way forward and the role of focal points The Brussels meeting of the Global Forum and the process leading to it laid the foundations for a new, informal and State-led process for establishing new approaches to the migration and development debate through dialogue and partnerships. It sought to find concrete answers to the mutual challenges and opportunities offered by migration for development and vice versa. By moving development to the centre of the migration debate, it created a wider space for better achieving the respective objectives of migration and development policies, and for developing in the longer term a common vision on migration. This common vision would be based on a better understanding of the consequences of migration for development, and how migration policies can contribute to developing countries' achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. It can ultimately ensure that people migrate by choice rather than out of necessity. The Belgian Taskforce will make a full report available later in 2007 on the process and the first meeting of the Global Forum. As of 1 September 2007, the Republic of the Philippines will be the next Global Forum Chair-in-Office. The next meeting of the Forum will be organized in Manila in the second half of 2008. Reports on some of the issues discussed in Brussels will be expected at this meeting. While the Manila meeting may address other aspects of migration and development, it will also include continuing debate and reports on some of the issues discussed in Brussels, particularly those resulting in follow-up actions. As to the future of the Global Forum, an assessment of the first meeting and the process will be made on the basis of the evaluation form that Belgium distributed to all participants at the meeting. More than 100 such forms were returned by the participants, representing a balanced geographic mix. The following provisional modalities were already agreed upon for continuation of the Global Forum process: a troika comprising the past, present and future chairs, a regionally balanced Steering Group, the Friends of the Forum (open to all United Nations Member States), and a task force attached to the chair-in-office to organize, administer and report on the actual meeting (see annex for details). Beyond the operational modalities, five elements will contribute to the successful continuation of the Global Forum: exchange of information; funding support; ongoing government engagement; internal government coordination; and favourable public opinion. :: Exchange of information: participating Governments need to continue exchanging expertise and lessons learned, including from the implementation of the Forum's recommendations at national and international levels. It is equally important for the Forum to build upon regional initiatives and interregional conferences such as the Europe-Africa conferences and vice versa. :: Funding: funding will be needed not only to organize Forum meetings and preparatory activities but also to support projects and outcomes from both the round-table sessions and the marketplace. :: Ongoing government engagement: Governments need to take stock of the outcomes of these meetings, define appropriate strategies, commence actions and measure the results of these actions. :: Internal government coordination: Governments should take the necessary steps to place migration and development high on their political agenda, and to strengthen the capacities and roles of their respective departments or ministries to participate in the Forum. :: Favourable public opinion: information about the achievements of the Global Forum needs to be circulated widely among the public to ensure public support for a more positive perception about migration as an opportunity for development. The focal points are key to achieving all these. Their role, function and where appropriate their level should be strengthened, as conduits to the Forum, as coordinators of intragovernmental engagement, information-sharing and cooperation, also on initiatives arising from the Global Forum meetings, and as vehicles for interaction at the regional level. Governments should entrust them with an advocacy role to promote a more comprehensive approach towards migration policies taking development and other relevant policy areas into account. The networking of focal points at the global level should be reinforced for this purpose. [13 August 2007] The Global Forum on Migration and Development Operating modalities The Global Forum on Migration and Development is a voluntary, intergovernmental, non-binding and informal consultative process open to all States Members and observers of the United Nations. United Nations agencies and other international and regional bodies may be invited as observers. It was established on the proposal of the Secretary-General of the United Nations at the September 2006 General Assembly High-Level Dialogue on International Migration and Development. The Forum was initiated by Belgium and is led by Governments. Its purpose is to address, in a transparent manner, the multidimensional aspects, opportunities and challenges related to international migration and its interlinkages with development, to bring together government expertise from all regions, to enhance dialogue, cooperation and partnership and to foster practical and action-oriented outcomes at the national, regional and global levels. National Focal Points have been designated by participating Governments to coordinate Forum-related preparations at the national level. These operating modalities are of a preliminary nature and aim at ensuring sufficient continuity and practical support for the incoming chair(s), to be assessed and revised, as appropriate, in 2008. 1. Chairing arrangements -- Troika The host country (Chair-in-Office) assumes responsibility for the preparatory process and the implementation of each Forum. The host Government chairs all sessions related to Forum preparations and chairs the Forum. The Chair-in-Office is assisted by a Co-chair -- the country that organized the previous Forum. Once a third country has been identified to host a following meeting of the Forum, the three countries concerned will form the Troika that includes the outgoing Chair, the Chair-in-Office, and the forthcoming Chair of the Forum. The Co-chairs shall assist the Chair-in-Office. The Chair-in-Office should, in principle, alternate annually between a developing and a developed country. Countries interested in assuming the Chair of the Forum shall communicate their intention to the Troika. 2. Steering Group The Steering Group is comprised of Governments that are firmly committed to offer sustained political and conceptual support to the Chair-in-Office and to the Forum process, and to ensure continuity of the process. Its membership shall be sufficient in number to provide efficiency, flexibility and transparency. The Troika Governments are ex officio members. The Steering Group is regionally balanced and its composition takes into account different migration perspectives and interests of Governments, including those Governments that contribute substantially to the migration and development debate and are prepared to provide concrete input to the thematic preparation of Forum meetings. Steering Group members and the Chair-in- Office are also called upon to brief other Governments, as appropriate, on Forum-related developments, including through the National Forum Focal Points. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on international migration and development shall be invited to the meetings. Following the first meeting of the Forum in Brussels, the Steering Group and the Troika, with the support of participating Governments/National Focal Points, will undertake an assessment of the Forum process, including the preparations for and outcome of the first meeting of the Forum and the operating modalities of the Forum. The Steering Group is convened and chaired by the Chair-in-Office. It meets at regular intervals to consider and advise on all relevant policy issues pertaining to the smooth running of the Forum process. It may also create thematic follow-up working groups. It meets in Geneva. 3. Friends of the Forum The Friends of the Forum is open to all States Members and observers of the United Nations. Specialized agencies of the United Nations and other international organizations may be invited as observers. It acts as a sounding board, ensures that all States Members and observers of the United Nations are kept abreast of Forum-related developments and advises on the agenda, structure and format of each Forum meeting. Friends of the Forum meetings are chaired by the Chair-in-Office. They are held, in principle, at least twice in between each Forum meeting, at a venue to be determined by the Chair-in-Office. 4. Support structure The Support Structure should assist the Chair-in-Office in preparations for the Forum, including the deliberations of the Steering Group and the Friends of the Forum. It shall be responsible for maintaining the archives and for other related matters such as operating a website. The support structure is attached to and supervised by the Chair-in-Office. It may be comprised of host government staff as well as experts and advisers seconded from other Governments and from interested institutions. 5. Funding Each Chair-in-Office prepares a comprehensive budget for the respective Forum, indicating the part it will cover through its own resources and the part for which it will require external funding. Provisions for the possible transfer of leftover funds from one Chair-in-Office to the succeeding Chair-in-Office must also be considered. Financial contributions are paid to a fund administered by the Chair-in-Office. The Chair-in-Office incurs expenditures in accordance with the budget and ensures the efficient management of all funds received, including controlling and auditing. 6. Relationship with the United Nations system The Forum does not form part of the United Nations system. However, the Forum maintains, through the Steering Group, links with the Secretary-General, notably through the Special Representative on international migration and development. The Forum can also benefit from the expertise of the inter-agency Global Migration Group (GMG) and may consult with the GMG both through the individual institutions and the GMG chair. The Forum may also consult and cooperate with other relevant international and regional bodies. The Chair-in-Office conveys the outcomes of the Forum meeting to the Secretary-General. 7. Participation of civil society Appropriate arrangements shall be made for the participation of civil society, including relevant non-governmental organizations. 8. Format of Forum meetings The Forum meets every year for an interactive and practice-related dialogue. It is attended by high-level and senior government policymakers and its deliberations are held under the Chatham House Rule. An outcome report is prepared at the end of each Forum. [1 August 2007] Roundtable panellists List of panellists per regions Africa (11 panellists) Round table 1 Session 1.1: Dr. Ken Sagoe, Director, Human Resources Development, Ghana Health Service, Ghana Dr. Ann Phoya, Director of Nursing Services, Ministry of Health, Malawi Session 1.2: Mr. Youssef Amrani, Director General of Bilateral Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Morocco Session 1.4: Mr. Ali Mansoor, Financial Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, Mauritius Mr. Sefu Kawaya, MIDA Coordinator, Ministry of Labour, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) Round table 2 General rapporteur for round table 2: H.E. Professor Oumar Hammadoun Dicko, Minister for Malians Abroad and for African Integration, Mali Session 2.1: Mr. Abdelatif Fezzani, Deputy Director, DG Europe, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Tunisia Session 2.2: Mr. Seringe Dieye, Director of Chancery, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Senegal Session 2.4: Mr. Kaba Sangare, Technical Counsellor, Ministry for Malians Abroad and for African Integration, Mali Round table 3 Session 3.1: Mr. Samuel Goagoseb, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, Namibia Session 3.2: Dr. Isaac Mensa-Bonsu, Director, Plan Coordination, National Development Planning Commission, Ghana Latin America and Caribbean States (6 panellists) Session 1.2: Mr. Carlos Rodriguez Bocanegra, Counsellor, Embassy of Colombia to the Kingdom of Belgium and Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, and Mission to the European Union, Brussels, Colombia Session 1.3: H.E. Mr. Antonio Arenales Forno, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Guatemala to the European Union, the Kingdom of Belgium and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Brussels, Guatemala Session 1.4: Ms. Ana Eugenia Duran, Vice-Minister of Government and Policy, Costa Rica Session 2.2: Mr. Carlos Gonzalez Gutierrez, Executive Director of the Institute of Mexicans abroad, Mexico Session 2.3: H.E. Ms. Margarita Escobar, Deputy Minister of External Relations for Salvadorians abroad, El Salvador Session 3.1: Dr. Lester Mejía Solís, Ambassador of Nicaragua to Belgium Asia (8 panellists) General rapporteur for round table 1: Ms. Patricia Sto. Tomas, Chairwoman of the Development Bank of the Philippines, former Minister of Labour, the Philippines Session 1.2: Ms. Rosalinda Baldoz, Administrator of the Philippines Overseas Employment Administration, the Philippines Session 1.3: Dr. Hamidur Rashid, Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Bangladesh Session 2.1: Mr. Marianito D. Roque, Administrator of the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration, the Philippines Mr. Diwa C. Guinigundo, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank, the Philippines Session 2.4: H.E. Mr. Manjaiiv Singh Puri, Joint Secretary to the Government of India, India Session 3.3: H.E. Mr. Enrique A. Manalo, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva Session 3.4: Dr. Endang Sulistyaningsih, Director of Promotion for Overseas Employment, National Agency for Placement and Protection of Overseas Workers, Indonesia Europe (17 panellists) General rapporteur for horizontal issues: Mr. Jozef De Witte, Director of the Centre for Equality of Opportunity and the Fight against Racism, Belgium Session 1.1: Mr. Mark Lowcock, Director General for Policy and International, Department for International Development, United Kingdom Ms. Renée Jones-Bos, Director General for Regional Policy and Consular Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Netherlands Session 1.2: Ms. Marta Rodríguez-Tarduchy, Director General of immigration, Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, Spain Session 1.4: Ms. Rachel Bayani, Counselor Justice and Internal Affairs, Permanent Representation of the Duchy of Luxembourg at the European Union, Luxembourg Mr. Robert K. Visser, Director General for Legislation, International Affairs and Immigration, Ministry of Justice, the Netherlands Session 2.1: Ms. Tamara Zaballa Utrillas, Head of Area, Multilateral Organizations and European Union Unit, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Spain Session 2.2: Ms. Manuela Ramin-Osmundsen, Project Coordinator for Migration and Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway Session 2.3: Ms. Ayse Elif Talu, Central Bank, Turkey Mr. Marin Molosag, Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Moldova Ms. Maria João Azevedo, Head of Division, International Relations Department, Banco de Portugal, Portugal Session 2.4: Mr. Igor Haustrate, Deputy Director-General for Development Cooperation, Belgium Session 3.1: Ms. Marjatta Rasi, Under-Secretary of State, Finland Session 3.2: Mr. Joakim Stymne, State Secretary to the Minister for International Development Cooperation, Sweden and Mr. Ola Henrikson, Director General for Migration and Asylum Policy, Sweden Ms. Anita Bundegaard, Former Danish Minister of Development Cooperation, Denmark Session 3.3: H.E. Ms. Régine De Clercq, Ambassador for Migration and Asylum Policy, Executive Director of the Global Forum on Migration and Development Session 3.4: Mr. Kevin O'Sullivan, Director of Immigration Policy, Irish National Immigration Service, Ireland European Commission (4 panellists) Session 1.4: Mr. Jean-Louis De Brouwer, Director for Immigration, Borders and Asylum, Directorate General Justice, Freedom and Security, European Commission Session 2.1: Mr. Pedro de Lima, Deputy Economic Adviser, European Investment Bank (EIB) Session 3.1: Mr. Robertus Rozenburg, Deputy Head of Unit, Directorate General for Development, European Commission Session 3.4: Mr. Peter Bosch, Principal Administrator, Immigration and Asylum Unit, Directorate General -- Justice, Freedom and Security, European Commission International organizations (12 panellists) Roundtable 1 Session 1.1: Mr. Jean-Pierre Garson, Head of Non-member Economies and International Migration Division, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Dr. Jean Yan, Chief Scientist for Nursing and Midwifery, Chair of the Migration Technical Working Group, World Health Organization (WHO) Session 1.2: Mr. Ibrahim Awad, Director of the International Migration Programme, International Labour Organization (ILO) Session 1.3: Mr. Shahidul Haque, Regional Representative for South Asia, International Organization for Migration (IOM) Roundtable 2 Session 2.2: Mr. Arun Kashyap, Advisor, Private sector development, UNDP Session 2.3: Mr. Dilip Ratha, Senior Economist, Development Prospects Group Manager -- Migration and Remittances, World Bank Session 2.4: Ms. Maria Ochoa-Llido, Head of the Migration and Roma Department, Council of Europe General rapporteur for round table 3: Mr. Richard Manning, Chair of the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) Session 3.2: Mr. Luca Barbone, Director for Poverty Reduction and Development Effectiveness, World Bank Mr. Jeff Dayton Johnson, Senior Economist, Coordinator of the OECD Development Centre's Research Activities on Policy Coherence Session 3.3: Mr. Peter Sutherland, Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations on international migration and development Session 3.4: Ms. Michele Klein Solomon, Director, Migration Policy, Research and Communications Department, IOM Others (7 panellists) Session 1.3: Mr. René Mantha, Director, "Fondation des Entreprises en Recrutement de Main-d'Œuvre Agricole Etrangère" (FERME), Quebec Professor Philip Martin, College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, Department of Agricultural Economics, UC Davis, United States Mr. Rene Cristobal, President of Manpower Resources of Asia, Spokesperson of the Association for Professionalism in Overseas Employment, the Philippines Session 2.2: Ms. Anne-Françoise Lefevre, Adviser to the Chairman of the Management Committee, World Savings Banks Institute Session 2.4: Mr. Chukwu-Emeka Chikizie, Executive-Director, AFFORD Session 3.1: Dr. Dhananjayan Sriskandarajah, Senior Research Fellow and Head of the Migration, Equalities and Citizenship team, Institute for Public Policy Research Session 3.4: Mr. Vincent Williams, Programme Manager, Southern African Migration Project (SAMP), South Africa 