%%%DRUG CONTROL|TRANSNATIONAL CRIME|CRIME PREVENTION|COUNTER-TERRORISM|TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|NARCOTIC DRUGS|ORGANIZED CRIME|DRUG TRAFFIC|TERRORISM|CAPACITY BUILDING|LAUNDERING OF FUNDS|CORRUPTION|

Third Committee Summary record of the 7th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 11 October 2007, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica) Contents Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)* * Items which the Committee has decided to consider together. Agenda item 107: International drug control (continued)* The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m. Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) (A/62/84, A/62/126, A/62/127; A/C.3/62/L.2 and L.3) Agenda item 107: International drug control (continued) (A/62/117) 1. Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) said that his delegation aligned itself with the statements made by the representatives of Belarus and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). New challenges posed by transnational organized crime and drug trafficking in a globalized world called for concerted international efforts and a strengthening of relevant United Nations programmes and institutions. Accession to the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols and the Convention against Corruption must be broadened and the capacity of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) improved. The Russian Federation attached special priority to combating human trafficking and was enhancing both legislation and enforcement as well as strengthening international cooperation to that end. 2. The Organization's drug control capacities should be strengthened to deal with an increasingly difficult world drug situation. The new phenomenon of drugbased economies was a particular cause for concern. Narcotics production in Afghanistan was escalating, allowing drug trafficking to flourish and financing extremists. International efforts had not succeeded in easing the situation, and Afghanistan continued to pose a drug threat well beyond its borders. In that connection, he wished to draw attention to the Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan held in Moscow in June 2006, the outcome of which could form a basis for international cooperation on the issue. Drug control efforts should focus also on territories neighbouring Afghanistan, with a view to creating anti-drug and financial security belts. The Russian Federation continued to contribute to such efforts and urged the international community to do likewise. 3. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that transnational crime continued to be a serious threat to international security and that investment by countries in basic crime prevention efforts yielded benefits on the local, national, regional and international levels. Diverging views existed on how best to tackle the threats posed by transnational crime, as did different levels of development among countries in their law enforcement and legal capacities. Therefore, continued cooperation, in the form of information sharing, capacity-building, and technology transfer, was important in combating transnational crime. 4. Malaysia was a party to the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, which recognized that the problem could be solved only through close international cooperation. Bilateral cooperation between neighbours on issues of similar concern remained an effective and important way of addressing the problem. Information and intelligence sharing should be done on the basis of need and reciprocity, within the limits of the domestic legislation and country regulations, and taking into account the sensitivity of the information. 5. At the regional level, Malaysia had been working with its ASEAN partners to strengthen the legislative and procedural framework for practical cooperation in combating crime. It had spearheaded the formulation of the regional Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, which facilitated crossborder cooperation in criminal investigations and the gathering of evidence for court proceedings. 6. Domestically, Malaysian laws were constantly being reviewed to respond to the ever-changing nature and growing complexity of crime. Malaysia rendered and requested mutual legal assistance in information sharing under the 2002 Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act. Its Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act had recently come into force in August of that year. As trafficking in persons was multifaceted and complex, international initiatives should also focus on the developmental and security issues within the countries of origin. Malaysia welcomed those countries' initiatives to strengthen their own self-regulation measures in order to stamp out human trafficking. 7. On the issue of anti-money-laundering and the counter-financing of terrorism, the Asia-Pacific Group on Money Laundering, a regional financial action task force had conducted a mutual evaluation exercise of Malaysia's measures in that field early that year and had found that Malaysia was in the top two tiers of compliant countries on 33 of the recommendations, and partially compliant on 15. Malaysia would strive further to strengthen its efforts to ensure better compliance in the future. 8. Illicit drug trafficking, transnational in nature, could not be controlled or eradicated by any one country on its own. Strong international support and cooperation were vital in the efforts of national governments to combat the problem. His country had consistently called for stringent measures to curb illicit drug trafficking. Comprehensive steps were being taken by Malaysia's National Anti-Drug Agency to create a drug-free generation by 2023. 9. Mr. Yamaguchi (Japan) said that in order to reduce the supply of illegal drugs, every country's law enforcement agencies needed to have adequate power and appropriate regulations in place against illegal trafficking in narcotic drugs. At the fiftieth session of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs in March, Japan had tabled the draft resolution on use of drug characterization and chemical profiling in support of drug law enforcement intelligence-gathering and operational work, as well as trend analysis, which had been adopted by consensus and had to be followed up. 10. A reduction in the demand for drugs required a reduction in the number of people abusing drugs. In Japan, both the Government and civil society had waged a vigorous campaign on the issue. The Government monitored the process of following up the outcome of the twentieth special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, and would participate actively in the next session of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. 11. Japan was taking a variety of steps to combat human trafficking based on the Action Plan for Trafficking in Persons. It was discussing countermeasures that might be taken with countries that sent and countries that received victims of trafficking. To protect victims, his country was also implementing a rehabilitation programme through UNODC. In addition, it had taken steps against corruption, such as promoting technical support, training on the prevention of corruption, and dispatching technical experts to other countries through the Japan International Cooperation Agency. 12. As those who perpetrated transnational organized crime often based their operations in countries where the administration of criminal justice and law enforcement were inadequate, those countries should be given support to address their deficiencies. The United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (UNAFEI) was based in Japan and offered training courses for officers in charge of criminal justice systems in the Asia-Pacific region. His country welcomed the adoption of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy by the General Assembly and pledged to continue to contribute to the implementation of the Strategy in cooperation with other Member States. 13. Japan appreciated the role that UNODC played in the fields of drugs and crime and welcomed the Office's steps to promote reform and create an "evaluation culture". It was important for UNODC to continue striving to enhance the quality of its work and follow it up in a timely and appropriate manner. Given its limitations in resources, mandate and specific area of expertise, the Office needed to promote cooperation with related organizations and avoid duplicating projects being conducted elsewhere. Lastly, UNODC should also be prudent about moving into new areas, especially if that would have a serious impact on the policies of Member States. 14. Mr. Emadi (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that the issue of illicit drug production and trafficking was one of the most serious problems that the international community faced, a problem that required collective and concerted efforts. However, despite action taken by States and international organizations to combat illicit drug production, consumption and trafficking, there was no satisfactory prospect of an immediate solution. 15. The Islamic Republic of Iran, sharing borders with the Golden Crescent countries, stood on the forefront in combating drug abuse and smuggling worldwide. Following the rise of the Taliban in Afghanistan, which led to an unprecedented increase in opium production in that country, the Islamic Republic of Iran was confronted with large amounts of narcotics transported from Afghanistan to other countries through Iranian territory. His Government's unwanted fight against that phenomenon had been highly costly in terms of lives lost and money spent. 16. The Iranian Government was aware of the difficulties faced by the current Government of Afghanistan. However, the presence of coalition forces in Afghanistan had not led to the eradication or even to the reduction of the deep-rooted problem. Instead, they had demonstrated indifference to the increased cultivation of opiates there. 17. International bodies, especially UNODC, had recognized the massive and effective actions of Iranian forces against drug consignments and narcotics trafficking networks. His Government had taken measures to minimize the benefits of the illicit drug trade, such as mobilizing 30,000 troops along the joint borders with Afghanistan and Pakistan, and reinforcing the fortifications and control systems at border checkpoints in order to prevent the entry of trafficking caravans into the country. Those measures had resulted in the confiscation of massive amounts of narcotics, and the Islamic Republic of Iran had been ranked first in the world in narcotics confiscation, accounting for 80 per cent of global opium and heroin seizures. 18. His country had also signed cooperation agreements with over 30 countries on combating narcotics. In order to strengthen regional cooperation within the framework of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), it had taken the initiative of establishing a Drug Combating Unit, as well as holding workshops on drug supply and demand reduction among ECO member States. Further, it had established regular contacts with senior anti-drug officials in Afghanistan and Pakistan and had cooperated closely with UNODC to coordinate measures that involved the three countries. 19. Ms. Bowen (Jamaica), speaking on behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), said that the international community had acknowledged the nexus between transnational organized crime and the drug trade. The global dimension of the problem required international efforts to deal with it, as a shared responsibility to be addressed in a multilateral setting. The approach to crime prevention and combating the drug trade must be in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, non-intervention in their internal affairs, and all human rights and fundamental freedoms. 20. The CARICOM countries were signatories to a number of international instruments in the area of crime prevention and drug control. They faced challenges, however, in applying those instruments at the domestic level, mainly due to lack of resources, and were exploring creative ways to bridge the gap through partnerships and subregional cooperation. CARICOM had expressed its dismay at the prospect of closing the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) office in Barbados, and did not consider its termination a closed matter. Its members were seriously in need of the services offered by the Office, and would continue to press for a reversal of the decision and demonstrate that the concerns of the people of the Caribbean were to be taken as seriously as any other group. CARICOM continued to cooperate with the European Union in the areas of demand and supply reduction, moneylaundering and police and judicial cooperation. 21. The particular problems faced by CARICOM included disproportionately high crime rates in relation to population size, the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons, international demand for drugs and the effects of international terrorism. The deportation of criminals continued to have a destabilizing effect on societies in the region. Individuals were expelled by their adopted countries and returned, often with no remaining family or social support networks to assist their re-entry into those vulnerable societies. It would be far more advantageous for those countries to be able to put their scarce resources into schools rather than prisons. Its central location as an easy trans-shipment point between North and South America and Europe, while a geographical advantage, had also begun to pose significant challenges to its capacity to respond to drugs and crime. 22. The nexus between the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the drugs trade had also been well established. CARICOM countries were not arms producers, nor did they trade in small arms, yet they continued to attract an abundance of such weapons illegally, challenging their capacity for crime prevention and placing added burdens on the criminal justice system. The high crime rate affected their development efforts and threatened internal security. They continued to emphasize the importance of the early and full implementation of the Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons as well as an international instrument enabling States to identify and trace illicit small arms and light weapons. 23. Lastly, there were some accomplishments in the Caribbean region in meeting the targets set by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, especially in the areas of interdiction and legislation, including with regard to trafficking in persons. An integrated regional approach to security had helped to strengthen the countries' capacity for border control and surveillance. The success of such initiatives, of course, would depend on serious financial commitments and competing demands on limited resources. 24. Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein) said that the activities of UNODC were a crucial component of overall United Nations action to promote the rule of law worldwide. Long-term, sustained assistance was necessary for strengthening the capacity of criminal justice systems to apply those instruments in full conformity with the rule of law and human rights standards. Since international cooperation was at the heart of the fight against transnational organized crime and terrorism, ensuring the application of common standards for all States was a prerequisite for the success of efforts by the international community. Only an approach based on the rule of law and full respect for human rights could create the necessary trust among civil society and the private sector in the effectiveness of measures taken by State authorities and promote mutual trust among States. 25. Capacity-building was vitally important, and his delegation welcomed partnerships between UNODC and other organizations pursuing similar objectives, which had the potential to create synergies, avoid duplication of effort and ensure the targeted use of scarce resources. It commended the cooperation with the World Bank in the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative and with the International Centre for Asset Recovery. The Centre had recently convened an expert group meeting to explore the application of the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Lastly, Liechtenstein had taken a number of measures to strengthen its prevention regime further against the abuse of its financial centre for criminal purposes. A delegation from the International Monetary Fund had also reviewed its regulatory and supervisory system for combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, and its report was expected in the near future. 26. Mr. Sen (India) said that the World Drug Report 2007 pointed to remarkable progress made by South-East Asia in eliminating sources of heroin supply, stemming from an 85 per cent reduction in poppy cultivation in the area. Global coca cultivation and cocaine production had also continued to decline in 2006. There were serious concerns, however, over the concentration of opium production in Afghanistan, which had accounted for 92 per cent of global opium production in 2006. In the context of the 2008 review of progress in achieving the goals and targets set at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, all relevant stakeholders should identify the challenges still confronting them so that collective strategies could be devised to address them. 27. Terrorism remained one of the major challenges to international peace and security, undermining the very foundation of freedom, democracy and human rights and the continued existence of open and democratic societies. The adoption of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy signalled the will of the international community to combat that menace in a holistic and coordinated manner. Without the early adoption of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, the global struggle against terrorism would remain incomplete. Zero tolerance for all forms of terrorism must be ensured. The growing role of UNODC in counter-terrorism efforts, especially its technical assistance activities, was highly appreciated, and had helped to increase the number of countries that had ratified all 12 universal legal instruments in that field. 28. In view of the increasing demands placed on UNODC for implementation assistance, his delegation supported the allocation of increased resources for its counter-terrorism activities from the United Nations regular budget and voluntary contributions. It also supported the statement by the representative of Jamaica on behalf of CARICOM expressing dismay at the closure of the UNODC office in the region. While efforts were under way to increase overall resources, the Office should use its existing resources in an optimal way. Financial efficiency was not the only criterion to be considered. As a specialized agency, the Office had been created to serve the interests of Member States, including the smallest and most vulnerable. Hence, in the view of his delegation, it must reconsider that issue. 29. India had been examining the need to amend its Code of Criminal Procedure to further streamline the criminal justice system, notably to provide special protections for women crime victims. It had signed the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols and was taking steps towards their ratification. The nexus between transnational organized crime, illicit drugs, money-laundering and illegal arms transactions and international terrorism undermined international peace and security. A world free of those scourges would require concerted effort at national, regional and international levels, and India remained fully committed to working closely with other countries to address those issues. 30. Mr. Amoros Nuñez (Cuba) said that his delegation was highly concerned at the growth of transnational organized crime and terrorism and the increasing diversification and sophistication of organized criminal groups. The current international system, driven by a thirst for profit and increasing globalization, created ideal conditions for those phenomena. No country could fight them by itself, but the necessary resources for a preventive approach had not been allocated. The major Powers had avoided their responsibility, assuming the role of judge or policeman instead. 31. The solutions to those problems had already been outlined in numerous documents negotiated and agreed in many forums, but were doomed to be forgotten. Much less would remain to be done if the international community had upheld the principle of the shared responsibility of all States in the fight against transnational crime, instead of some powerful nations unilaterally certifying good or bad behaviour. Further, the threat or use of force from a position of undisputed military superiority, including the doctrine of the right to a pre-emptive war, showed a lack of understanding that war destroyed nations and, rather than eradicating poverty, inequality, injustice, hunger, corruption and terrorism, tended to increase them. True cooperation must be promoted in the establishment of just, democratic, equitable and supportive international systems, which placed priority on the well-being of all peoples, without exclusion or discrimination. 32. There was no room for double standards in combating international crime. It was unacceptable that the United States of America, whose drug business generated tens of billions of dollars per year for traffickers, should judge others in matters of drug trafficking. Despite the damage caused by the embargo, Cuba had achieved a great deal in crime prevention, criminal justice and combating the international drug problem. It had proven its commitment to international cooperation in that area, and actively participated in related international forums and mechanisms. It would continue to do its duty in fighting those scourges, and would make every effort to prevent its territory from being used to carry out criminal actions against the people of the United States or any other people in the world. 33. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the drug epidemic, the narcotics trade and crime were some of the fundamental problems besetting the modern world and that those phenomena deserved attention because of their destructive impact on social, cultural, economic and political stability and on sustainable development. Immediate solutions were needed in order to mitigate the impact of those phenomena on societies. The Syrian Arab Republic was party to most of the international instruments to combat crime and was one of the first parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime of 2000 and its Protocols. Her Government had concluded bilateral and multilateral agreements, above all in the area of extradition. 34. Trafficking in humans had become one of the most serious aspects of transnational organized crime, transcending national and geographic borders. The Syrian Arab Republic had participated actively in all regional conferences on human trafficking and had set up a national commission that aimed to enact a law against human trafficking, in conjunction with the International Organization for Migration and the United Nations Development Programme. 35. Her Government also supported sincere international efforts to combat terrorism but drew a clear distinction between the fight against terrorism and the inalienable right of persons to fight against foreign occupation. It further endorsed the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, along with measures taken under it to eradicate terrorism's underlying causes. Those strategies, however, could in no way replace a definition of terrorism or the conclusion of the process of negotiating a comprehensive convention on terrorism. The Syrian Arab Republic had ratified 10 of the 13 counter-terrorism conventions and was considering acceding to the remaining conventions. 36. Her country had also established a national task force to combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, having acceded to the regional anti-terrorism conventions, including the Arab Convention for the Suppression of Terrorism and the relevant Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Further, her Government had entered into bilateral agreements with a number of countries in the region to facilitate information-sharing on drug trafficking, and had also signed the Convention against Corruption. The Syrian Government was working closely with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and expressed its satisfaction with the regional UNODC office's efforts. It called for further technical and financial support to be provided to the office to enable it to carry out its mission more thoroughly. 37. Mr. Heller (Mexico) said that Mexico was an active participant in the work of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD), including the expert groups on chemical substances and pharmaceutical products. It had submitted several draft resolutions at the fiftieth session of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. Mexico had promoted initiatives to prevent the illicit distribution via the Internet of controlled pharmaceutical products. In view of the alarming increase in the use of synthetic drugs, his delegation called on the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to encourage States to develop strategies to combat the illicit distribution of substances via the Internet and to reaffirm their commitment to prevent the use and abuse of such drugs. The International Narcotics Control Board played an important role in the establishment and maintenance of mechanisms for preventing the diversion of chemical precursors for the illegal manufacture of drugs, as well as promoting greater cooperation and exchange of information among countries. 38. Mexico had played a leading role in the development and creation of mechanisms to implement international instruments governing international cooperation in the field of organized crime and drug trafficking, including the United Nations Convention against Corruption, known as the Mérida Convention. On 26 September 2007, the Senate of the Republic had passed the Prevention and Punishment of Trafficking in Persons Act. Mexico condemned human trafficking as a detestable contemporary form of slavery and recognized the urgent need for broad international cooperation to combat it. His delegation looked forward to participating actively in the Vienna Forum to be held in early 2008. 39. Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) said that Qatar was committed to participating nationally and internationally in drug control and crime prevention and that it had taken several steps in the recent past to translate its commitment into action. The Global Sport Fund had been established in cooperation with UNODC in May 2006, thanks to the contribution by Qatar. The Fund supported the efforts of organizations worldwide that used athletics to combat drug abuse and juvenile delinquency and crime. The activities supported by the Fund would be models of what could be achieved by athletics, both on the field and beyond it, as it helped communities and youth to chose a better life. 40. UNODC organized popular awareness campaigns in which sporting stars conveyed the message, "Yes to sport, no to drugs". The Office also held sports camps in which sport was used to teach tolerance, leadership, and life skills. Sport was about more than competition and winning. It meant participation, involvement, fitness, enhanced self-confidence, respect and tolerance. He invited delegations to visit the Fund's website, www.globalsportfund.com, to familiarize themselves with the distinct experience of Qatar in that regard. Qatar would continue its efforts on the national level to achieve the international objectives in the field of crime and drug abuse prevention. 41. Ms. Gendi (Egypt) said that the United Nations played an important role in crime prevention, criminal justice and combating the drug problem that was fundamental in achieving stability and social peace. Egypt was among the first countries to adopt resolutions relating to that role and ratify regional and international treaties and conventions against all forms of crime and terrorism. It had always worked to support the Organization's activities in building the capacity of Member States to fight organized crime and international terrorism and supported the activities of the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime, which had its regional office in Cairo. 42. UNODC assisted Member States' capacity to fulfil their commitments under international treaties, prepare national legislation and train their cadres in combating crime, terrorism, corruption and money-laundering. The Office was also creating a programme to combat illegal immigration, a phenomenon that Egypt was particularly beset with as a country of transit. In that regard, Egypt echoed the call for Member States to review their policies concerning travel and identity documents. 43. The Egyptian delegation had studied closely the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme (A/62/126). Despite the vitality of UNODC programmes on the African continent, the Office suffered from a lack of funding. That required the attention of the donor countries and institutions that financed its programmes, since justice and security were two sides of the same coin and were directly related to work on sustainable development in order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in Africa. 44. Her country commended the efforts by UNODC to promote support for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the documentation of crime in Africa, given that Africa was one of the least developed regions in that regard. Five countries, including Egypt, were to begin working on the creation of a reliable database to support African efforts to combat crime and drug use. 45. In 2010, countries would meet at the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to face new global challenges such as modern economic and technological crimes. Egypt hoped that the appropriate treatment of the underlying causes of the spread of terrorism would be identified and addressed. The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy had affirmed the importance of ending foreign occupation, as it was one of the causes of violence around the world. 46. Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan), speaking on behalf of the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), said that drugs posed one of the most serious threats to mankind, undermining the social, economic and political stability of States and of the international community as a whole. A concerted and comprehensive approach was needed, requiring a maximum of resources. Technical assistance should also be provided for national control efforts. Each year, 150 tons of heroin were trafficked from Afghanistan through Central Asia. That posed a significant threat to the CIS countries, where the number of addicts was projected to increase to 25 million by 2010, and the number of persons living with HIV/AIDS to 10 million. One important initiative was the Paris-Moscow Process, which enabled Governments to pool their efforts to combat the spread of drugs from Afghanistan. The newly established Central Asia Regional Information and Coordination Centre would also be working in close cooperation with the United Nations and UNODC to promote information exchange and analysis. CIS countries had adopted joint plans to harmonize and strengthen border control policy and combat illicit trafficking in narcotic and psychotropic substances and their precursors. 47. Mr. Swe (Myanmar), noting that the report of the Secretary-General on international cooperation against the world drug problem (A/62/117) underscored the decline in opium poppy cultivation in the Golden Triangle, pointed out that Myanmar's achievements in reducing poppy cultivation had been documented in the World Drug Reports issued over the last few years. Myanmar had cooperated with the United States in conducting opium yield surveys from 1993 until 2004, although it had received no bilateral assistance from that country to combat the scourge of narcotic drugs. Illicit poppy cultivation had declined steadily in Myanmar for eight consecutive years; however, the latest preliminary figures released by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) showed that it had increased somewhat in the last few months. Nevertheless, while illicit poppy cultivation in Myanmar had accounted for 63 per cent of the world opium market in 1998, that share had fallen to six per cent by 2006. As noted by the Secretary-General in his report (para. 89), more needed to be done by the international community to assist former opium growers living in extreme poverty to face the challenges posed in the post-opium-cultivating period. 48. His Government was determined to rid the country of narcotic drugs by 2014, one year ahead of the date set by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The country's fight against drugs was based on two strategies aimed at the eradication of narcotic drugs and the total eradication of poppy cultivation by promoting better living standards for people of all nationalities residing in the border areas. Those strategies would be implemented by reducing the supply of drugs, reducing demand and increasing enforcement measures. To that end, the Government had strengthened its enforcement capacity and had been providing alternative livelihood opportunities for farmers so as to encourage them to end their dependence on opium poppy cultivation. The New Destiny Project launched in April 2002 was designed to promote such activities and to provide support to poppy growers as they turned to alternative cash crops. 49. At the regional level, Myanmar was working with other ASEAN members to reach the goal of making the region drug-free by 2015. Myanmar had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with six countries for the creation of a Greater Mekong subregion drug-free zone. The impressive progress made by Myanmar in combating the drug problem had been achieved with little or no external assistance. Unless assistance was forthcoming to provide alternative livelihood opportunities and help alleviate the acute poverty of former poppy growers, they might eventually go back to their previous business in order to survive. The ominous threat posed by amphetamine-type stimulants was also a growing concern. Myanmar was cooperating closely with its neighbours to prohibit precursor chemicals and eradicate the production of those stimulants. Myanmar neither produced nor imported precursor chemicals. 50. Mr. Siles (Bolivia) said that one of the symbols of Bolivia's new national consciousness was the coca leaf, a sacred leaf which had been unjustly criminalized and stigmatized by the international community. The zero coca policy that had been imposed on Bolivia by one of the countries with the highest rates of drug use had only created hardships for the poorest coca-growing families. Through its new policy of "Coca Yes, Cocaine No", the Bolivian Government had made significant progress in the process of banning the precursors used in cocaine production, as well as in seizing drugs in transit to consumer countries. Bolivia had signed and ratified all the treaties aimed at fighting drug use and trafficking and had declared war on cocaine producers, traffickers and users. It was carrying out a well-organized effort to eradicate surplus coca crops, while respecting the human rights of peasants and taking into account the traditional and non-traditional uses of the coca leaf. 51. Bolivia rejected unilateral certifications issued by countries that had set themselves up as judges of his Government's efforts against drug trafficking. Priority should be given to combating those who produced and sold drugs, not the farmers who produced the raw materials. Economic resources should be used to improve technological and logistical resources to make it possible to conduct an efficient campaign against drug traffickers. The effort should be carried out jointly by producer and consumer countries. Demand-reduction policies must be strengthened in order to decrease the supply of raw materials. Bolivia did not need any economic or military help to eradicate coca plantations. What his country needed was technical and economic cooperation to industrialize the beneficial products of the coca leaf. It also needed access to international markets for its alternative products, as well as logistical support to combat the production and sale of cocaine. Markets for the consumption of illicit drugs should be eliminated. 52. Mr. Azor (Haiti) said that his Government was committed to working with other countries, in particular the United States and Canada, to eliminate the transit of drugs through Haiti. It applauded the efforts of consumer countries to reduce demand and eliminate trafficking. Haiti had actively participated in the forum on drugs that had been held in the Dominican Republic in March 2007. His Government hoped that the United States would mobilize sufficient resources to combat the illicit trafficking of drugs by sea, pursuant to an agreement signed in 1997. The Haitian Government had taken steps to strengthen the National Commission to Combat Drugs and to reinforce the security forces patrolling the land and maritime borders. It was hoped that the Security Council would approve the Secretary-General's recommendation on enhancing the capabilities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in border control in collaboration with the National Police. 53. His Government was committed to strengthening the judiciary with a view to ensuring stability for the professional staff and attracting some of the most competent personnel who had left the country. Not only had there been an exodus of Haitians, there had also been a sharp decline in the number of tourists visiting Haiti. The reform of the judiciary was crucial to reviving the tourist industry. President Préval was committed to eliminating corruption in the court system and the police force. A working group on law enforcement reform had been established in June 2007 following a meeting convened by the Head of State with the participation, inter alia, of the business sector. 54. In July 2006, with the assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Ministry of Justice had embarked on an effort to consolidate the independence of the courts. An inter-ministerial committee had been set up to implement and strengthen judicial cooperation in fighting international organized crime. Training sessions had been held for judges and other officials to enhance their capacity to deal with cases of corruption, drug trafficking, money laundering and organized crime. 55. Mr. Ganhuayg (Mongolia) said that his delegation wished to commend the Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking launched by UNODC, which would help enhance the capacity of Member States and other stakeholders to counter human trafficking and implement the Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Palermo Convention), on the prevention, suppression and punishment of trafficking in persons. His Government was collaborating with the relevant international organizations, including the International Organization for Migration (IOM), on the issues of human trafficking, commercial sexual exploitation and drug abuse. 56. Mongolia attached particular importance to the fight against corruption. As a party to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, his Government had taken significant steps to combat corruption in parallel with steps to combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. In July 2006, the Parliament had passed a comprehensive anti-corruption law which provided for the creation of the Anti-Corruption Agency. The newly established Agency needed assistance from the relevant international organizations and agencies of other countries in the areas of jurisdiction, investigation and prosecution, transfer of assets, recovery, training, sharing of best practices and fulfilment of the country's obligations under the United Nations Convention against Corruption. His delegation attached particular importance to the first session of the Conference of the States Parties held in December 2006 in Amman. 57. Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand) said that the world drug problem required strengthened international partnerships as well as a holistic approach tackling both supply and demand. The role of the mass media was important in convincing target groups of the danger of drugs. Rehabilitation and reintegration efforts must also be accompanied by improved data collection and evaluation capacity. 58. In the "Golden Triangle" of South-East Asia, illicit opium poppy cultivation had fallen by 80 per cent since 2000 thanks to people-centred alternative development initiatives which provided better access to basic infrastructure, food security, basic health-care services, vocational training and primary education. Thailand had established a regional training centre to share its successes in that regard. His delegation called upon the international community to provide funding for alternative development. Both developed and developing countries should cooperate by opening their markets to such products. 59. Thailand was working hard to tackle trafficking in human beings through prevention, protection and prosecution based on respect for human rights. National legislation was also being amended in line with the relevant protocol of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. His delegation strongly supported the Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking to be held in Vienna in 2008 and called for full implementation of the Bangkok Declaration adopted by the Eleventh Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. 60. Mr. Chin Mingjun (Singapore) said that the World Drug Report showed that the international drug problem was being contained. Almost half of all cocaine and a quarter of all heroine produced was intercepted. However, there were still 25 million problem drug users worldwide, and several regions lacking central government control continued to thrive as drug production centres. Trafficking continued across borders, making international cooperation vital. In Singapore, legislation had been strengthened to deter drug offenders and enforcement had been tightened. The national drug control strategy included preventive education, rehabilitation and community involvement. In 1995, a National Council Against Drug Abuse had been established, bringing together government bodies, self-help groups, halfway houses and community leaders. 61. Thanks to initiatives such as the Community Action for the Rehabilitation of Ex-Offenders (CARE) Network and Yellow Ribbon Project, the country's drug situation was well under control. The number of arrests for drug abuse had decreased from 6,200 in 1994 to 1,100 in 1996, and the percentage of drug abusers was one of the lowest in the world. Singapore was committed to regional and international cooperation on drug control efforts and had hosted the Twenty-Sixth Meeting of ASEAN Senior Officials on Drug Matters and the Second ASEAN and China Cooperative Operations in Response to Dangerous Drugs (ACCORD) Joint Task Force Meeting. Lastly, his delegation was surprised that the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) had used debate on the current agenda item to express his own personal views on the question of the death penalty and wished to caution him against exceeding his mandate. 62. Mr. Anshor (Indonesia) said that crime, drugs and terrorism were universal challenges requiring effective responses at the national, regional and international levels. His delegation commended UNODC on its efforts to provide country-driven technical cooperation in relevant fields. However overdependence on earmarked contributions could lead to an unpredictable funding situation and make it difficult for the Office to plan ahead. UNODC should receive regular resources commensurate with its mandate. The United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking should be the product of an intergovernmental consultative process to ensure that all interests were taken into account. Illicit trafficking in forest products had adverse environmental, social and economic impacts in many countries and called for common international measures. The crime was of particularly grave concern when the sources were tropical rainforests, vital guardians against climate change and global warming. 63. Alternative development was crucial to a balanced and comprehensive drug control strategy, and there was a need for increased partnership between UNODC and other relevant United Nations agencies, international organizations and development partners to strengthen Member States' capacities in that area, including in the area of prevention. Civil society and the private sector also had a role to play. The fight against corruption was another key priority. Indonesia was pleased to be hosting the Second Conference of the State Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption in Bali in early 2008. 64. Mr. Chabar (Morocco) said that the close connection between organized crime, terrorism and drug trafficking was significant, given the priority placed on combating those scourges. His delegation welcomed the trend towards multisectoral and coordinated national strategies for drug control. However, despite encouraging results, the fight against those ills depended on respect for the rule of law and good governance at the local, national and international levels. Sustained international cooperation and appropriate technical assistance were required to enable effective implementation of such plans, especially in developing countries. Morocco was in the process of harmonizing its national legislation with the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, which had led to a reform of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. 65. Further discussion was needed on the human and socio-economic aspects of organized crime, which included trafficking in persons and illicit trafficking of migrants. Morocco had established a National Commission on Narcotic Drugs. It was working to relieve the isolation of its northern provinces, in the hope that increased development would lead to total eradication of the illicit cultivation of cannabis. Crop substitution programmes and the promotion of rural tourism had begun to bear fruit, resulting in a 46 per cent drop in the amount of land under cultivation for cannabis. Morocco was firmly committed to fighting drug trafficking, and was willing to take responsibility for its part in the problem. In reality, however, it was a combination of national efforts, regional cooperation and appropriate international assistance that would bring an end to that scourge. The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 