%%%TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|TREATIES|REGIONAL COOPERATION|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|CAPACITY BUILDING|LAUNDERING OF FUNDS|LAW ENFORCEMENT|

Sixth Committee Summary record of the 4th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 11 October 2007, at 10 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Tulbure (Moldova) Contents Agenda item 108: Measures to eliminate international terrorism (continued) The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m. Agenda item 108: Measures to eliminate international terrorism (continued) (A/62/37, A/62/160 and A/62/291) 1. Ms. Rodríguez-Pineda (Guatemala) said that the universal character of the United Nations made it the most appropriate intergovernmental forum for dealing with the subject of international terrorism, which should not be viewed from the perspective of the individual risk to a given country, but from that of a threat calling for a concerted response from all countries. 2. In May, at the request of the Guatemalan Government, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of American States had run a workshop on the formulation of legislation to implement international anti-terrorism instruments and the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism. The purpose was to establish a dialogue with the main entities responsible for drafting and updating counter-terrorism laws in order to comply with obligations under the conventions referred to in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and subsequent Security Council resolutions on the subject. 3. Her Government had already ratified 10 of the existing universal instruments, as well as the InterAmerican Convention against Terrorism, and the ratification of six international instruments was pending. Laws to combat international crime and the financing of terrorism had been adopted, and Congress was studying a bill against international terrorism. Current efforts to bring the acts of terrorism identified in universal conventions within the ambit of national legislation would be helped by the conclusion in the near future of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism containing a definition which took account of the multidimensional nature of the phenomenon. 4. Although closer attention should be paid to ex post facto ways of preventing terrorism, such as sanctions, priority should go to addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, since all States large or small, strong or weak, were vulnerable to the scourge. Guatemala's geographical position made it a transit point for drugs and exposed it to related criminal activities. Those factors, coupled with extreme poverty, increased the risk of it falling prey to terrorist acts, since organized crime, drug trafficking and terrorism had been found to be interrelated. 5. It was vital to boost international cooperation if international terrorism was to be stamped out. Her country was grateful for the international, regional and bilateral support it had received, but it would still require long-term assistance from the international community for the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Lastly, she commended the delegation of Liechtenstein for organizing a meeting on terrorism and human rights, one aspect of the Global Strategy which needed bolstering. 6. Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh) said that, although the development and codification of conventions on specific aspects of combating terrorism were important tools, it was worrying that no consensus had been reached on a comprehensive convention on international terrorism. He therefore hoped that negotiations on the convention would soon reach a successful conclusion. Terrorism had a wide variety of root causes, including injustice, inequalities, subjugation and exploitation, all of which must be targeted if terrorism was to be eliminated forever. 7. Since his Government condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purpose, it had ratified 13 international conventions on terrorism and it was a party to the Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). Bangladesh also complied fully with all its obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions. 8. Terrorism was all pervasive and it crossed the boundaries of race, religion, culture and States. Nevertheless the unfair and imprudent tendency to associate terrorism with Islam not only ignored that religion's contribution to human civilization and culture, but was also breeding distrust, thereby undermining efforts to contain terrorism. Bridgebuilding would be more effective and, in that connection, he wished to draw attention to the resolution on the culture of peace which his delegation sponsored every year. 9. Any comprehensive convention on international terrorism must address the issue of State terrorism and any definition of terrorism should be crafted in such a way as to cover all terrorist activities, whether sponsored by a State or non-State actor. Acts of terrorism against innocent people were always abhorrent. For that reason, strict laws must be passed nationally and internationally so as to ensure that a commensurate response was found to every act of terrorism. To that end, the United Nations and the international community should support those who required capacity-building resources. 10. On the other hand, a clear distinction should be drawn between terrorism and the legitimate struggle against colonial domination and foreign occupation. His own country had struggled for independence, and that struggle, like other wars of liberation had been asymmetric and conducted unconventionally. Revulsion against terrorism should not therefore be used for political ends to suppress genuine popular movements striving for freedom and self-determination. Any attempt to do so was bound to backfire. 11. The adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy had been a milestone achievement. The next target must be the early adoption of a comprehensive convention. Public opinion all over the world was in favour of such a move. The opportunity to discharge the Sixth Committee's responsibility to rising generations should not be missed. 12. Mr. Mansour (Tunisia) said that despite efforts to eliminate terrorism many countries were still suffering greatly from that scourge, which was taking on alarming proportions and threatening all societies, irrespective of ethnic group, culture or religion. Given the number of victims from the many acts of terrorism which had been committed over the past year, it had to be acknowledged that the battle against terrorism had been unsuccessful and that it could be won only by addressing its manifold underlying causes. Political and economic injustice, long festering conflicts and marginalization were just some of the factors fuelling the hatred on which extremism and terrorism fed. 13. The growing terrorist threat was a constant reminder that unilateral action had its limitations and that closer cooperation between countries all over the world was an essential prerequisite for a firm, effective collective response addressing its underlying causes. While the United Nations remained the most appropriate framework for coordinating such collective action, better coordination and closer synergy between its various organs was vital if it was to function efficaciously. 14. Since the time for a review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was approaching, it would be advisable to give greater thought to ways of encouraging Member States to be more proactive with regard to implementation and to how to revive the Strategy to ensure that it answered the latest concerns and was in tune with current circumstances. As part of its endeavours in that direction, Tunisia was preparing to host a large international conference on terrorism in November 2007, which would scrutinize the causes of terrorism and ways of combating it, including the drafting of an international code of conduct binding on all parties. He also wished to remind delegations that his Government advocated convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations for that very purpose. 15. The conceptual and legal framework put in place by the General Assembly was useful, but deficiencies arising from its sectoral nature pointed to a need for an effective comprehensive instrument. He therefore hoped that consultations would be pursued in a constructive spirit in order to arrive at consensus on a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 16. His country, which was deeply attached to the values of open-mindedness, tolerance and moderation, believed that a dialogue between civilizations and cultures offered the only path to peaceful coexistence in the world by promoting understanding and rapprochement among peoples. 17. Mr. Mukongo Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) said that although his delegation condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever reason, it believed that the struggle against terrorism must not lead to the negation of human rights. It was a battle calling for large-scale efforts which would bear fruit only in the long term. The emphasis should be on the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict prevention in keeping with Chapters VI and VII of the Charter of the United Nations. 18. States must coordinate the action of their own police forces and intelligence services better if they wished to participate effectively in the fight against terrorism. At the same time, cooperation between security forces and intelligence services at home and abroad must be improved and all law enforcement agencies and decision makers must exchange data. 19. Since the war had ended in his country, several advances had been made with regard to combating international terrorism. It had become a party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three protocols and to the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Parliament had approved accession to the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and ratification of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The process of incorporating certain conventions and protocols to which it was a party into its municipal law had commenced with a view to giving its domestic courts jurisdiction to try the perpetrators of terrorist acts and enabling its judiciary to cooperate with other States and international or regional organizations in bringing such persons to trial. 20. His country's Act on money-laundering and the financing of terrorism contained a wide array of measures for the prevention and detection of operations to finance terrorism. The new military code defined and set penalties for terrorism, genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, which had hitherto not been covered by national law. In October 2004, the High Military Court had imposed stiff sentences, including the death sentence and penal servitude for life, on army officers who had been found guilty of acts of terrorism. 21. His Government had already presented three reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and would be responding to the Committee's comments in the fourth report it would be submitting at the beginning of the next year. 22. In conclusion, he urged delegations to pursue their efforts to complete negotiations on the drafting of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism and drew attention to the need to retain on the General Assembly's agenda the question of convening a highlevel conference to formulate a joint, organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 23. Mr. Omar (Malaysia) said that his country was already party to eight of the international counterterrorism conventions and protocols and was preparing to accede to the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection. Even before it had introduced specific anti-terrorism provisions into its domestic legislation, Malaysia had been able to deal decisively with terrorist groups and extremist movements through its existing laws and procedures, for example through its Sedition Act of 1948, which covered all forms of incitement to violence and public disorder. It had signed the Convention on CounterTerrorism of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in January 2007 after participating actively in its drafting and elaboration. 24. Moreover, efforts were under way to enhance international cooperation mechanisms. Malaysia was the depositary and served as secretariat for the Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters concluded between several ASEAN members in 2004. Senior officials of the parties had adopted a model request form and a model checklist to facilitate use of the treaty. In addition, it had been agreed to establish a pool of experts responsible for disseminating information on the treaty to the relevant ASEAN sectoral bodies and to train the relevant law enforcement agencies of the parties in the use of the treaty in order to facilitate evidence gathering for transnational criminal cases. 25. His Government had responded positively to United Nations reporting mechanisms such as the Committees established pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). After a visit to the country in 2006, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) had reported that Malaysia was already fulfilling its obligations under the Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), but that completion of the accession process to the remaining United Nations counter-terrorism conventions and protocols would significantly increase its compliance level. 26. Lastly he expressed his delegation's support for the convening of a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations to facilitate the finding of solutions to the broad political issues raised by United Nations efforts to combat terrorism including identifying the root causes. While a discussion of related issues might provide valuable insight, it should not compromise the discussion of the substantive provisions of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 27. Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) said that in keeping with its rejection of all forms of terrorism the Sudan had ratified 12 sectoral counter-terrorism conventions and was considering acceding to the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. It had hosted the Conference on Terrorism and Extremism in July 2007, which had concluded that terrorism should be combated not by the use of force alone but by addressing its root causes. The Sudan supported international counter-terrorism efforts, including efforts to draft a comprehensive convention on international terrorism. However, such efforts needed to recognize that colonial occupation was in itself a form of terrorism, and the right of peoples to struggle against it should be sacrosanct. 28. Attempts to associate terrorism with a particular religion or civilization risked turning the war against terrorism into a crusade that played into the hands of extremists. Instead, the economic, social and political causes that created a climate favourable to terrorism should be addressed. Attacks on Islam and the Prophet made in the name of freedom of expression were themselves a form of intellectual terrorism. The current United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy failed to address several key issues, including the definition of terrorism, the distinction between terrorism and the right of peoples to struggle against foreign occupation, State terrorism and the root causes of terrorism. Rather than discussing implementation of the Strategy, the high-level conference on terrorism should review and revise it. 29. Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) said that the General Assembly's unanimous adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy had been in keeping with the spirit of the United Nations Charter. The international community must unite in its endeavours to fight terrorism. The consensus achieved over a year ago must be followed up by commitments reflecting the will of all States to give substance to the Strategy, which reflected the General Assembly's determination to coordinate the international community's collective action at the institutional, legal and operational levels. Collective action was all the more important since actions by individual States had proved to be inadequate when faced with the transnational dimension of terrorist manifestations. 30. The main thrust of the Strategy was aimed at doing more to address the many conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. Conflicts arising from foreign occupation prompted feelings of frustration and humiliation, which led to almost automatic support, especially among young people, for the plans of terrorist groups whose activities debased legitimate resistance to the occupier. It was therefore more urgent than ever before that the United Nations should embody the ideas outlined in the Strategy in action on the ground in order to resolve such situations. 31. Although the initiatives taken by several States and entities over the previous year to clarify the contents of the Strategy and promote its implementation were welcome, its overall character should remain unaltered, and it should be implemented in full, because some of the measures it advocated had to be taken one after another in sequence. Selective implementation would undermine the consensus on which the Strategy rested. 32. If the Strategy was to succeed, it must have the political support of all Member States, and to that end, it would be wise to integrate all United Nations bodies responsible for the fight against terrorism into a single entity modelled on the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission which, by coordinating and rationalizing efforts and resources, would make it possible to take account of all the political, economic and cultural parameters contained in the Strategy. 33. The dialogue of civilizations initiated by the United Nations would favour peace and mutual understanding through collective action and put an end to degrading interreligious diatribes and pseudoscientific media fury, which merely instilled fear and mistrust among citizens of different religions who had previously lived harmoniously side by side and shown each other mutual respect. 34. Lastly, he would urge all delegations to see to it that the comprehensive convention on international terrorism ceased to be held hostage to the intransigence and stubbornness of those who failed to realize that the adoption of a consensual definition of terrorism would free enormous amounts of energy, which could then be devoted to implementing the Strategy. Nevertheless, the concessions requested in order to arrive at a compromise must not contradict the established principles of international law. 35. Mr. Hameed (Maldives) said that his country, having been visited only 12 days earlier by the spectre of terrorism, was firm in its resolve not to allow such cowardly acts of aggression to undermine the peace and tranquillity of Maldivian society. That unprovoked incident had provided a stark reminder that no State, big or small, was free from the scourge of terrorism, which knew no race and no religion and often crossed borders. Earlier in the year, for example, a foreign terrorist organization had used a hijacked third-country fishing trawler to smuggle weapons and explosives, across Maldivian waters, and 19 years earlier, foreign mercenaries had sought to secure a safe haven on Maldivian soil and establish training grounds and a platform for launching attacks in their home country. His Government was determined not to allow any such illegal activity to occur within its territory. 36. The foregoing incidents clearly illustrated the plight of small States, which had limited resources and technological know-how and were thus often unable to contend with terrorist threats. His delegation believed that such threats could only be addressed effectively through greater international cooperation. It was imperative that the international community should assume the moral and political obligation to protect the security of small States, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 44/51, 46/43 and 49/31. 37. Maldives had consistently advocated international measures to combat terrorism and had signed a number of international conventions on terrorism. Maldives also firmly supported regional efforts to combat terrorism and was a party to the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism and its Additional Protocol. His delegation believed that greater interaction, consultation and cooperation at regional level was needed to complement international efforts. Maldives supported the early completion of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 38. Ms. Mwaipopo (United Republic of Tanzania) said that terrorism was an international phenomenon and no State was immune from its ruthless effects. Only through international cooperation would the countries of the world be able to address the formidable challenge of terrorism. Constructive involvement of all stakeholders was imperative. Her delegation commended the United Nations for keeping the issue on the global agenda and particularly commended the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in providing technical assistance for counter-terrorism activities and for the implementation of the universal legal instruments against terrorism. 39. Her Government reiterated its support for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and pledged to work with the United Nations in implementing the provisions of the plan of action contained therein. It also reaffirmed its support for other relevant United Nations resolutions. Since the 1998 terrorist attack in Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania had taken several initiatives at the national and subregional levels to ensure the security of its borders and people. Legislation against terrorism had been adopted in 2002; security at ports and airports had been strengthened; and law enforcement and security officials were working with their counterparts elsewhere in Africa in the fight against illegal migration, drug trafficking, moneylaundering, and proliferation of small arms and light weapons and other hazardous materials which might be used to carry out terrorist activities. 40. The United Republic of Tanzania had ratified nine of the international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism and intended to ratify the remaining four in the near future. It had enacted antimoney-laundering legislation in 2006, establishing a financial intelligence unit which would be responsible for receiving, analysing and disseminating suspicious transaction reports and other information regarding money-laundering or terrorist financing. A 2007 law would ensure that money gained through corrupt practices and embezzlement was not used to finance terrorism. 41. Her delegation was grateful for the assistance provided by the United Nations and numerous development partners to facilitate training for Tanzanian judicial, law enforcement and security personnel in effective methods for detecting, preventing and combating terrorism while upholding human rights and the rule of law. The United Republic of Tanzania reiterated its pledge to fight domestic and international terrorism. 42. Mr. Tham (Singapore) observed that, while there had been acts of terrorism throughout history, they had not had the global reach of contemporary acts. The ease of modern communications had made it relatively easy for extremists to propagate their poisonous ideas and their techniques. Terrorism had become a global enterprise, as had been illustrated by the terrorist acts perpetrated around the world in the past year. Terrorist networks, too, were global, often comprising cells, groups and individuals from different countries and operating worldwide. There was a troubling new phenomenon: self-radicalization, independent of direct recruitment by groups and cells. 43. The response to terrorism must also be global in scope. International cooperation was crucial. His delegation therefore welcomed the international community's progress in implementing the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 44. Singapore had not been spared the threat of terrorism. In 2001 and 2002 the Singaporean authorities had arrested members of Jemaah Islamiyah who were plotting bomb attacks and other terrorist activities. The cell in Singapore was part of a larger regional network affiliated with Al-Qaida. In 2007, the authorities had arrested a Singaporean lawyer who had been influenced by radical discourse that he had read on the Internet. Although he had not committed a terrorist act in Singapore, he had made plans to pursue militant jihad in Afghanistan. The Singaporean Government intended to deal firmly with any Singaporean who took part in or provided support for terrorist acts, whether in Singapore or abroad. 45. Law enforcement was only one facet of his country's broader efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism. Singapore was also endeavouring to combat radical ideologies that attempted to legitimize violence under the veneer of religion. Its Religious Rehabilitation Programme, for example, was a religious counselling programme conducted by religious leaders, which sought to correct the distorted interpretations of religion held by extremists who had been arrested. Singapore had also launched the Community Engagement Programme, which aimed to foster interfaith understanding, dialogue and trust among different communities. 46. Singapore believed firmly in a multilateral approach to terrorism and looked forward to the completion of the comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 47. Mr. Medrek (Morocco) said that recent events in the Maghreb and in the Sahel region had clearly illustrated the threat that terrorism posed to international peace and security. Since the creation of the United Nations, an impressive array of legal instruments covering various aspects of terrorism had been adopted. That legal arsenal demonstrated the resolve of Member States to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Nevertheless, the arsenal suffered from some lacunae which reduced its scope and effectiveness. 48. In 2006 the General Assembly had adopted the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In his delegation's view, the Assembly, because of its universal membership and its powers under the Charter, was the appropriate forum for crafting a coordinated international response to terrorism. The challenge now was to implement the strategy, which the international community should do without delay at the national, regional and international levels, acting to eliminate anything that might encourage the scourge of terrorism while also ensuring respect for the Charter of the United Nations and for international law, international humanitarian law and human rights. 49. Now that the Strategy had been adopted, the next task was to finalize the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, which would complete the legal framework for the fight against terrorism. Morocco welcomed the proposals put forward by the coordinator for the eleventh session of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210, and it supported continued consultations aimed at breaking the deadlock that had existed since 2002. It wished to see serious negotiations within the Working Group during the current session to address the issues standing in the way of completing the convention. In his view, article 18 was the main obstacle, and overcoming it would help to resolve the other outstanding issues. 50. Morocco reiterated its support for the proposal by Egypt to convene a high-level conference to formulate a joint response by the international community to terrorism. Such a conference could help to strengthen international cooperation and dispel some misunderstandings with respect to terrorism. His delegation also supported the proposals by Saudi Arabia to establish an international counter-terrorism centre and by Tunisia to develop an international counter-terrorism code of conduct. 51. Terrorism fed on xenophobia, intolerance and other forms of fanaticism; it was not confined to any particular country, religion or culture. Initiatives aimed at fostering greater understanding, dialogue and mutual respect among peoples and cultures -- such as the recent High-Level Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace and the meeting of the Group of Friends of the Alliance of Civilizations -- should therefore be encouraged. 52. Individual actions by Member States could not eliminate the roots of terrorism or dismantle its structures. Success in the common fight against terrorism could only be achieved through solidarity among all nations. Morocco had experienced the scourge of terrorism and was firmly and unequivocally committed to the fight against it. It had signed almost all of the international legal instruments relating to terrorism and fully supported the Security Council resolutions on the subject. Recognizing that terrorism was a complex international phenomenon, Morocco had shifted from a national to a regional approach, collaborating with regional organizations and with its strategic partners and allies. That international cooperation was founded, inter alia, on bilateral agreements for mutual legal assistance and extradition and on greater recognition of the expertise of States that had been dealing with terrorism for many years. Morocco reiterated its condemnation of terrorism and its firm resolve to work with the international community in taking concerted action against it. 53. Ms. Pasheniuk (Ukraine) said that the United Nations and its specialized agencies should continue to play a key role in providing a solid legal basis for promoting cooperation in combating international terrorism. The adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy had made a concrete contribution to the fight against terrorism at the national, regional and international levels. Ukraine supported international anti-terrorist efforts, in particular, through its participation in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, in connection with which her Government would host an international forum during 2007. Ukraine had ratified all of the international anti-terrorism treaties, which were a powerful tool for the prevention and punishment of terrorist acts. 54. Everyone was aware of the outstanding issues relating to the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. In her delegation's view, a general definition of terrorism was desirable, as the crimes defined in the existing treaties were broader than the general understanding of what constituted terrorism. At the same time, those instruments did not cover all forms of terrorism. The lack of a generally accepted international definition of terrorism meant that States used their own national definitions, which opened the door to a fragmented approach. The adoption of such a definition during the current session would be a starting point for assessing the counterterrorism measures taken by each State. 55. Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana) noted that the issue of terrorism, including the drafting of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, had been on the Committee's agenda for several years. Progress towards a consensus had been stalled by serious political and ideological differences on a few critical issues. It was important to build on the momentum generated by the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Member States must now muster the necessary political will and take the necessary measures to ensure its effective implementation. The conclusion of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism should form an indispensable part of the implementation strategy, without which the four points in the plan of action annexed to the Global Strategy would be undermined and their impact weakened. 56. The outstanding issues relating to a legal definition of terrorism and to the scope of acts to be covered by the convention should be resolved as a matter of urgency. His delegation reiterated its position that the Committee should be guided by the formulation contained in the 2005 World Summit Outcome and in the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which condemned terrorism "in all its forms and manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes". That formulation could help in unlocking the stalemate on the outstanding issues. No cause, ideology, religion, creed or grievance justified terrorism, and moral relativism and ideological considerations had no place in the search for a definition. Member States should work towards a convention that had moral clarity and credibility, and that would command the respect of the international community. The convention should also create mechanisms to give comfort, solace and reparation to victims of terrorist acts. 57. Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka) said that terrorism continued to pose a serious threat to global peace and security by causing economic and political instability. It sought to annihilate societies, subvert the established order and deny people their basic rights and freedoms. Democracies had become especially vulnerable. 58. Following its recent ratification of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, Sri Lanka was now a party to 12 of the 13 international instruments against terrorism. The United Nations, which enjoyed legitimacy and the confidence of the global community, was well placed to lead a concerted global campaign against terrorism, promoting respect for the rule of law, good governance and political pluralism. That collective effort should now move beyond declarations and piecemeal approaches towards comprehensive practical measures to strengthen global peace and security and institutions of democracy and governance. 59. As the President of Sri Lanka had recently stated in his address to the General Assembly, it was imperative to conclude the negotiations on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism as soon as possible so as to establish a comprehensive legal regime for counter-terrorism efforts, while preserving the integrity of international humanitarian law and giving greater impetus to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Sri Lanka had been at the forefront of the campaign for international action to combat terrorism, in line with its belief that mutual understanding among States was necessary in order to tackle the problem effectively. As stated in various instruments and documents of the United Nations, such international action should be supported by efforts to enhance the national capacity of States to fight terrorism. 60. As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, Sri Lanka reiterated the Movement's condemnation of terrorism and its view that criminal acts intended to provoke a state of terror in the general public could not be justified under any circumstances. Terrorism could not and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Moreover, all States should refrain from providing political, diplomatic, moral or material support for terrorism, and should ensure that refugee status was not abused by terrorists, in line with the principles of international law. 61. As part of Sri Lanka's contribution to the global counter-terrorism campaign, the Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute of International Relations and Strategic Studies in Colombo would be hosting an international conference on countering terrorism in October 2007, in which representatives of States and international nongovernmental organizations, policymakers, journalists, academics and counter-terrorism experts had been invited to participate. The event would help strengthen the platform for action against international terrorism. 62. Lastly, Sri Lanka urged Member States to ratify or accede to all existing international counter-terrorism instruments and to strive for consensus on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 63. Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that his delegation had been calling for an international conference to establish an accepted definition of terrorism since as early as 1986. In the absence of such a definition, the struggle against terrorism was in danger of becoming a slogan that could be exploited to deprive peoples of the right to self-determination, which was one of the principles upon which the United Nations was founded. Applying the label "terrorist" to the legitimate struggle of peoples against foreign occupation was itself a form of intellectual terrorism that subverted the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, and led to State terrorism such as that being perpetrated by Israel in the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as in Palestine and Lebanon. 64. He hoped that efforts to draft a comprehensive convention on international terrorism would succeed despite the lack of sufficient political will in certain quarters. His Government had ratified 10 of the international conventions relating to terrorism and was considering acceding to the remaining 3. It was also a party to regional counter-terrorism conventions, including the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism and the Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on Combating International Terrorism. Its national commission for combating money-laundering and terrorist financing continued to cooperate with the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENAFATF). But the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, despite some commendable aspects that addressed the factors that led to terrorism, was no substitute for a comprehensive convention with an internationally accepted definition of terrorism. The use of force to combat terrorism had only produced terrorism where it had not previously existed, most notably in the Middle East. His delegation called upon all States to join in the struggle against terrorism, but cautioned against that struggle being used as a pretext for sowing hatred among peoples and civilizations by associating terrorism with any particular religion, people, culture, language or nationality. 65. Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) said that Belarus was a party to all the international instruments against terrorism and welcomed the recent entry into force of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. It also hoped for swift consensus on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and, in that regard, stood ready to support the work of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210. 66. His Government condemned terrorism as a means of waging a political struggle, no matter how just the objectives. At the same time, international law must be observed and fundamental human rights and freedoms must be preserved when fighting terrorism. Belarus played an active role in the fight against terrorism at the global and regional levels, as demonstrated by its involvement in the counter-terrorist activities of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. With regard to international efforts to counter the financing of terrorism, the financial intelligence unit of Belarus had joined the Egmont Group in 2007, and the country also participated in the activities of the Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism. 67. Belarus was pursuing a specific policy of stemming the tide of illegal migration to Western Europe, since there were grounds for believing that such migration was bolstering terrorist groups and criminal gangs. However, it was unable to accede to all the multilateral legal instruments and counter-terrorist programmes of the Council of Europe. In that regard, his delegation felt that multilateral conventions on combating crime and terrorism should not be closed; those adopted by regional international organizations should allow the access of all States in the region to the mechanisms for cooperation established in them. 68. Ms. Nworgu (Nigeria) said that her delegation supported the convening of a high-level conference on terrorism under the auspices of the United Nations, which, together with the hoped-for finalization of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, would make an important contribution to international counter-terrorism efforts. Terrorism was a global threat that required a comprehensive global response. The existing international instruments against terrorism, together with the relevant Security Council resolutions, provided the legal framework for multilateral action. Moreover, the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006 had demonstrated Member States' unity in their commitment to combating terrorism. 69. Terrorism could never be justified. Nigeria unequivocally condemned it and had taken bold steps to combat it. It had ratified ten of the international instruments against terrorism and was making efforts to ratify the remaining three, two of which it had already signed. Nigeria's prevention of terrorism bill had been submitted to the National Assembly; when it became law, it would, inter alia, criminalize incitement to commit terrorist acts, in compliance with Security Council resolution 1624 (2005). Pending the enactment of the bill, the country's general counter-terrorism legislation covered offences related to terrorism and the financing of terrorism. 70. In 2003, Nigeria had ratified the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Legislation had been put in place to criminalize money-laundering and to provide for the freezing of the assets of suspected terrorists. The vigorous enforcement of those laws had resulted in a number of convictions for acts of terrorism and the freezing of the assets of four companies in compliance with Security Council resolution 1267 (1999). Four counter-terrorism centres had been set up across the country. The Nigerian Financial Intelligence Unit had dealt with over 2,000 suspicious transaction reports since its establishment in 2005 and had signed memorandums of understanding with many other financial intelligence units around the world. The Central Bank of Nigeria had restructured the banking sector and conducted regular inspections of all banks for the purposes of combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. 71. Nigeria's Independent Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission had established integrity units within each law enforcement agency to prevent and investigate corruption. In addition, the various law enforcement agencies met regularly for the purpose of coordination. Terrorists were denied safe haven in accordance with the relevant bilateral and multilateral treaties. Nigeria had also entered into bilateral agreements with many countries on mutual legal assistance, extradition and aviation safety. It cooperated extensively with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose Executive Directorate had conducted a number of visits to Nigeria, providing an opportunity to review Nigeria's efforts in the war on terrorism. Her delegation urged other countries to take advantage of that facility. 72. Elimination of the root causes of terrorism, as outlined in the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, was fundamental to the success of the war on terrorism. In that spirit, an ongoing process of inter-faith dialogue was under way in Nigeria. The inclusive nature of the Nigerian Administration was aimed at eliminating marginalization and the concomitant sense of victimization that fostered extremism and the recruitment of terrorists. 73. Welcoming the establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, she said that efforts should be made to avoid duplication of functions among the various bodies that made up the Task Force, in order to ensure the optimal attainment of its objectives. The Task Force should harness the potential and experience of all countries, big or small, and encourage the pooling of resources in the fight against terrorism. 74. Ms. Valenzuela Díaz (El Salvador) said that her Government supported all the measures adopted by the United Nations in the fight against international terrorism, which must be applied with respect for the principles of the Charter and international law. Action by Governments must be conducted within an appropriate legal framework. At the same time, international cooperation was vital if action to combat terrorism was to be effective. 75. At the regional level, El Salvador was a keen advocate of the efforts under way within the framework of the Central American Security Commission to establish a common area of democratic security to complement the counter-terrorism efforts of other subregions in the American hemisphere. At the hemispheric level, El Salvador stressed the importance of cooperation among the members of the Organization of American States (OAS) for the full implementation of the objectives set out in the declarations of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE), in particular the Declaration of San Carlos on Hemispheric Cooperation for Comprehensive Action to Fight Terrorism and the Declaration of Panama on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure in the Hemisphere in the Face of Terrorism. 76. At the international level, El Salvador was a party to all the sectoral international instruments relating to terrorism and was continuing to adapt its national legislation in that area. It also complied with its reporting requirements under Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), in coordination with the Inter-Agency Group against Terrorism (GRICTE). 77. Global cooperation was necessary in order to deal with the continuing threat of terrorism and extremism. For that reason, her delegation welcomed the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which set out a coherent plan for combating terrorism on the basis of respect for human rights and the rule of law. In the year since the adoption of the Strategy, it had become clear that the strategic alliances between Member States, the entities of the United Nations system, regional and subregional organizations and civil society were extremely important. Only through joint efforts would human life be made safe from the threat of terrorism. El Salvador welcomed the Alliance of Civilizations initiative, including the recent Group of Friends Ministerial Meeting, which had fostered closer relations among different cultures. It also supported the High-Level Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace which had been held recently, and hoped that more such events would take place in the near future. 78. El Salvador would continue to take all the necessary measures to combat terrorism and stood ready to strengthen international cooperation to that end. Her delegation was confident that agreement could be reached in the near future on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, which would be a useful addition to the existing legal framework on the subject. It would collaborate fully with efforts in that regard. 79. Mr. Koné (Burkina Faso) said that, in the decades since the General Assembly had begun discussing the issue of international terrorism, much progress had been made, notably the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and of the sectoral international legal instruments, 12 of which had been ratified by Burkina Faso. Nonetheless, certain individuals continued to commit brutal acts that demonstrated their contempt for their own lives as well as the lives of others. 80. No continent or State was safe from terrorism, which was one of the major threats to international peace and security. Africa, which already faced many other challenges, continued to suffer terrorist attacks on a regular basis. Burkina Faso reaffirmed its condemnation of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and would continue to support all the efforts of the international community to combat it. 81. In that spirit, Burkina Faso had hosted the Fourth Conference of Ministers of Justice of the French-speaking African Countries on the ratification and implementation of the international counter-terrorism instruments in March 2007. The Ouagadougou Declaration adopted at the Conference had emphasized the importance of international cooperation in combating terrorism in accordance with international law, in particular the Charter of the United Nations and instruments relating to human rights, the rights of refugees and international humanitarian law. International technical assistance in that regard should be strengthened, and any link between terrorism and a particular religion or creed should be avoided. 82. The finalization of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism had become a matter of urgency in which the credibility of the Committee was at stake. His delegation stood ready to compromise on the outstanding issues, including draft article 18, provided that the right of peoples to self-determination -- an important principle of customary international law -- was preserved. There should also be a clear line drawn between the scope of application of the draft convention and that of international humanitarian law. With regard to the definition of terrorism, his delegation was prepared to be flexible. Lastly, it supported the convening of a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations to determine a joint response to terrorism. 83. Ms. Mohajy (Madagascar) said that the impact of terrorism transcended borders, threatening security at the national, regional and international levels and jeopardizing economic and social progress. The eradication of terrorism required international cooperation and solidarity. In that regard, Madagascar reaffirmed its categorical condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It was to be hoped that, at the current session, agreement could be reached on the outstanding issues with regard to the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, including a clear definition of terrorism that was acceptable to all. Her delegation also reaffirmed its support for the convening of a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations once the draft convention had been finalized and consensus had been reached on the themes to be addressed by such a conference. 84. Given its geographical position and natural resources, and the risk that it could be used as a terrorist base, Madagascar attached the utmost importance to efforts to combat terrorism on all fronts. It had ratified 12 of the international instruments against terrorism and was working on their implementation. It had also signed the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. It had endorsed the Rabat declaration on nuclear terrorism and had participated in the third meeting of countries that had supported the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in June 2007. 85. At the national level, an integrated approach to counter-terrorism activities was being taken. Strategies were in place to revise the national plan for the maintenance of security and the prevention of crimes against public order and to strengthen border controls. In implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), a central counter-terrorism department had been in operation since 2004, albeit with modest resources. A draft plan of action was in place to deal with possible terrorist attacks, and a number of other measures had been taken, including the introduction of biometric travel documents and the establishment of a body to combat organized crime, serious financial crimes and the financing of terrorism. 86. In addition to its close collaboration with the African Centre for Study and Research on Terrorism, Madagascar had strengthened its cooperation with other Indian Ocean islands through the adoption of counter-terrorism strategies and through its accession in March 2006 to the regional security convention of the member States of the Indian Ocean Commission. It had also signed a memorandum of understanding on a regional counter-terrorism strategy for East Africa, which provided for cooperation among the national security and intelligence services of East African countries. 87. Madagascar welcomed the unanimous adoption in 2006 of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the symposium held in Vienna in May 2007 on the implementation of the Strategy. It likewise welcomed the holding of the Fourth Conference of Ministers of Justice of the French-speaking African Countries on the ratification and implementation of the international counter-terrorism instruments and the adoption of the Ouagadougou Declaration. In order to implement the Declaration, Madagascar had finalized a bill on combating terrorism and transnational organized crime, which included provisions on mutual legal assistance and extradition. 88. Ms. Asmady (Indonesia) said that, as a victim of terrorism, her country welcomed every step forward in the battle against it; inaction was not an option. In recent years Indonesia had taken an active part in comprehensive efforts to counter the threat of terrorism. It had developed close bilateral cooperation in that regard with several countries in the region; it had become party to six global conventions on counter-terrorism and was seeking to join those that remained. It also cooperated consistently with the various committees set up by the Security Council to combat terrorism and had been at the forefront of the adoption of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 89. While practical cooperation in law enforcement was a necessity, it was also crucial to develop dialogue in order to further mutual understanding and tolerance. Care must be taken not to stereotype terrorism in terms of a specific religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Indonesia accordingly attached great importance to cross-cultural and inter-faith dialogue, to which end it sought the involvement of community leaders, non-governmental organizations and media professionals. It had initiated, jointly with the Norwegian Government, the Global Inter-Media Dialogue and, in cooperation with the United Kingdom, set up an Islamic Advisory Group to promote interaction between Muslim leaders in the East and the West. 90. A balanced, comprehensive convention on terrorism was more necessary than ever, consistent with the principles of international law, respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity and international humanitarian law. However, such a convention could not be effective unless an effort were made to address the root causes of terrorism. With that in mind, she looked forward to broadminded approaches to resolving the outstanding issues raised by article 18 of the draft instrument. 91. Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) said that his country reaffirmed its commitment to the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, the 1996 Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, and the 2005 World Summit Outcome as it related to terrorism. Terrorism flourished in conditions of poverty, oppression and occupation. It could not be confronted unilaterally, and States needed to comply with the provision of Security Council resolution 1456 (2003) that measures taken to combat terrorism should comply with international human rights law. It was to be hoped that the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism would include a definition of terrorism that distinguished terrorism from the right of peoples to resist occupation. As a current member of the Security Council, Qatar called on all States to comply with sanctions imposed by the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee, and had itself submitted all the reports requested by that Committee. It was party to numerous international and bilateral counter-terrorism conventions, and as a member of the Council of Arab Ministers of Justice and of the Interior, had participated in the adoption of the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism in 1998. 92. Terrorism could not be associated with any particular civilization, religion or culture. All societies had their criminals, and it was a mistake to link Islam or Muslims with every terrorist incident. Terrorists could in fact never be true Muslims, even if some claimed to be. A full understanding of terrorism in all its aspects, combined with political, economic and social reform, was essential for putting an end to the phenomenon of terrorism. 93. Mr. Gaumakwe (Botswana) said that initiatives to strengthen global capacity to combat terrorism were important and welcome. Terrorism, one of the single most serious threats to international peace, security and development, needed to be tackled by all countries individually and collectively in a concerted and coordinated manner. While efforts must continue to be made to promote mutual understanding, respect and tolerance through national, regional and international dialogue, practical mechanisms also needed to be put in place to that end. Moreover, the conditions that fostered terrorism should be addressed through the realization of internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium Development Goals and the objectives of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 94. Botswana remained wholly committed to international and regional cooperation in combating terrorism. It had benefited from the support of the international community, in particular the Southern African Development Community and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in developing its law enforcement capacity and would welcome continued technical assistance to enable its national institutions to strengthen their monitoring activities and respond effectively to new and emerging threats. In August 2007 Botswana had had the privilege of hosting the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-money-laundering Group Council of Ministers meeting. In conclusion, he would urge the Committee to reach agreement during the current session on a comprehensive convention based on a common understanding of what constituted a terrorist act. 95. Mr. Sea (Cambodia) said that Cambodia strongly condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and considered the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to be a vital instrument for collectively combating it. It could not succeed, however, unless the root causes of terrorism were addressed, in particular poverty, which made unemployed youth vulnerable to recruitment into terrorist networks. Increased resources should be spent on poverty-reduction programmes around the world, while at the same time efforts should be made to promote a culture of peace, tolerance, mutual understanding and communication across societies and nations. 96. Cambodia, for its part, had recently adopted an anti-terrorism law and was enacting legislation to combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. In addition, the National Bank had circulated nationwide the Security Council lists of individuals and entities involved in global terrorism and instructed all financial and banking institutions in the country to freeze their assets. His country strictly controlled the use of weapons, explosive devices, chemical substances and radioactive material and had destroyed large quantities of arms in order to prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists or other criminal groups. It had acceded to 12 key international counter-terrorism instruments and was envisaging ratification of the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Lastly, at the regional level, it had concluded with the other nine members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) a Convention on Counter-Terrorism in order to enhance intelligence exchange, bring to justice any person involved in terrorist acts and share best practices on the rehabilitation of persons convicted of terrorism. 97. Ms. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) said that Cuba deeply rejected all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, irrespective of their motivations, including those in which States were directly or indirectly involved. However, measures to eliminate international terrorism must be based on strict respect for the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law, especially international humanitarian law. They must not be arbitrary or unilateral actions, leading to pre-emptive wars, acts of aggression, covert actions, unilateral sanctions or politically motivated lists or certifications of countries. 98. Cuba attached importance to the conclusion of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism that would contain a clear definition of a terrorist act, encompass activities of armed forces not regulated by international humanitarian law and make a clear distinction between terrorism and peoples' struggles for independence and self-determination. States should also be guided by the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted in 2006. 99. Cuba had never allowed and would never allow its national territory to be used to carry out, plan or finance terrorist acts against any other State. It had been one of the first three countries to ratify the first 12 international instruments against terrorism and had adopted domestic measures to combat it; it was also currently taking steps to become a party to the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Nevertheless, the United States of America included Cuba in the list of States alleged to sponsor terrorism, while itself allowing its own territory to be used for the planning and perpetration of acts of terrorism against Cuba. 100. A case in point was that of Luis Posada Carriles, an international terrorist who had been responsible for blowing up a Cuban airliner in mid-air in 1976, attacking tourist facilities in Havana and planning attempts to assassinate the Cuban Head of State. After refusing to comply with the request by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to extradite Posada Carriles, the United States Government had recently released him from prison and was protecting him. Similarly, Orlando Bosch, who had also been involved in the blowing up of the Cuban airliner, enjoyed full freedom in Miami and boasted publicly about his numerous terrorist acts against Cuba. It was worth recalling in that connection the statement by the President of the United States of America that those who harboured terrorists on their territory would themselves be regarded as terrorists. In contrast, five Cubans whose only crime had been to fight terrorism in the same city of Miami, where the authorities allowed actions to be organized against Cuba, had been given heavy prison sentences. The fight against terrorism should be waged without double standards and without impunity, through cooperation among all States, on the basis of respect for each one's sovereignty and non-interference in its domestic affairs. 101. Mr. Sen (India) stressed that terrorism was a global threat that required a global response. Unlike liberation struggles, the targeted killing of innocent men, women and children could never be justified regardless of motivation, as a long series of declarations and resolutions on terrorism adopted by the United Nations had maintained. The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy clearly demonstrated that the international community would no longer tolerate the actions of the sponsors and abettors of terrorism or of those who wilfully allowed terrorists to use their territories. A strong response to terrorism required sustained and specific cooperation through a variety of national, regional and global agencies and practical measures to facilitate such cooperation by way of extradition, prosecution, information exchange and capacity-building. 102. His delegation believed indeed that international terrorism could only be fought through international cooperation, underpinned by duly agreed and ratified international legal instruments. India, which had suffered from terrorism for more than two decades, was a party to all the major United Nations instruments relating to terrorism, including the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, which it had ratified early in 2007. The key to preventing terrorists from acquiring nuclear weapons was to strengthen the security of fissile materials stored in nuclear facilities. India attached the utmost importance to the fulfilment of its obligations under the relevant counter-terrorism resolutions of the United Nations. It had filed five national reports with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and in 2006 had received a delegation of United Nations counter-terrorism experts. India had also entered into a number of bilateral and multilateral agreements to cooperate with other States in curbing the scourge of terrorism. 103. Although the legal instruments adopted thus far by the General Assembly relating to specific terrorist activities remained fundamental tools in the fight against terrorism, without the adoption of a comprehensive convention the legal framework would remain incomplete. His delegation continued to believe that agreement was attainable. The issue of a definition need not be an obstacle: the sectoral conventions had eschewed a philosophical definition in favour of identifying the acts that constituted terrorism. All the proposals on the table should be examined seriously, including the new compromise proposal on article 18 submitted by the coordinator of the eleventh session of the Ad Hoc Committee after extensive bilateral consultations. Taken together, the proposals made it clear that there was no contradiction between the draft comprehensive convention and humanitarian law. He would urge all delegations to work to resolve the outstanding issues and reach a compromise that would satisfy all parties, since a comprehensive convention would provide a solid legal basis for the fight against terrorism. The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m. 