%%%DEVELOPMENT FINANCE|PLEDGING CONFERENCES|

2007 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities New York, 12 November 2007 Report of the 2007 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities A. Opening and duration of the session 1. By its resolution 45/215, the General Assembly decided, inter alia, that the adoption and signing of the Final Act of the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities should be replaced by the adoption of a procedural report of the Conference. 2. The Conference was held at United Nations Headquarters on 12 November 2007. 3. The Conference was opened by the Assistant Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. B. Attendance 4. The Conference was attended by representatives of the Governments of the following States: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Croatia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia. 5. Representatives of the following organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations and the specialized and related agencies also attended the Conference: the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Development Fund for Women, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme and the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women. C. Election of officers 6. The Conference elected by acclamation Sanja Štiglic (Slovenia) as President of the 2007 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities. D. Documentation 7. The Conference had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive statistical analysis of the financing of operational activities for development of the United Nations system (A/62/74-E/2007/54); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive statistical analysis of the financing of operational activities of the United Nations system: 2006 update (A/62/326); (c) Note by the Secretary-General on operational activities for development of the United Nations system (A/CONF.208/2007/1); (d) Note by the Secretary-General on contributions pledged or paid at the 2006 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities as at 30 June 2007 (A/CONF.208/2007/2 and Add.1); (e) Draft report (A/CONF.208/2007/L.1); (f) Background information on programmes and funds for the 2007 Pledging Conference. E. Announcement of pledges 8. The Conference heard the announcement of pledges by a number of Governments to one or more programmes and funds and took note of the fact that, while several Governments were not in a position to announce their contributions, they had proposed to communicate their announcement of such contributions to the Secretary-General as soon as they were in a position to do so after the closure of the Conference. 