%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|GAZA STRIP (STATE OF PALESTINE)|ISRAEL|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|PALESTINIANS|

General Assembly Security Council Tenth emergency special session Agenda item 5 Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory Sixty-second year Identical letters dated 30 May 2007 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Security Council In flagrant violation and grave breach of the relevant rules and provisions of international law, Israel, the occupying Power, continues with its aggression of military air raids and assaults on Palestinian cities and towns in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Such illegal actions have continued to endanger the lives of the defenceless Palestinian civilian population and have caused further destruction to Palestinian property and infrastructure. In this regard, the occupying Power has persisted with its offensive against the Palestinian civilians and their property in the Gaza Strip. During the morning hours (Palestine time) of 30 May 2007, Israeli warplanes fired missiles into a crowd of people in the town of Jablaya, killing two Palestinians and wounding several others. Furthermore, yesterday, 29 May 2007, Israeli occupying forces, backed by Israeli warplanes, infiltrated the area near the Sofa crossing in the south-east of Khan Younis, where they broke into the home of a Palestinian family, holding the residents hostage while using their home as a military base. During this incident, two people, Mohammad Abu Mua'mmar and Abdel Kareem Shaath, were killed from sniper bullets to the head. Also, in the West Bank city of Jenin, an Israeli death squad opened fire at Mohammad Marei', killing him instantly. It is important to recall that, since the commencement of the Israeli offensive against Gaza, at least 55 Palestinians have been killed, including children, and over 200 people injured. The attacks have also resulted in the destruction of more than 70 homes, 47 security installations and 47 commercial and industrial properties. In addition, 13 vehicles have been also targeted, 9 of which were completely destroyed. I regret to also inform you that the Israeli occupying forces have continued with their arrest campaign throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem. In this connection, on 29 May 2007, Israeli occupying forces broke into the home of a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Jamal Al-Tirawi, kidnapping him and six others. This latest arrest came two days after the kidnapping of the Minister of State of the national unity government, Wasfi Qabha. In addition, on 28 May 2007, Israeli occupying forces kidnapped two Palestinians from the intensive care unit at Jericho Hospital while they were receiving medical treatment. In another dangerous development, over the past weekend, Israeli occupying forces arrested over 800 Palestinian citizens from Jerusalem in addition to imposing a curfew on the neighbourhood of Sheikh Saad, south-east of Jerusalem city. In this connection, Israeli occupying forces also prevented students from reaching their schools and workers from reaching their workplaces. Israeli occupying forces even barred Palestinian Muslims from burying the dead in Bab AlRahmah cemetery in Jerusalem. All of the above actions carried out by the occupying Power only provide further proof that all attempts being made to reinstate the reciprocal ceasefire in Gaza and the call for its extension to the West Bank are being intentionally sabotaged by Israel. In this regard, we continue to reiterate our calls for the immediate cessation of all illegal Israeli practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including cessation of military attacks and all other human rights violations against the Palestinian people. Accordingly, we also reiterate our call upon the international community to exert efforts to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its unlawful actions against the Palestinian people, including its unlawful actions and threats against the Palestinian leadership, such as continuing attacks against and the imprisonment of Palestinian officials and the destruction of Palestinian institutions. The present letter is in follow-up to our previous 283 letters to you regarding the ongoing crisis in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, since 28 September 2000. These letters, dated from 29 September 2000 (A/55/432-S/2000/921) to 24 May 2007 (A/ES-10/386-S/2007/308), constitute a basic record of the crimes being committed by Israel, the occupying Power, against the Palestinian people since September 2000. For all of these war crimes, State terrorism and systematic human rights violations committed against the Palestinian people, Israel, the occupying Power, must be held accountable and the perpetrators must be brought to justice. In follow-up to the above-mentioned letters, it is my profound regret to inform you that, since 24 May 2007, at least 16 more Palestinian civilians have been killed by the Israeli occupying forces, raising the total number of martyrs killed since September 2000 to 4,554. (The names of the martyrs that have been identified are listed in the annex to the present letter.) I should be grateful if you would arrange to have the present letter and its annex distributed as a document of the tenth emergency special session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 5, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Riyad Mansour Ambassador Permanent Observer Names of martyrs killed by the Israeli occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem* (Friday, 25 May 2007, to Wednesday, 30 May 2007) Friday, 25 May 2007 1. Ra'ed Ghattas 2. Adnan Isbeiteh Saturday, 26 May 2007 3. Amad Shabaneh 4. Mohammad Hasan Al-Dairy 5. Ali Mohammad Al-Nashar 6. Shawqi Adel Qaljah 7. Adel Muslih Al-Saifi 8. Saher Sa'eed Dalloul Sunday , 27 May 2007 9. Mamdouh Sh'qeirat 10. Mohammad Owaisat Tuesday, 29 May 2007 11. Omar Abdel Haleem 12. Mohammad Ahmad Abu Mua'mmar 13. Abdel Kareem Jumaa' Shaath Wednesday, 30 May 2007 14. Issa Hammouda 15. Omar Shaa'ban Reehan 16. Mohammad Hisham Marei' * The total number of Palestinian martyrs killed by the Israeli occupying forces since 28 September 2000 is 4,554. 