%%%WORK ORGANIZATION|SUBSIDIARY BODIES|ARMAMENTS|LANDMINES|SECURITY ASSURANCES|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR ARMS RACE|

CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT CD/1501 26 March 1998 Original: ENGLISH Decision (Adopted by the Conference at its 791st plenary meeting on 26 March 1998) The Conference takes the following decisions: 1. That the Presidency, taking into account the statement (CD/1500), made by the President at the 791st plenary meeting on 26 March 1998, shall pursue intensive consultations and seek the views of its Members on appropriate methods and approaches for dealing with agenda item 1 entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, taking into consideration all proposals and views on this item. 2. The Conference establishes, for the duration of the 1998 session, an ad hoc committee under agenda item 4 entitled “Effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons”, to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. These arrangements could take the form of an internationally legally binding instrument. The ad hoc committee shall take into consideration all relevant views and proposals present and future and also address questions related to its mandate. The Ad Hoc Committee will report to the Conference on the progress of its work before the conclusion of the 1998 session. 3. The Conference appoints a Special Coordinator under agenda item 3 entitled “Prevention of an arms race in outer space” to seek the views of its Members on the most appropriate way to deal with the questions related to this item. 4. The Conference appoints a Special Coordinator under agenda item 6 entitled “Comprehensive programme of disarmament” to seek the views of its Members on the most appropriate way to deal with the questions related to anti-personnel landmines taking into account, inter alia, developments outside the Conference. 5. The Conference appoints a Special Coordinator under agenda item 7 entitled “Transparency in armaments” to seek the views of its Members on the most appropriate way to deal with the questions related to this item. GE.98-60827 6. In implementing these decisions, the Presidency and the Special Coordinators shall take into consideration all relevant views and proposals, present and future. 7. The Conference requests the Presidency and the Special Coordinators to present early and regular reports on the outcome of their consultations throughout the session, including before the end of the second part of its 1998 session. 8. The Conference also decides to appoint Special Coordinators on the Review of its Agenda, the Expansion of its Membership and its Improved and Effective Functioning. These Special Coordinators, in discharging their duties and functions, will take into account all proposals and views, as well as future initiatives. The Conference requests these Special Coordinators to report to it before the conclusion of the 1998 session. 9. The taking of these decisions contained in paragraphs 1, 3, 4 and 5 does not prejudge the positions of delegations on the eventual establishment of subsidiary bodies on the issues identified, but reflects agreement to advance the Conference’s work with a view to reaching consensus. This decision is also taken without prejudice to the rights of Members of the Conference to move forward with positions and proposals already made or to be put forward in the future. 