%%%APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS|DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|

CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT ENGLISH FINAL RECORD OF THE ONE THOUSAND AND SIXTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, on Tuesday, 5 June 2007, at 10.05 a.m. President: Ms. Elisabet BORSIIN BONNIER (Sweden) The PRESIDENT: I declare open the 1069th plenary meeting of the Conference on Disarmament. I have on the speakers list the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran, but before proceeding to the speakers' list, I would like to make a few remarks by the President on how I intend to proceed this week. As you will remember, on Thursday of last week, as I assumed the presidency, I pledged to explore whatever possibilities there might be to find a way out of the delicate situation in which we find ourselves, so as to establish a work programme for the remaining part of the session which all delegations could live with. It has been suggested that a way forward might be to work out a Presidential statement complementary to L.1 in which the clarifications sought could be addressed and concerns alleviated. Whether such an approach would realistically open up a way out or not depends on the real nature of our problems. If there is a genuine readiness to begin serious work along the lines proposed in L.1, then a clarifying complementary Presidential statement might very well be helpful. If, however, the heart of the problem lies in serious political or military reluctance to embark on the kind of work outlined in L.1, then no Presidential statement, however cleverly crafted, will take us out of our present deadlock. I, for my part, strongly believe that we should approach the situation in good faith and that it would be worthwhile to make a serious attempt to address the issues involved through a complementary Presidential statement. Therefore I intend to pursue the following activities for the coming week: This afternoon, between 3 and 4 p.m., I will be available to delegations in the President's office. On Wednesday, tomorrow, between 3 and 4 p.m., I will likewise be available in the President's office. Also on Wednesday I will discuss possible elements for a complementary Presidential statement with my P-6 colleagues, and by Thursday morning, I hope to be able to put together such a draft text. On Thursday afternoon, at 4 p.m. in this Council chamber, all delegations are invited to open-ended informal consultations by the President. I will then present you with a draft complementary Presidential statement, and hope of course to have your initial reactions to it. On Friday, at 11 a.m. in room IX, after you have had some more time to reflect on the draft complementary Presidential statement, all delegations are invited to continued open-ended informal consultations by the President. On Monday morning, I plan to have the usual weekly meetings with the P-6, the coordinators and the coordinators of the regional groups. And then on Tuesday, at our next plenary meeting at 10 a.m., I will put the result of our endeavours before the Conference. If the process has been fruitful, I hope that delegations will then also be ready to proceed towards a decision on a programme of work for the remaining weeks of the session. In order to facilitate your agenda-keeping, I have asked that these remarks by me with the names, places and dates be distributed to all delegations. And, following those remarks, I will now proceed to our list of speakers. It is my pleasure to give the floor to the distinguished Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Mr. MOAIYERI (Islamic Republic of Iran): Madam President, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Conference on Disarmament. I am confident that under your able presidency and diplomatic skills, the work of the Conference will lead to a successful outcome. I also express my appreciation to other Presidents of the CD for their efforts and dedication. Based on instructions received from my capital, I take the floor to present the national position of the Islamic Republic of Iran on document CD/2007/L.1. The Islamic Republic of Iran wants the CD to end the deadlock and get back to work in a balanced manner where the priorities of the member States are equally taken into account. For that purpose, a comprehensive and balanced programme of work, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the CD, is greatly required. There are numerous procedural as well as substantive problems regarding document CD/2007/L.1. Those concerns should be dealt with in an open and transparent negotiating process in the CD. In that regard, we appreciate your efforts to conduct open-ended informal consultations. We expect to focus on the text of L.1 to resolve its problems. Procedural issues, including the mechanism to conduct the tasks of the CD, need to be in accordance with the rules of procedure. The four core issues identified earlier by the CD have equal value, and they have to be subject to equal treatment. In the view of the Islamic Republic of Iran, nuclear disarmament and NSA are the highest priorities to be negotiated in the CD. The existence of the nuclear arsenals of the nuclear-weapon States causes a serious threat to the existence of the globe. Given the overall global security environment, the necessity for the CD to be seriously involved in nuclear disarmament is becoming ever more pressing. Therefore, the Islamic Republic of Iran requests the CD to establish ad hoc committees to start negotiations on nuclear disarmament and a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States. The Islamic Republic of Iran wants the FMCT to be an internationally and effectively verifiable, comprehensive and non-discriminatory treaty. Past and present stockpiles are to be covered under the scope of the treaty. We stress that the negotiation process on a possible FMCT should be in the framework of the Shannon mandate. We want the P-6 proposal to include these issues. My delegation is prepared to participate in the negotiations to improve document CD/2007/L.1 in an open and transparent manner in order to prepare a balanced programme of work for the CD. The PRESIDENT: I thank you, Mr. Ambassador, and the Islamic Republic of Iran for its kind and encouraging words addressed to the Chair. I have no more speakers on my list for today. Unless I see somebody requesting the floor, I intend to close this meeting. The next meeting will be held on Tuesday, 12 June, at 10 a.m. in this conference room. This meeting stands adjourned. The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m. 