%%%COUNTRY PROGRAMMES|REGIONAL PROGRAMMES|

Second regular session 2007 10-14 September 2007, New York Item 6 of the provisional agenda Country programmes and related matters Extensions of programmes Note of the Administrator Summary The present note contains information on the first one-year extension of the UNDP global programme, first one-year extension of the country programme for Venezuela and second one-year extension of the country programme for Haiti. In accordance with established procedures, the Administrator approves the first one-year extension of programmes. Requests for extensions of country, regional or global programmes into a second or third, as well as initial two-year extensions, are submitted to the Executive Board for approval. Elements of a decision The Executive Board may wish to take note of the first extension of the global programme and the country programme for Venezuela for a period of one year, from 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2008, as reported in table 1. The Executive Board may wish to approve the second one-year extension of the country programme for Haiti from 1 January to 31 December 2008, as presented in table 2. Table 1. Extensions of programmes approved by the Administrator since June 2007 Programme Original cooperation framework period Year(s) covered by extension already approved Year(s) proposed for new extension Extension Reason and explanation 2nd one-year Two-year United Nations harmonization In-country political development Other Global To give enough time to practice groups to draw a new global programme in line with the UNDP strategic plan 2008-2011 which is being developed. Venezuela To align the United Nations programming cycle with national priorities and elaborate, during 2008, the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for the period 2008-2013. Table 2. Extensions of programmes for which Executive Board approval is sought Haïti To align the United Nations programming cycle with national priorities. The new harmonized programming cycle will be 2009 - 2011. 