%%%FOOD AID|FOOD POLICY|FOOD SECURITY|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|GENDER MAINSTREAMING|CAPACITY BUILDING|COMMON SERVICES|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|CONFERENCES|

Substantive session of 2007 Geneva, 2-27 July 2007 * E/2007/100. Item 3 (b) of the provisional agenda* Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme Annual report of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme for 2006 Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the Economic and Social Council the annual report of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme for 2006, as approved by the Board of the Programme in its decision 2007/EB.1/2, which is also attached. Annual report for 2006 to the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations The Board approved the annual report for 2006 to the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (WFP/EB.1/2007/4). In accordance with its decision 2004/EB.A/11 of 24 May 2004, the Board requested that the annual report be forwarded to the Economic and Social Council and to the FAO Council, along with the Board's decisions and recommendations for 2006 and the present decision. 20 February 2007 Executive Summary In response to increased inter-governmental and inter-agency interest in United Nations reform, this report focuses on WFP's progress in implementing reform measures and the challenges WFP faces in continuing the reform agenda. In 2006, WFP's work in United Nations reform and inter-agency cooperation included the achievements set out below. (i) Leadership of the humanitarian logistics cluster and co-leadership of the emergency telecommunications cluster, under which the principles governing relationships among United Nations and Inter-Agency Standing Committee logistics bodies were reviewed to increase their effectiveness and clarity. (ii) WFP was the largest appealing agency in the 2006 Common Appeals Process, accounting for 42 percent of all requirements. As of 30 November 2006, WFP had received 88 percent of requirements against appeals. (iii) WFP intensified its participation in joint programmes in 27 countries on HIV/AIDS, education, the Millennium Development Goals, nutrition, disaster management and the environment. (iv) Collaboration among the Rome agencies ensured that food security, hunger reduction, rural and social development, and safety nets became focus areas in the United Nations Development Group action plan for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. This report is in accordance with streamlined corporate reporting to the Board and WFP parent bodies (WFP/EB.A/2004/5-F). It is consistent with the United Nations Economic and Social Council format for annual reporting by United Nations agencies, based on provisions of the 2004 General Assembly resolution on the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review of Operational Activities for Development. This report takes account of comments from the Board on the 2005 Annual Report and from the Bureau in September 2006. The timing for submitting it to the Board's First Regular Session of 2007 does not allow inclusion of complete statistical information for all of 2006. Partnership statistical data in the Section on Collaboration with Partners refer to 2005, because 2006 data are not yet available. Complete statistical information will be available in the 2006 Annual Performance Report, submitted to the Board's Annual Session. Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) . IASC continued to improve humanitarian response by rolling out and refining the cluster system; WFP guided implementation of the system, focusing on results. WFP's leadership of the logistics cluster and coleadership of the emergency telecommunications cluster was further strengthened. WFP and IASC partners reviewed the principles governing relationships among IASC logistics bodies to increase their effectiveness. WFP contributed to other clusters, especially nutrition, protection, health and early recovery. WFP is also leading the developing of a rapid nutrition assessment toolkit. Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs (ECHA) . Through ECHA, WFP highlighted the situation of its staff who work in insecure and difficult environments. Working with the United Nations Development Group (UNDG)/ECHA group on transitions, WFP helped to bring United Nations development and humanitarian actors together to develop common approaches to post-conflict transition policies and programmes. Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP) . WFP was the largest appealing agency in the 2006 CAP, accounting for 42 percent of all requirements. As of 30 November 2006, WFP had received 88 percent of requirements against appeals. . As part of inter-agency implementation of needs analysis frameworks (NAFs), WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) led the food-security NAFs in Côte d'Ivoire, Somalia, the Occupied Palestinian Territory and Uganda. Food security working groups led by WFP and FAO analysed needs and priorities, providing a basis for a food-security analysis by the Common Humanitarian Action Plan (CHAP). United Nations Development Group (UNDG) . WFP chaired the Programme Group (PG) in 2006, guiding working groups on (i) national development strategies based on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), (ii) aid effectiveness and (iii) programming policy. For the first time, UNDG Executive Committee (ExCom) regional directors were consulted about the most effective support that the PG could provide to regional and country structures. . The PG prepared an action plan for realizing the objectives endorsed by the 2005 World Summit, using an operational framework based on the MDGs. This allows country-level efforts to be scaled up and ensures alignment with national priorities and development strategies. The UNDG principals endorsed the action plan, which now provides a reference for gauging achievement of the MDGs. . The Rome-based agencies ensured that food security, hunger reduction, rural and social development and safety nets were focus areas for the action plan. WFP encouraged country offices to refer to the action plan during discussion in United Nations country teams particularly in the Common Country Assessment (CCA)/United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) process and to advocate for food security, nutrition and education, including WFP food-based interventions where appropriate. Funding and Resources . WFP's fundraising ensured increased and stable funding from major donors, attracted new donors including private corporations and individuals and encouraged occasional donors to become regular contributors. WFP's fundraising strategy aims to increase the impact of donations through greater flexibility and predictability - larger proportions of multilateral contributions, more cash donations, twinning arrangements and fewer restrictions. . As of 30 November 2006, contributions to WFP amounted to US$2.4 billion: emergency operations (EMOPs) and protracted relief and recovery operations (PRROs) received approximately 80 percent; development operations 9 percent; and special operations and others, including the Immediate Response Account (IRA), the remaining balance. Approximately 10 percent of these funds were multilateral, and 90 percent were directed multilateral; 82 public-sector donors contributed to WFP operations, including ten new donors contributing US$97 million. . WFP benefited from private sector support, with US$47 million confirmed as of 30 November 2006. WFP is preparing an innovative strategy to consolidate and institutionalize its private fundraising activities; this includes seeking cash from a balanced portfolio of corporations, individuals, foundations and community-based organizations. Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) . The new centralized funding mechanisms for humanitarian operations had the greatest effect on WFP operations of any of the current United Nations reforms. As of November 2006, the United Nations, including CERF and the common humanitarian funds, was WFP's third largest donor, contributing US$126.5 million, compared with US$7 million in 2005. . The CERF and WFP's internal rapid response funding mechanism, the Immediate Response Account (IRA), operate collaboratively to augment WFP's emergency response capacity. The IRA supplements the CERF grants, which have a maximum allocation of US$30 million per crisis for all United Nations agencies. The IRA is used to address timing issues, because these funds are accessed within 24 hours; CERF grant approval takes longer. The CERF contributions to WFP in 2006 as of 30 November 2006 amounted to US$67 million. Implementation of United Nations Reform Measures Harmonization of Programmes . In 2006, ExCom members and WFP improved country programming by making it more results-based and linking planning and implementation to the MDGs. Cape Verde experimented with a Common Country Programme (CCP) and a country programme action plan (CPAP); collaboration achieved results that were in line with national development goals. The CCA/UNDAF guidelines were updated to reflect joint programming that emphasizes national planning, capacity-building and inter-agency frameworks for disaster prevention and post-conflict recovery. . WFP will increase its participation in poverty reduction strategies (PRS). With FAO, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Bank, WFP provides information about food-insecure people, helping to ensure that food security remains a high priority. Food security was incorporated into Mali's national Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) thanks to joint efforts by FAO and WFP. Joint Programmes (JPs) . WFP participated in 46 JPs in 27 countries in various sectors. These included two HIV/AIDS JPs in Lesotho. One, with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and FAO, involves and empowers people living with HIV/AIDS by emphasizing capacity-building. The second, with FAO and UNICEF, aims to improve the nutritional status of children living with HIV/AIDS. In Malawi, WFP is the lead agency for coordinating food security and nutrition support of HIV/AIDS-affected people, partnering FAO, UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO). In Rwanda, WFP, UNICEF and UNDP support improved selfreliance for HIV-affected people, including co-production of a weekly radio programme on nutrition and HIV, with local radio and government support. The programme will be in the local Kinyarwanda language, and be available throughout the Great Lakes Region. . With UNICEF and WHO, WFP is implementing the Healthy Schools Initiative in Afghanistan, benefiting 1.5 million schoolchildren. WFP also leads the national deworming campaign, which helps 6 million schoolchildren and will be handed over to the national authorities as part of capacity-building. WFP leads the deworming campaign in Haiti, with WHO and UNICEF. . WFP is promoting girls' education in Cameroon, with UNICEF, the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNDP, UNESCO, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and WHO; in Pakistan, with UNICEF and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS); and in Egypt, with, ILO, UNDP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNICEF, the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). In Burkina Faso, WFP, UNICEF, UNDP and FAO designed a girls' education programme and provide a minimum essential package for schoolchildren, especially girls. . In Bhutan, WFP, UNDP, UNFPA, United Nations volunteers (UNVs) and UNICEF are implementing the Human Security Fund, addressing rural hunger and poverty, illiteracy, school enrolment, unemployment and youth, child and maternal mortality and HIV/AIDS. WFP contributes food-for-education (FFE) programmes. . In Bolivia, WFP is involved in the Contigo Avanzar campaign advocating for and disseminating MDGs, with FAO, UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF. For each MDG the initiative uses musical compositions, departmental workshops and other audiovisual media. . In the United Republic of Tanzania, WFP, UNICEF, UNDP, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and FAO are implementing a pilot programme supported by the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. The project targets refugee host areas in north-western Tanzania, and aims to improve food and environmental security, reduce the small arms and light weapons trade, and strengthen host area capacities in vulnerability analysis. WFP and UNHCR lead this transition programme, with WFP leading the humanitarian and transport sectors. . In Peru, WFP, UNDP, FAO, UNICEF and WHO collaborate to respond to natural disasters. WFP-led activities include improving the nutritional and health status of local communities to reduce their vulnerability. . WFP, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), FAO, UNOPS, UNDP, UNIFEM, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNESCO, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), UNHCR, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United Nations Mine Action Centre for Afghanistan, and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (Habitat) cooperate on the Green Afghanistan Initiative, which focuses on the environment. Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness . WFP participates in the Paris Declaration agenda in Cambodia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania. WFP developed guidelines for country offices engaged in harmonization and alignment processes. In December 2006, WFP and the other UNDG ExCom funds and programmes signed a CPAP for the Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania. The Tanzanian government's preference for general budget support, however, is a challenge to programme implementation for many development partners, including United Nations agencies. The aid environment in Tanzania is changing rapidly, and WFP needs to adopt sector-wide approaches and management. Resident Coordinator (RC)/Humanitarian Coordinator (HC) System . In 2006, WFP increased its participation in RC and HC issues. A new accountability framework for the RC system is being introduced. This will increase the involvement of regional directors, who will oversee and support UNCTs' promotion of United Nations reform in countries. Regional directors will prepare "team opinions" of RCs and United Nations country teams (UNCTs), based on representatives' assessments of UNCTs. WFP regional and country directors piloted a feedback tool, which WFP regional human resources officers have been trained to use. . WFP seeks to attract and retain top-quality individuals as RCs or HCs, and to increase their impact on United Nations work at the country level. To increase the number of WFP staff in RC/HC rosters, six people from WFP attended the RC Assessment Centre during 2006. Four WFP staff members currently serve as RCs, including one in the Sudan who also serves as Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General. . WFP helped to improve the training and selection of HCs. Three WFP country directors are in the HC pool, established in 2006 to provide qualified candidates for quick selection. Joint Offices (JOs) . WFP and the other ExCom agencies initiated a pilot JO in Cape Verde in January 2006. One CCP was approved by the Boards of all four agencies. WFP's Board also noted that a development project it had already approved was subsumed in the CCP. The RC was designated to represent the ExCom agencies, and UNDP was designated as support agency to implement the JO model. UNDP business processes, based on the Atlas Enterprise Resource Planning system, were therefore applied. Staff employment contracts with the four agencies were terminated, and new contracts were offered to those selected for the JO through a job fair. The full JO started on 1 April 2006. An inter-agency team selected a WFP professional as the deputy representative in charge of programme aspects of the JO. She joined in September 2006. . WFP chaired the JO Working Group (JOWG) of UNDG in 2006. The group will support the creation of additional JOs in 2007, though this may not follow the Cape Verde model. Supported by JOWG, a UNDG internal review of implementation of the Cape Verde JO will be completed in the first quarter of 2007. WFP supports UNDG's development of additional JO model offices through consultation from its corporate partner, the Boston Consulting Group. . WFP and the Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on United Nations System-Wide Coherence believe that the main goal of JOs should be more coherent and improved United Nations country programming. There is a risk that the JO process focuses too much on administrative coordination and not enough on the impact of programming. Common Premises . In August 2006, WFP became chair of the Working Group on Common Premises. WFP evaluated potential common premises and United Nations House initiatives, and funded projects where the financial, operational, safety and security aspects of common premises would benefit country offices. Using its United Nations reform fund for 2006, WFP managed design and construction of the Bhutan United Nations House, carried out a seismic assessment of the United Nations House in Armenia, and supported a working group to evaluate 21 United Nations House or common premises projects. United Nations Joint Logistics Centre (UNJLC) . WFP is responsible for the administrative and financial management of UNJLC. In 2006, IASC agreed that UNJLC would be a tool for the WFP-led Logistics Cluster; the precise arrangements will be worked out and approved by IASC in 2007. In 2006, UNJLC was involved in the Pakistan earthquake relief operation, providing logistics coordination and information management services to the humanitarian community; this operation was phased out in August. In July 2006, UNJLC deployed staff to Lebanon, to support the Logistics Cluster team, WFP logistics and the rest of the humanitarian community with logistics information and mapping services, reporting, and tracking of non-food items (NFIs); this operation was phased out in October. UNJLC assisted the HC and the Logistics Cluster team in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and continued to coordinate and manage NFIs in Darfur. . Declining donor support for the UNJLC core unit in Rome is a major challenge. The unit initiates and supports UNJLC field operations, and reduced support is preventing it from responding efficiently through the rapid deployment of staff. United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) . UNHAS provided assistance in major emergencies in Pakistan and Lebanon, initiated common services in the Central African Republic and Sri Lanka, and continued its operations in Afghanistan, Angola, Burundi, Chad, DRC, West Africa, Somalia, the Sudan and the United Republic of Tanzania. A large-scale special project in DRC transported demobilized soldiers by air, on behalf of the World Bank/Commission nationale de la démobilisation et réinsertion. . As of November 2006, the 64 aircraft and heavy-lift helicopters chartered by WFP/UNHAS had transported 359,000 passengers and 29,600 mt of cargo for the relief operations of United Nations agencies and more than 200 non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Drastically improved road access to beneficiaries in southern Sudan considerably reduced cargo deliveries by air. . The aviation management structure was strengthened in response to recommendations in the International Civil Aviation Organization's recent audit report. Collaboration with Partners . In 2005, WFP collaborated with 13 United Nations agencies, the World Bank, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), IOM and ILO in 230 projects in 80 countries. Statistical data on partnerships for 2006 will be available in the Annual Performance Report at the Board's 2007 Annual Session. UNICEF . With collaboration on 138 projects in 68 countries in 2005, UNICEF remained WFP's main partner, primarily in education, motherand-child health (MCH), nutrition and technical assistance. . In Uganda, WFP and UNICEF implement the Nutrition Work in Conflict-Affected Districts JP, addressing child and maternal nutrition, and are developing a global partnership for capacity-building. WFP and UNICEF implemented a nutrition project in Bhutan for the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, and developed a strategy and action plan for double fortification of salt. In Pakistan, UNICEF and WFP initiated the MCH JP, with WFP providing fortified food to encourage positive health behaviour and increased target group attendance at common target health facilities. . In line with their 2005 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), WFP and UNICEF are cooperating to eliminate child hunger and undernutrition and achieve MDG 1 target 2 reduce by half the prevalence of underweight among children under 5. The Ending Child Hunger and Undernutrition Initiative (ECHUI) is a global partnership to ensure coherent global and national efforts. United Nations partners in ECHUI include UNICEF, the World Bank, UNHCR, UNDP, FAO and UNFPA. . In West Africa, WFP and UNICEF are implementing a joint nutrition strategy, especially through MCH programmes. Joint advocacy with donors was established, in which WFP and UNICEF in discussions with the World Bank advocate to make nutrition a PRS priority. In a similar initiative for education, WFP and UNICEF promote the Essential Learning Package within the Sahel Alliance. . In Latin America and the Caribbean, the UNICEF/WFP Regional Strategic Partnership Meeting in May 2006 recognized that UNICEF/WFP partnership is critical to ending child hunger. WFP and partners influenced policy and put child hunger and undernutrition high on government agendas. In Peru, WFP, UNICEF, the World Bank, the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO), WHO, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), NGOs and the government collaborated in a national initiative to combat chronic malnutrition, which the government declared a priority. WFP and UNICEF foster SouthSouth cooperation; WFP, UNICEF, PAHO/WHO and other partners have established a regional knowledge management initiative for policy-makers, to strengthen national policies to eradicate child undernutrition. . A joint WFP/UNICEF project in the Occupied Palestinian Territory provides salt producers with potassium iodide to increase the percentage of iodized salt, and includes iodized salt in WFP rations. In TimorLeste, WFP and UNICEF jointly employed a nutritionist to recommend ways of strengthening their joint programming. In Cambodia, collaboration with UNICEF started in 73 schools and has now expanded to 654 child-friendly schools. . The "essential package" of 12 school-based interventions was established with UNESCO, UNICEF, WHO and other partners and is based on the Focusing Resources on Effective School Health framework. It delivers complementary nutrition, health and basic education inputs in all WFP-assisted schools, to improve the health and nutritional status of schoolchildren. There are WFP/UNICEF partnerships in 38 countries; the most comprehensive being those in Afghanistan and Pakistan, where deworming campaigns reached more than 11 million children. Expected approval for an additional 13 million deworming tablets will benefit Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Cameroon, Ecuador, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. FAO . In 2005, FAO was WFP's second largest partner, cooperating in 87 projects in 53 countries, mainly in promoting agricultural and crop production, FFE and joint assessments. . In the context of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, supported by WFP, the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) launched the Home-Grown School Feeding Programme (HGSFP), which links school feeding to agricultural development by expanding local markets through the purchase of home-grown food commodities. . In Ghana, HGSFP was integrated into the WFP country programme (CP); the governments of Ghana and the Netherlands, WFP and the business community linked to the University of Berkeley used locally purchased foods to support the National School Feeding Programme. An MOU between WFP and the National Ghana School Feeding Programme will ensure joint targeting, a sustainable exit strategy and harmonized inputs, strategies and monitoring mechanisms. . FAO and WFP joint crop and food supply assessment missions (CFSAMs) are very valuable to humanitarian food security interventions. By September 2006, CFSAMs had been conducted in Angola, Cameroon, Liberia and Burundi; additional missions are planned for Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Mauritania and the Sudan. . Following a technical consultation in December 2005 on issues such as the relationship between national food gaps and household food needs, and improved estimation of commercial imports, WFP and FAO are revising CFSAM guidelines. . The challenge is to develop a standard food security classification system that consolidates inter-sectoral data and facilitates comparisons of humanitarian needs among countries. In Somalia, WFP and FAO are using the Integrated Phase Classification (IPC) system and guidance developed by the FAO Food Security Assessment Unit. IPC is also being piloted in Côte d'Ivoire, the Occupied Palestinian Territory and Somalia as part of CAP/NAF. WFP plans to extend the pilot to other countries before revising the IPC guidelines with FAO. . WFP and FAO continued the twin-track approach in the Junior Farmer Field and Life School (JFFLS) programme in Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland and Zambia. . In September 2006, WFP and FAO signed a local MOU in the Philippines to build peace and improve food security among conflict-affected farmers in the first joint foodforwork (FFW) project in Mindanao. This aims to improve the agricultural productivity and livelihoods of poor farmers affected by conflict and internal displacement. . The Emergency Relief Coordinator and Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa requested FAO and WFP to start a regional consultative process addressing long-term food security challenges in the region, to mitigate the effects of future droughts in the Horn of Africa. IFAD . In 2005, WFP and IFAD cooperated on nine projects in eight countries, mainly on agricultural production, land and water development, road development and disaster recovery. WFP provided food aid to communities benefiting from IFAD micro-credit schemes, to improve infrastructure or develop skills in income-generating activities. . In 2001, WFP/IFAD collaboration in India addressed poverty eradication and food security. WFP hosts IFAD's Field Presence Unit in India. The benefits of this collaboration include improved project design, cost efficiency and joint advocacy. Combining the agencies' food and cash resources has developed sustainable livelihoods for 600,000 of the most food-insecure tribal people. . In Mali, WFP, IFAD and the government signed a Letter of Understanding (LOU) for rural development through asset creation. In the United Republic of Tanzania, WFP has partnered IFAD since 1999, supporting the government's Participatory Irrigation Development Programme; WFP's food-for-asset-creation activities have constructed/rehabilitated 328 km of access roads and excavated 461 km of canals. WFP, IFAD and government interventions created 36 irrigation schemes for paddy irrigation land. Rome-Based Agency Cooperation . A senior-level working group of the Rome-based agencies met for the first time in August 2006 to discuss improvements in joint working. Areas where increased collaboration was proposed included the integration of food security and rural development into national PRS, regional approaches to combating food insecurity, and needs assessment. . In November 2006, WFP, FAO, IFAD and Habitat collaborated during the International Forum on the Eradication of Poverty held in New York to mark the end of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. The agencies co-sponsored a panel and produced a joint paper on "Reducing Hunger and Extreme Poverty: Towards a Coherent Strategy", highlighting the need for a twin-track approach to hunger and poverty reduction. . The heads of the three Rome-based agencies visited Ghana in December 2006 to reaffirm their determination to strengthen joint efforts to reduce hunger and poverty in Ghana's food-insecure northern regions. . The Rome-based agencies continued to cooperate in the International Alliance Against Hunger (IAAH). During the FAO Committee on World Food Security, a special event, Alliances Against Hunger, Today and Tomorrow, brought about national alliances such as the Jordanian National Alliance. WFP and Jordan are strengthening this alliance's institutional capacity. . IAAH was among the first partners WFP contacted in 2005 when it launched the Walk the World event. This initiative stimulated activities such as the GermanyJordan Drive Away Hunger rally, in 2006. . The Rome-Based Management Development Centre a joint WFP, IFAD and FAO initiative was launched in 2004. Simulations, competency-based interviews and assessment results increased participants' awareness of their own management and leadership skills. Since its inception, 114 senior managers from the three organizations 42 from WFP have participated. Other United Nations agencies recognize this programme's effectiveness in developing senior managers, and the Romebased agencies are exploring ways of expanding partnerships with these agencies. Women in leadership, negotiation skills and Myers Briggs training sessions were attended by 92 participants 15 from WFP. UNAIDS . As a co-sponsor of UNAIDS, WFP is the lead agency for nutrition and dietary support of people with HIV, and provides guidance to national governments and the other nine cosponsors of UNAIDS. . In March 2006, the Global Task Team on Improving AIDS Coordination among Multilateral Institutions and Donors was established in accordance with the Three Ones principles. WFP advocates for food, nutritional and dietary support to be included in comprehensive care and support packages for governments. The role of food and nutrition in maintaining the health and quality of life of people living with HIV and AIDS is now widely recognized. In July 2006, WFP became chair of the UNAIDS Committee of Coordinating Organizations. . In August 2006, at the International AIDS conference in Toronto, WFP called on all stakeholders in the fight against AIDS to include food and nutritional support in the essential package of care for people affected by HIV. As Stephen Lewis stated: "...it is now accepted as unassailable truth that people in treatment need nutritious food supplements to maintain and tolerate their treatment". . WFP operates in 21 of the 25 most severely affected countries, and has HIV/AIDSrelated activities in 51 countries. WFP interventions focus on three areas: care and treatment, support to orphans and vulnerable children affected by AIDS, and awareness and prevention education. UNHCR . WFP and UNHCR continued their joint support to 1.9 million refugees and 2 million returnees in 30 countries. Collaboration includes a global work plan, joint plans of action at the country level, regular high-level meetings, WFP's participation in the UNHCR Executive Committee, and UNHCR's in the WFP Executive Board, a high-level working group to review joint issues related to internally displaced people (IDPs), and collaboration at the field and headquarters levels. . More than 15 joint assessment missions (JAMs) were carried out, and training for JAMs was provided in Geneva in October 2006. UNHCR participated in WFP's training of staff and counterparts on protection issues in the delivery and distribution of food aid. . WFP and UNHCR are partners on IDP issues in countries where UNHCR is the global cluster lead for protection and emergency shelter and camp management/coordination for people displaced as a result of conflict. Both agencies collaborated on repatriating refugees to Angola, Burundi, DRC, Liberia and the Sudan. . WFP and UNHCR joint advocacy continues. For the first time, the heads of WFP, UNHCR and UNICEF visited DRC, Burundi and Rwanda together in February and March 2006 to highlight the needs of people in the Great Lakes Region. . WFP and UNHCR issue joint press releases and statements, particularly for underfunded operations where food pipeline breaks are expected. Both agencies collaborate on ending child hunger and improving the nutritional status of refugees. UNHCR has made nutrition one of its Global Strategies for 2006 - 2009. . In the United Republic of Tanzania, UNHCR, UNICEF and WFP lead monthly Development Partners Group refugee sub-group meetings, organize donor missions and conduct annual nutritional surveys with other partners. United Nations Volunteers . United Nations Volunteers (UNV) collaboration with WFP is growing: 257 UNVs 190 international and 67 national contributed to WFP's field operations in 2005. As of 30 September 2006, 210 UNVs were serving with WFP. . This partnership was strengthened by joint support of WFP's and the UNV International Volunteer Day. In Trinidad and Tobago, two UNV doctors organized an 11 km Walk Against Child Hunger. WHO . WFP/WHO cooperation grew over the past year. WHO became one of WFP's main partners in 2005, with 69 projects in 42 countries. Health and nutrition 52 projects and HIV/AIDS 17 projects featured prominently; 70 percent of joint activities were in emergency and recovery operations. . In 2006, high-level meetings were held to enhance cooperation in humanitarian issues. A technical logistics agreement is being finalized, in which WHO will tap WFP's expertise in logistics and use its Humanitarian Response Depots, while WFP benefits from WHO's technical experience in health and nutrition. From early 2007, WFP plans to involve WHO in its preparedness and contingency planning, assessments and vulnerability mapping activities in countries that include DRC. World Bank . In 2005, WFP and the World Bank collaborated in 26 projects in primary schools, MCH, and nutrition and HIV/AIDS in 17 countries. Collaboration is growing, especially in postconflict and post-emergency countries, as both organizations develop more efficient food systems and recognize each other's strategic guidelines for poverty reduction. . Following WFP missions to Niger in the aftermath of the food crisis in late 2005, the World Bank invited WFP to participate in the mid-term evaluation of a nationwide irrigation project. This led to the extension of benefits to poor, food-insecure farmers who had been excluded. Within the 2006 budget support project, Rural and Social Sector Reform Credit, WFP helped to draft a policy document identifying actions that the government needs to implement to trigger the release of World Bank funds. WFP highlighted the importance of food security as an element in Niger's national development strategy, and identified policy actions to this end. . WFP, the World Bank and FAO are discussing development of the grain market in Africa. WFP will analyse the effects and consequences of food aid distribution and local food aid procurement on underlying grain markets, and the effects of inadequate infrastructure on grain markets. . WFP and the World Bank are collaborating on a weather-based insurance pilot project to provide monetary compensation to Ethiopian farmers and protect them against rainfall risk. Collaboration with NGOs . In 2005, a record 2,274 NGO partners handled 42 percent of WFP's food aid in 73 countries and 209 projects. Most of these partnerships - involving 170 NGOs - were in conflict areas such as Afghanistan, Burundi and DRC. . Consultations in Europe and the United States aimed to engage NGOs in ECHUI and public awareness raising on hunger-related issues. NGOs were briefed about participation in the global Partners Group. . The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and three NGO consortia organized a meeting on enhancing the effectiveness of humanitarian action, in Geneva in July 2006. WFP's Executive Director attended the meeting, which was valuable in fostering relationships between the United Nations and NGOs. WFP is a member of the inter-agency working group to follow up on this meeting. Partnerships between WFP and NGOs also benefited from WFP's role as lead agency for the logistics cluster, as funding was channelled directly to NGOs and international organizations. In Lebanon, WFP provided NGOs with a common transport system. . The regional NGO strategy in southern Africa focused on linking partners and United Nations teams through the Regional Inter-Agency Coordination Support Office process, and identified programming and technical gaps in the regional portfolio. Two staff members from the Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere (CARE) and Action Aid were seconded to help improve regional capacity to collect outcome data, develop HIV/AIDS programmes and strengthen field-level collaboration. WFP established NGO consortia to respond to the relief and recovery needs of country offices. Swaziland uses the Coordinating Assembly of NGO Consortia, and Zimbabwe's flexible umbrella/nodal NGO management and delivery system can scale up or down at short notice. . In October 2006, WFP and 25 NGOs co-chaired WFP's annual NGO consultation on Partnerships in Food Aid Interventions in the 21st century. Issues included cost sharing, the Sudan operation, WFP targeting, humanitarian reform, local/regional procurement, future levels of food assistance, and protection. On 1 December 2006, WFP and the NGO Islamic Relief signed an MOU for global cooperation, which will lead to new collaborations to assist WFP beneficiaries, more than half of whom live in Muslim communities. Follow-Up to International Conferences Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on United Nations System-Wide Coherence in the Area of Development, Humanitarian Assistance and the Environment. . The High Level Panel's report which was released in November 2006, was a major follow-up to the 2005 World Summit. In May 2006, WFP hosted in Rome the HighLevel Panel consultations on humanitarian and transition issues, and seconded a staff member to the panel secretariat for several months. WFP, FAO and IFAD will implement the report's recommendation for closer cooperation among the Rome-based agencies to address longterm food security needs, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Action on most of the panel's recommendations will require broader inter-agency cooperation, guidance from the new Secretary-General and in some cases inter-governmental action among Member States. WFP will participate in the inter-agency and intergovernmental bodies, and will regularly inform the Board of developments. High-Level Meeting on the Mid-Term Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the Programme of Action (Brussels Programme of Action) for the Least-developed Countries (LDCs) for the decade . WFP participated in consultations for the mid-term comprehensive global review of implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action, making statements in Addis Ababa and at the ministerial-level meeting in Cotonou. In September 2006, the Executive Director participated at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to review the Brussels Programme of Action and reaffirm commitment to LDCs. Through the review WFP highlighted its focus on LDCs, and its commitment to delivering the bulk of its resources to LDCs, to reduce hunger, malnutrition and poverty. In 2005, US$1.9 billion - three quarters of WFP's expenditures - were allocated to LDCs. WFP targeted a greater portion of its resources to LDCs than any other United Nations agency, far exceeding average bilateral official development assistance (ODA). At the high-level meeting in New York, WFP and FAO stressed the Rome agencies' important role in addressing hunger and food insecurity in LDCs. Other Issues Relevant to Implementation of the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review (TCPR) Transition from Relief to Development . In April 2006, WFP disseminated field guidelines on exiting emergencies, including tools for shifting from emergency response to longer-term programmes that protect and improve livelihoods and resilience, and for phasing out WFP assistance from a transition setting or country. On the Board's request, WFP presented a discussion paper on "WFP Thinking and Experience on Programming in Transition Settings" at the informal consultation in October 2006. Although 90 percent of WFP food is directed to emergencies and 10 percent to development, in PRROs the tonnages for relief and for recovery are roughly 50:50. WFP will ensure that best practices for exiting emergencies and transitions are included in all future EMOPs and PRROs. Next steps include developing guidance on targeting in emergencies, developing comprehensive training on programming in emergencies and transitions, and continuing to participate in inter-agency fora, such as the IASC Early Recovery Cluster and the UNDG/ECHA Working Group on Transition Issues. Capacity-Building . WFP's Strategic Objective 5 is to strengthen the capacities of countries and regions to establish and manage food assistance and hunger reduction programmes. There are regional capacity development projects in Latin America and the Caribbean and southern Africa. Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Egypt, Senegal and Yemen have capacity development as a main objective. At least 30 country offices have mainstreamed capacity-building activities within food assistance interventions. In 2006, capacity development components for new CPs were appraised in Bangladesh, Egypt, India and Yemen. WFP technical assistance is a major feature of capacity development, with thousands of government and NGO participants being trained. Technical services and cooperation with governments were established in 20 areas. . WFP partnered the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to pilot the economic model and methodology for regional cost of hunger studies that estimate the economic impact of undernutrition. Methodology for the Nutrition and Food Security Atlas was developed with Tufts University and tested in the Dominican Republic. . The southern Africa project highlighted the importance of ensuring local ownership: participation from Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) partners led to adoption of a five-year programme on Strengthening Vulnerability Assessment and Analysis in the SADC Region. There is a full-time WFP staff member at the SADC/Vulnerability Assessment Committee in Gaborone, co-funded by WFP and FAO. Another WFP staff member is stationed in the Ministry of Agriculture in Pretoria, supporting development of the national Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping Systems process. . WFP provided technical training on early-warning systems (EWS), emergency preparedness and response to technical departments of the African Union Commission (AUC) and some regional economic communities. WFP and AUC jointly developed: (i) Alert Africa, and Africa-Wide EWS; and (ii) the Building Africa-Wide Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) Network. WFP and other United Nations agencies developed a post-conflict reconstruction and development strategic framework for AU, as a blueprint for intervening in countries emerging from conflict. WFP provides technical support on gender policy to AUC's Directorate for Women and Gender. . In Ethiopia, WFP's capacity-building is based on its experience in local-level participatory planning, in which communities lead the management of their natural resources. In Indonesia, WFP collaborated with UNDP, UNESCO and WHO to build the capacity of central, provincial and district government officials in emergency management and contingency planning. In Liberia and the Dominican Republic, UNICEF and WFP built the Ministry of Health's capacity to establish a nutrition surveillance system. Gender Mainstreaming . Implementation of WFP Gender Policy 20032007: Enhanced Commitments to Women (ECW) to Ensure Food Security continues through (i) guidelines on implementation of the ECWs, (ii) collection and analysis of baseline survey data to produce a global report in 2005 and a follow-up study in 2007, (iii) regional and country-level training, completed in early 2006, for 60 country offices and 1,400 WFP and partner staff, and (iv) field-based research on implementation of the ECWs. . WFP has mainstreamed gender in: the operational sectors of CPs; the updated Programme Guidance Manual (online), and Food Distribution Guidelines; a training manual on Leadership Skills, Gender and HIV/AIDS, for which the links between gender and HIV/AIDS were explored; a recent publication Getting Started: HIV, AIDS and Gender in WFP Programmes, describing how WFP's efforts to achieve gender equality and empowerment contribute to reducing the vulnerability of women and girls to HIV/AIDS; the 2006 food security and nutrition assessment in Darfur; field studies in DRC, Colombia, Liberia and Uganda in 2006 on the impact of humanitarian crises on both sexes, food aid protection challenges and gender-based violence; WFP activities, such as protection rations, contributed to beneficiaries' safety; programme evaluations and reports such as those on Ethiopia, India, the Sudan and Indonesia; and WFP's overall results-based monitoring system; a chapter on Food Security, Distribution and Nutrition in Women, Girls, Boys and Men: Different Needs - Equal Opportunities. A Gender Handbook for Humanitarian Action, in collaboration with FAO and UNICEF, as a member of the IASC task force on gender and humanitarian assistance. Challenges . There is need to mainstream gender in all conflict prevention and early warning tools, so more efforts are needed in needs assessment, contingency planning and early warning. Although WFP does not have a treaty-based protection mandate, it is well-placed to promote protection. More efforts are needed to increase understanding of how WFP can contribute to protection concerns, including gender-based violence, however. Evaluation . During 2006, WFP presented 13 evaluation reports to the Board. Of particular interest were (i) an evaluation of WFP's Business Process Review, which seeks to maximize resource use and improve food pipelines, particularly in relief operations, (ii) a joint UNHCR/WFP evaluation of pilot food distribution projects, (iii) the Tsunami Evaluation Coalition synthesis report and (iv) the inter-agency real-time evaluation of the application of the IASC Cluster Approach in the South Asia Earthquake. . The Niger evaluation report distinguished between the period before the humanitarian crisis (harvest 2004 to July 2005) when the assessment and response by stakeholders proved to be inadequate and the acute phase of the crisis, when WFP's strategic reorientation was fully relevant, if somewhat late. . WFP is a member of the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG), which it anticipates will facilitate a peer review of the evaluation function in WFP in 2007. Activities of the Executive Boards Participation in the 2006 Joint Meeting of the Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP . UNFPA coordinated the joint meeting of the Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP, which took place in New York in January 2006. For the second consecutive year, WFP coordinated the Transitions from Relief to Development theme, highlighting recovery from the 2005 Pakistan earthquake. To reflect the field perspective, WFP invited UNDP's Pakistan country director and the Pakistan's Secretary of the Ministry of Economic Affairs to make statements on United Nations inter-agency and government cooperation. Board Members' reactions were positive, and they encouraged the United Nations agencies to foster capacity-building, preparedness and national leadership. Participation in Joint Field Visits of the Boards . The Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP visited Indonesia in March 2006, coordinated by UNDP. The purpose was to help Board Members understand the extent and ways in which United Nations organizations, collaborating with government and other partners, contributed to the transition from a humanitarian disaster of unprecedented scale the December 2004 tsunami to reconstruction and recovery. The visit also demonstrated how multilateral agencies support governments' achievement of goals. Particular attention was paid to issues relevant to United Nations reform and donor coordination. The mission concluded that the Indonesia UNDAF had strong country ownership, and noted that joint programming is an important tool. TABLE 1: GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTIONS THAT MENTION WFP AS A FOLLOW-UP AGENCY Resolution Timing Title Action by WFP A/Res/60/123 (A/60/L.3) Ongoing Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel Information Note on Funding of Security Management Arrangements, WFP/EB.1/2006/13-C. A/Res/60/125 (A/60/L.39) International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in natural disasters, from relief to development WFP's follow-up on humanitarian assistance is reported in the 2005 Annual Report to the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and the FAO Council, section 6. A/Res/60/195 (A/60/488/Add.3) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR) WFP is a member of the Platform for Promotion of Early Warning. It is also involved in the ISDR initiative, which deals with the Kyoto Framework for Action. A/Res/60/218 (A/60/496) Humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation for Ethiopia WFP provides inputs on its achievements to the report of the Secretary-General through the RC. A/Res/60/219 Assistance for humanitarian relief and the economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia See above A/Res/60/128 (A/60/499) Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced people in Africa WFP/UNHCR Joint Evaluation of the Pilot Food Distribution Projects, WFP/EB.1/2006/7-D. See also the Paragraphs on UNHCR in the section on Collaboration with Partners in this report. A//Res/60/141 (A/60/505 and Corr.1) The girl child WFP provides inputs on its achievements, three times a year, to reports of the Commission on the Status of Women, ECOSOC and the General Assembly. WFP's Gender Policy (20032007) Enhanced Commitments to Women to Ensure Food Security, WFP/EB.3/2002/4-A. A/Res/60/165 (A/60/509/Add.2) (Part II) The right to food WFP and the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security, WFP/EB/2/2005/4-B. TABLE 2: ECOSOC RESOLUTIONS THAT MENTION WFP AS A FOLLOW-UP AGENCY United Nations PublicPrivate Alliance for Rural Development The Rome-based agencies support IAAH and work together in the twin-track approach. See below for more details. Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development WFP, FAO and IFAD focus on achieving MDG 1. They encourage investment in rural development and agriculture to support developing countries creating vibrant economies where people can provide for themselves. The Rome-based agencies are strengthening efforts to make the twin-track work. They highlighted food security, hunger reduction and rural development in the outcome document of the September 2005 World Summit. In August 2006, the three agencies formed a senior-level working group on cooperation to integrate food security and rural development into national PRS and regional approaches to combating food insecurity, among others. Sustained economic growth for social development, including the eradication of poverty and hunger All WFP policies governing the use of food aid aim to eradicate hunger and poverty (WFP Mission Statement). WFP, its United Nations partners, NGOs and other organizations implement initiatives to achieve MDG 1. Details are in this report. Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau ANNEX I Points Raised at the 33rd Session of the FAO Conference "65. The Conference commended and reiterated its support to WFP for its performance in responding to both man-made and natural disasters. Many Members considered that more attention should be paid to development activities. Members also expressed support for WFP management. 66. Some Members recognized the importance of continuing WFP/FAO cooperation, especially with regard to food security, needs assessment, emergency responses in the provision of agricultural inputs, and nutrition. Cooperation with other UN agencies, civil society, governments and other partners in promoting comparative advantage and effectiveness was also stressed. 67. Some Members commended WFP's focus on women as regarded mother and child nutrition and school feeding programmes. There was some concern, however, over diminishing development programmes that were crucial in addressing hunger as a result of the increase in emergency activities. It was important for development activities to remain intact for capacity-building efforts of developing countries. Some Members stressed that emphasis should be on the traditional core activity of food aid. 68. Most Members recognized the importance of WFP's call for an expansion in its multilateral donor base, and called for the flexibility that more multilateral cash donations would provide. 69. Some Members expressed concern about the capacity of WFP staff to cope with an ever increasing number of emergency situations. While welcoming the concern expressed about staff well-being, the WFP noted that several mechanisms were in place to assist staff in coping with stress such as Rest and Relaxation (R&R), staff rotation, peer support volunteers, and that management was paying continued attention to this matter. 70. A concern was raised that the contributions of small non-traditional donors should not result in decreasing support by the traditional donors. A few Members also addressed the need for strategic food stocks to be available in disaster-prone areas. 71. Some Members praised WFP's business process review, and further encouraged innovative approaches." (Source: FAO Conference, 33rd Session, Rome, 19-26 November 2005. http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/010/j6321e/j6321e00.htm) AIDS auto-immune deficiency syndrome AU African Union AUC African Union Commission CAP Consolidated Appeals Process CARE Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere CCA Common Country Assessment CCP Common Country Programme CERF Central Emergency Response Fund CFSAM crop and food supply assessment mission CHAP Common Humanitarian Action Plan CP country programme CPAP country programme action plan DRC Democratic Republic of the Congo ECHA Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs ECHUI Ending Child Hunger and Undernutrition Initiative ECOSOC United Nations Economic and Social Council ECW Enhanced Commitments to Women EMOP emergency operation EWS early-warning system ExCom UNDG Executive Committee Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FFE food for education FFW food for work Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme HC Humanitarian Coordinator HGSFP Home-Grown School Feeding Programme HIV human immuno-deficiency virus IAAH International Alliance Against Hunger IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross IDP internally displaced person International Fund for Agricultural Development IFRC International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies ILO International Labour Organization IOM International Organization for Migration IPC Integrated Phase Classification IRA Immediate Response Account ISDR International Strategy for Disaster Reduction JAM joint assessment mission JFFLS Junior Farmer Field and Life School(s) JO joint office JOWG Joint Office Working Group JP joint programme LDC least-developed country LOU Letter of Understanding MCH mother-and-child health MDG Millennium Development Goal MOU Memorandum of Understanding NAF needs analysis framework NEPAD New Partnership for Africa's Development NFI non-food item NGO non-governmental organization OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ODA official development assistance PAHO Pan-American Health Organization PDE External Relations Division PG Programme Group PRRO protracted relief and recovery operation PRS poverty reduction strategy PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper RC Resident Coordinator SADC Southern Africa Development Community TCPR Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS UNAMA United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan UNCT United Nations country team UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework UNDG United Nations Development Group UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UNHAS United Nations Humanitarian Air Service Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees United Nations Children's Fund UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNIFEM United Nations Development Fund for Women UNJLC United Nations Joint Logistics Centre UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services UNV United Nations volunteer USAID United States Agency for International Development VAM vulnerability analysis and mapping World Health Organization 