%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|DEVELOPMENT FINANCE|AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|

Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Sixth session New York, 14-25 May 2007 * E/C.19/2007/1. Item 4 of the provisional agenda* Implementation of recommendations on the six mandated areas of the Forum and on the Millennium Development Goals Information received from the United Nations system and other inter-governmental organizations International Fund for Agricultural Development Summary Acknowledging the importance of indigenous peoples development and the centrality of the mandate of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), in compliance with the recommendations of the Permanent Forum at its fifth session, the Fund reports that in 2006 it has approved a number of projects that specifically targeted indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities for a total amount of $93.6 million in loans and $1.64 million in grants. In response to the recommendation of the Permanent Forum, made at its sixth session, in 2007 IFAD will develop its principles of engagement with indigenous peoples. In addition, in 2006, IFAD responded to the Permanent Forum recommendations as specified below: :: Financed two "Learning route" training programmes focused on indigenous tourism activities, through the Regional Programme in Support of Indigenous Peoples in the Amazon Basin :: Sponsored, in cooperation with other institutional partners, the fourth Anaconda Film Festival in Latin America :: Funded two studies in India, one on data disaggregation and human development index and one on traditional and local governance :: Held a policy forum at its headquarters on indigenous issues :: Invited the Chair of the Permanent Forum to address its Executive Board :: Hosted the annual meeting of the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues :: Organized an exhibition on the arts and traditions of tribal peoples of India Contents Page Response of the International Fund for Agricultural Development to the specific recommendations of the Forum Response of the International Fund for Agricultural Development to the recommendations of the Forum to the United Nations system Other significant information regarding recent policies, programmes, budgetary allocations or activities regarding indigenous issues within the International Fund for Agricultural Development List of conferences and other meetings on indigenous issues to be hosted by the International Fund for Agricultural Development in 2007-2008 Annex Projects in support of indigenous peoples financed by the International Fund for Agricultural Development: 2006 A. Response to recommendation 16 Establish an institutional partnership with indigenous peoples so that they can fully participate in IFAD projects and programmes that are relevant to indigenous peoples. 1. The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) has from its early years been involved in the development of indigenous peoples thanks to its targeted and participatory approach to rural development. The Fund has so far provided approximately $1.18 million in loans and $15.65 million in grants in support of indigenous peoples. Starting in 2002, in preparation for the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg, South Africa, IFAD worked proactively on advocacy with indigenous peoples beyond the confines of its projects. Since then, the Fund has established a close partnership with the Forum and the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues, and has provided funds to the Forum's secretariat to consult with indigenous peoples and communities on the impact of selected IFAD projects and whether the projects were in line with the Forum's principles, concepts and practices of development. In September 2006, the Chair of the Forum was invited to deliver a speech to the Fund Executive Board on "Enhancing the partnership of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues with IFAD". In an effort to further enhance and institutionalize its dialogue with indigenous peoples, in 2007 IFAD will develop its corporate principles of engagement with indigenous peoples. B. Response to recommendation 164 Contribute to fellowship programme established within the secretariat of the Permanent Forum. 2. On the basis of proposals received by the Permanent Forum for supporting the indigenous fellowship programme, IFAD is considering extending grant financing to the secretariat of the Permanent Forum. However, in order to be considered, proposals must meet the Fund's grant policy criteria, and their approval is subject to technical evaluation and revision. In addition, grant financing can only be extended to organizations after the successful completion of previous grants (ongoing grant No. 810 to the Permanent Forum secretariat). C. Response to recommendations 165, 166 and 168 165. Undertake work in data disaggregation in collaboration with the World Bank and the Inter-American Bank, following the IFAD work undertaken in India in disaggregating of the human development index. 166. Enhance the Indigenous Peoples Assistance Facility transferred by the World Bank through grant funding mechanism and contributions of other international financial institutions and bilateral and multilateral donors. 168. Lead a process aimed at generating a global report on the status of indigenous peoples as a complement to the indigenous peoples' world status report. 3. In 2007, in addition to its operational and advocacy work, the Fund will concentrate its efforts on developing the IFAD principles of engagement with indigenous peoples and to operate and mobilize resources for the newly established Indigenous Peoples Assistance Facility, which was successfully transferred by the World Bank in September 2006. However, possibilities of replicating, along with partners, the work undertaken in India on data disaggregation will be explored. At this stage, IFAD cannot make a commitment with regard to recommendation 168. D. Response to recommendation 167 Ensure continuity and future sustainability of indigenous peoples initiatives within the organization. 4. Based on the gains made so far under the leadership of the Assistant President on Special Assignment for Indigenous and Tribal Issues, the Fund has made the necessary arrangements to maintain its high profile and commitment to indigenous issues. The work related to indigenous peoples is being mainstreamed in a functional unit incorporated in the Policy Division. A Coordinator for Indigenous and Tribal Issues has been recruited to support day-to-day activities and the newly established Indigenous Peoples Assistance Facility. In addition, an interdepartmental Policy Reference Group on Indigenous Issues has been set up under the leadership of the two Assistant Presidents of the External Affairs and the Programme Management Departments. II. Response of the International Fund for Agricultural Development to the recommendations of the Forum to the United Nations system Special theme: the Millennium Development Goals and indigenous peoples: redefining the Goals A. Response to recommendation 27 The United Nation system is encouraged to support the full and effective participation of indigenous peoples in efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals at the national and local levels. 5. Extreme poverty remains a reality for over a billion people in the world. IFAD believes that poverty reduction needs to be tackled in the rural areas by focusing on agriculture, the basis of the economic livelihoods of most poor rural peoples. IFAD activities contribute to a number of Millennium Development Goals, most specifically Goal 1. To the extent that the Fund's agenda is rural poverty reduction, indigenous peoples are among the major target groups of IFAD, as they are often among the poorest and most marginalized people the Fund encounters in its areas of intervention, particularly in Asia and Latin America. B. Response to recommendation 40 Considering the commitment made by the World Bank to further explore inter-agency mechanisms to support the inclusion of indigenous peoples in national policies reduction strategies in a limited number of pilot countries, the Permanent Forum recommends that United Nations organizations fully contribute to that initiative and report back to the Permanent Forum on the progress made and the opportunities and limitations encountered, with a view to replicating the initiatives in other countries. 6. In the formulation of poverty reduction strategy papers, rural development has so far received little attention. IFAD has been concentrating its efforts on introducing the rural dimension in poverty reduction strategies and in building the capacity of the rural poor, including, organizations of indigenous peoples, to participate in the poverty reduction strategy paper processes. Data collection and disaggregation C. Response to the global efforts towards the identification of indicators and data collections relevant to indigenous peoples 7. In addition to grant resources provided to the secretariat of the Permanent Forum in 2005 and in order to define specific indicators of poverty and well-being among indigenous peoples, in 2006, IFAD funded a study on human development and deprivation among the Scheduled Tribes in India, carried out by the Indian Institute for Human Development. The purpose of the study was to calculate the human development, poverty and gender indices for a specific socio-economic group, the Scheduled Tribes, to compare them in terms of the indices in India as a whole, and to place them in a global context of development and deprivation. The study also focused on trends in poverty reduction among the Scheduled Tribes and on key poverty and deprivation factors. The main conclusion of the study was that the human development index for various tribal belts in India is as low as that of some of the poorest countries in sub-Saharan Africa. The results of the study were presented at a workshop in New Delhi, held in April 2006, and at the World Bank Conference on Poverty Reduction and Indigenous Peoples, held in New York in May 2006. Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People D. Response to recommendation 128 The Permanent Forum requests the Coordinator of the Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous Peoples to submit a report at its annual session regarding progress on the implementation of the Programme of Action of the Second Decade and invites States, the United Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations to provide information to the Coordinator. 8. In the process of developing its principles of engagement with indigenous peoples, IFAD will address the five objectives of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade of the World's Indigenous People and submit to the coordinator of the Second Decade a plan of action that will emerge from consultations within the organization and with indigenous peoples' representatives. More specifically, in those areas directly related to the IFAD mandate, such as economic and social development, the Fund will address issues related to (a) free, prior and informed consent; (b) policies that recognize environmentally sustainable pastoralism, hunting, gathering and shifting cultivation as legitimate activities; and (c) gender perspectives. 9. Within the context of development with identity, indigenous institutions and governance structures, IFAD, funded a study in 2005 that is being carried out by the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, on "Identity, power and rights: the State, international institutions and indigenous people", the goal of which is to ensure that indigenous visions of development and rights are recognized, respected and taken into consideration in national and international development programmes. Furthermore, in 2006, the Fund undertook a study on local governance, development and the identity of indigenous peoples, which documented traditional and local governance in five states in India. E. Response to recommendations 136 and 137 136. The Permanent Forum recommends that States, United Nations organizations and indigenous peoples' organizations elaborate and develop strategies and action plans for communication, education and public awareness on indigenous issues during the Second Decade, addressing different audiences. Toolkits should also be developed for use in the implementation of such plans. 137. The Permanent Forum recommends that States, United Nations organizations and indigenous peoples' strengthen the necessary communications, education and information infrastructure and support networks of educators on indigenous issues. Information and communications technology (ICT) for indigenous peoples must be supported in order to close the technological and information gap. 10. In October 2006, in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Confederación de Pueblos Indígenas de Bolivia and several indigenous peoples' organizations, IFAD co-sponsored a special session on indigenous peoples and communication for development at the World Congress on Communication for Development held in Rome. It also supported the participation in the congress of indigenous peoples' representatives from different regions. The special session produced specific recommendations to the World Congress on mainstreaming communication for development policies, programmes and services to foster the sustainable development of indigenous peoples' communities (see details on grants activities below). 11. During the course of 2006, IFAD also initiated programmes to raise the awareness of journalists in Latin America and South Africa about and to advocate indigenous peoples' issues (see details on grants activities below). 12. Furthermore, in 2006, as part of the development of the Rural Poverty Portal powered by IFAD, the Fund expanded its web page on indigenous peoples to incorporate its experiences and general issues related to indigenous peoples. The page can be accessed through the Rural Poverty Portal (http://www. ruralpovertyportal.org), and through the IFAD web page (www.ifad.org). III. Other significant information regarding recent policies, programmes, budgetary allocations or activities regarding indigenous issues within the International Fund for Agricultural Development 13. During 2006, through its loan facility, the IFAD Executive Board approved seven projects supporting indigenous peoples, ethnic minorities and pastoralists. The approved projects covered two countries in Asia (China and Viet Nam), three in Latin America (Argentina, Bolivia and Colombia) and two in Africa (Mali and the Sudan). The total cost of projects benefiting indigenous peoples amounted to $93.6 million, of which the IFAD contribution amounted to $49.23 million. They expect to benefit approximately 151,075 indigenous households (for further details on the approved projects, see the annex to the present report). 14. Six institutional grants were also approved in favour of organizations supporting indigenous peoples for a total amount of $2.409 million, of which the IFAD contribution amounted to $1.64 million (for details, see the annex to the present report). 15. A grant of $900,000 was approved by the Fund to support the Regional Programme for Rural Development Training in implementing a three-year "Learning route" training programme in Latin America. The programme will focus on different thematic areas, including the management of indigenous ecotourism. 16. A contribution of $50,000 was extended to FAO in preparation of a special session during the World Congress on Communication for Development to enable indigenous groups and communities to be able to better communicate their principle, concepts and practice of development. The objectives of this grant are as follows: :: Promote the mainstreaming of communication for development policies, programmes and services to foster the sustainable development of indigenous peoples' communities through the first World Congress on Communication for Development :: Enhance the capacity of indigenous peoples to appropriate communication for development :: Identify key communication for development methods, tools, strategies and projects to support indigenous peoples' livelihoods. 17. A grant in the amount of $145,000 was approved by the Fund to support the PANOS Institute in enhancing awareness of indigenous peoples' knowledge and experiences in rural areas of Madagascar and build their capacity to make their development needs known to policymakers and others in positions of influence. 18. In the framework of the Second Decade of the World's Indigenous Peoples, a grant contribution of $145,000 was extended to the InterPress Service news agency to raise awareness about poor rural communities of indigenous peoples in Latin America and to build the capacity of local journalists in Latin America and Southern Africa to advocate with and for indigenous peoples and provide them with the necessary tools. 19. In 2006, the Regional Programme in Support of Indigenous People in the Amazon Basin (PRAIA) focused two "Learning route" training programmes on indigenous tourism activities. "Indigenous tourism enterprises: management experiences" promoted exposure visits of indigenous peoples from different Latin American countries to successful ecotourism initiatives in the Bolivian Amazon. The scope of the "Learning route" programmes was to build the capacity of indigenous representatives undertaking indigenous ecotourism initiatives through learning by seeing and sharing experiences. "Following the Incas' tracks" brought together indigenous representatives from all over Latin America to visit successful living tourism experiences in the highlands of Peru. 20. In 2006, PRAIA launched the fourth Anaconda Film Festival. The festival, organized by PRAIA in cooperation with several partner institutions every two years, has the objective of promoting audiovisual products realized by or focusing on indigenous peoples from the Amazon Basin and the Chaco region. The Anaconda Film Festival selects and publicizes the best indigenous films and awards them four different prizes. The films are selected by an international jury and awarded by several indigenous communities through itinerant exhibitions in different parts of Latin America. In 2006, 37 films were proposed, 12 were selected and the best four were awarded prizes: :: The film "Cachivera de los jaguares", by Brazilian director Vincent Carelli received first prize :: "Sipakapa no se vende", by Álvaro Revenga of Guatemala, received the prize for the best documentary :: The Bolivian Miguel Angel Yalauma received the prize for the best docu-fiction "Renacer: historia de un movima" :: The best fiction prize was awarded to the Bolivian Maria Morales for the experimental video "Venciendo el miedo". 21. The awards ceremony, Anaconda 2006, will be held in Quito on 8 March 2007 (for further details see www.praia-amazonia.org). 22. During 2006, PRAIA also supported the publication of the book "Viaje al centro de un sueño: Chalalan -- una experiencia exitosa de ecoturismo comunitario en la Amazonia". The book is about the successful ecotourism experience of the Tacana community of San José de Uchupiamonas, in the Bolivian Amazon region. PRAIA ended as an IFAD-funded programme in 2006 and its successor, the PRAIA Foundation, was created as a result of the success of the programme. The newly established Foundation, during the course of the year, supported the publication of two books concerning indigenous peoples: "Medicina tradicional de las comunidades indígenas del Rio Quiquibey"; and "Qalauta, guía turística de trekking, escalada y boulder". Other activities 23. As a follow-up to the Permanent Forum/IFAD brainstorming workshop on indigenous peoples' perspectives on IFAD-funded projects, held in Rome in November 2005, a policy forum was organized at IFAD headquarters in May 2006 on the theme "IFAD and indigenous peoples". The forum provided an opportunity for IFAD staff to reflect on and react to the recommendations of the workshop and, in so doing, determine how IFAD could increase both its operational and policy engagement capacities to specifically address the issues faced by indigenous peoples. The chair of the Permanent Forum and a member of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights working group on indigenous populations and communities were invited as resource persons. The policy forum encouraged IFAD to develop specific principles of engagement to guide its work with indigenous peoples and to stress inclusiveness, specificity, flexibility and a demand-driven approach. 24. In June 2006, the Fund sponsored an indigenous expert to participate in the regional training for professional staff on indigenous and tribal peoples in Asia, organized by the Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact Foundation, the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs. 25. As Chair of the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues, IFAD hosted the Group's annual meeting in September 2006. The focal points on indigenous issues of 15 United Nations agencies, multilateral organizations and international financial institutions attended the meeting and shared their experiences in the three following areas: :: Indigenous land, territories and resources :: Indigenous peoples' knowledge and technologies :: Indigenous culture and development. 26. The report of the meeting was submitted to the sixth session of the Forum (E/C.19/2007/2). 27. An exhibition entitled "An unknown India -- arts and living tradition" was organized by IFAD in connection with the meeting, displaying art and handicrafts of the tribal peoples of India, or Adivasi. 28. Also, in support of the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by the General Assembly, IFAD lobbied with the Italian members of Parliament who, on 12 December 2006, unanimously approved a motion in support of the Declaration. IV. List of conferences and other meetings on indigenous issues to be hosted by the International Fund for Agricultural Development in 2007-2008 29. IFAD will be hosting the 2007 Multilateral Financial Institutions Environment Group meeting, which will take place in May 2007. The Group has been given the responsibility by the Heads of multilateral development agencies to promote greater cooperation between the various institutions for development effectiveness. The participants are primarily heads of environmental units/divisions in both multilateral and bilateral institutions. During the meeting, a brief session will be dedicated to discussing issues related to indigenous peoples. The proposed session would serve as a critical forum for IFAD to: (a) seek further inputs/views on the draft revised IFAD environmental assessment procedures; and (b) share the considerable experience and knowledge that it has developed through its engagement with indigenous groups. 30. In the process of developing the IFAD principles of engagement with indigenous peoples, the Fund will hold several consultations within IFAD and with indigenous peoples' representatives during the course of 2007. 31. Towards the end of 2007, IFAD expects to hold a workshop in India to document best practices and lessons learned from IFAD-funded projects in tribal areas. The workshop will also be an occasion to share experiences on the implementation of policies affecting tribal peoples in India, including the newly approved Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill. Projects in support of indigenous peoples financed by the International Fund for Agricultural Development: 2006 A. Loans Region/country Project title Project objective Project area Project components Project cost and financing (in United States dollars) Direct beneficiaries Asia China Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Modular Rural Development Programme Main objectives Reduce the incidence of poverty in target villages in a sustainable and gender-equitable way Specific objectives (a) Improve social and economic situation of poor women and men (b) Scale up innovations Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Target group Ethnic minorities: Uygurs, Kazaks, Hui, Kirgiz, Mongolian, Xibe, Ozbek, Russian, Daur and Tatar groups (a) Community-based natural resources management (b) Agricultural development (c) Strategic support for women (d) Microfinance development (e) Institutional support Total cost 55 million Estimated total cost benefiting ethnic minorities 33 million, including an IFAD loan of 15.06 million 793 000 persons in roughly 176 000 households It is assumed that 60 per cent-90 per cent of the target group belongs to ethnic minorities, equivalent to about 105 600 households Viet Nam Programme for improving market participation of the poor in Ha Tinh and Tra Vinh provinces Main objective Contribute to the sustainable improvement of incomes of poor people in rural areas of Viet Nam (a) Improvement of key markets and market mechanisms, processes and linkages (b) Off-farm job creation and improvement of agricultural incomes (c) Linking market-based initiatives to the needs and priorities of poor communes within a better functioning market environment Ha Tinh and Tra Vinh provinces Poorer, more vulnerable households; women and woman-headed households; underemployed youth; and ethnic minorities, especially the Khmer in Tra Vinh (a) Commune market opportunities support (b) Job/ enterprise facilitation and market development (c) Enterprise financing 37.3 million 10.4 million, including an IFAD loan of 7.28 million 70 000 to 80 000 people, equivalent to about 50 000 households Estimated 14 000 ethnic minority households Latin America Argentina Rural areas development programme Contribute to the sustainable reduction of rural poverty (a) Empower producer organizations/groups (b) Carry out social and productive projects for indigenous groups (c) Foster the transformation of traditional farm and non-farm activities of rural poor households into sustainable, revenue-generating business activities (d) Offer work and business opportunities to rural youth (e) Facilitate access by beneficiaries and their organizations to business support services (f) Support institutional strengthening and policy dialogue in favour of rural poor people 10 provinces of Argentina: Formosa, Chaco, Misiones, Corrientes, Entre Ríos, Sante Fe, Cordoba, La Pampa, Mendoza, San Juan (a) Non-indigenous, family-based producers or adult rural workers (b) Indigenous communities (c) Young men and women (a) Strengthening of human and social capital (b) Development of rural businesses (c) Institutional development 44.8 million Estimated total cost benefiting indigenous communities 8.98 million, including an IFAD loan of 3.87 million 19 450 direct beneficiaries, of which 3 900 belong to indigenous communities (estimated 1 950 indigenous households) Bolivia Enhancement of the peasant camelid economy support project Primary objective Enhance, increase and accumulate social, human, financial, physical and natural assets of poor camelid producers and microentrepreneurs, especially women and young people Selected municipalities from Oruro, La Paz and Potosí Department Poor producers of South American domestic camelids and vicuñas and related artisans and small-scale traders Most of the population living in the highland of Bolivia is Quechua and Aymara speaking (a) Sustainable management and rational use of vicuñas (b) Investments for the peasant camelid economy (c) Financial assets management and access to learning mechanisms 14.38 million Estimated total cost benefiting camelid producers 14.38 million, including an IFAD loan of 7.23 million 48 500 direct beneficiaries, equivalent to about 14 100 households Colombia Rural microenter-prise assets programme: capitalization technical assistance and investment support Increase the social, human, financial, physical and natural assets of small-scale entrepreneurs, especially women and young people, in poor rural areas of Colombia Specific objective Increase the rural poor's access to financial resources, technical assistance, knowledge, information and governance structures (local, regional and national) essential to the development of their microenterprises and markets National programme Small-scale producers, peasants, microentrepreneurs and craftworkers with scant access to resources but dynamic social, economic and cultural potential Explicit inclusion of indigenous and Afro-Colombian people living in the programme area (a) Investment and asset enhancement of rural microenterprises (b) Capacity-building and information for stakeholder linkages (c) Knowledge management and programme administration 32.1 million Estimated total cost benefiting Afro-Colombians and indigenous groups 5.64 million, including an IFAD loan of 3.51 million 128 000 direct beneficiaries, of which 20 000 are Afro-Colombians and 2 500 belong to indigenous groups Estimated 5 000 Afro-Colombian households and 625 indigenous households Africa Mali Kidal integrated rural development programme Help reduce poverty and food insecurity in the Kidal region (a) Increase and diversify local residents' incomes by stabilizing returns from nomadic livestock husbandry and promoting agro-pastoral activities (b) Improve their living conditions, notably those of women by facilitating access to basic socio-economic services and infrastructure Kidal region Target groups The population in Kidal region is 70 per cent Kel Tamashek (also known as Touaregs) (a) Development of agro-pastoral potential (b) Income-generation and diversification (c) Improved access to basic social services (d) Capacity-building 22.83 million Estimated total cost benefiting Touaregs 15.98 million, including an IFAD loan of 7.94 million 20 000 persons, of which approximately 14 000 are Touaregs Estimated 2 800 Touareg households Sudan Butana integrated rural development project Improve in a sustainable manner the livelihoods and resilience to drought of poor rural households (a) Establishing a coherent and cost-effective governance framework that ensures a regulated access to land and water resources of the Butana (b) Improving the access and bargaining position of women and men in the marketing of livestock (c) Developing the capacity of community-based organizations to engage in environmentally sound, socially and gender equitable development initiatives Butana region Smallholder agropastoralist households, smallholder households engaged in irrigation and smallholder transhumant households (a) Development of agriculture, rangeland and water services (b) Livestock and marketing development (c) Community development (d) Institutional support and project management Total cost 29.85 million Estimated total cost benefiting transhumant pastoralists 5.22 million, including an IFAD loan of 4.34 million 40 000 households, of which 7 000 households are transhumant pastoralists Global/regional/ country/ organization Beneficiaries Latin American countries/ regional programme for rural development training "Learning routes" training programme Improve the implementation and management of rural development and poverty reduction projects (a) Enhance the knowledge accumulated by rural associations, peasants and organizations implementing and operating rural development projects (b) Design, execute, validate and replicate innovative solutions and activities (c) Improve the design and management of rural development projects Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (a) Advisory and technical assistance services for the identification and design of learning routes (b) Training services (c) Development and dissemination of innovative rural development practices and ideas 1.5 million IFAD contribution Indigenous leaders from different Latin American countries Global/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Communication for development and indigenous peoples: support to the mainstreaming of communication for development into policies and programmes Enable indigenous groups and communities to be able to better communicate their principles, concepts and practices of development (a) Promote the mainstreaming of communication for development policies, programmes and services to foster the sustainable development of indigenous peoples' communities (b) Enhance the capacity of indigenous peoples to appropriate communication for development (c) Identify key communication for development methods, tools, strategies and projects to support indigenous peoples' livelihoods Global (a) Organization of a special session of the World Congress on Communication for Development on indigenous peoples and communication for development (b) Support for the participation of indigenous peoples' representatives from different regions in the World Congress (c) Display of multimedia materials prepared by indigenous peoples at the World Congress Latin American and Southern African countries/ InterPress Service News Agency Enabling indigenous peoples of Latin America and Southern Africa to use strategic communication skills to reduce poverty in their communities Raise awareness about poor rural communities of indigenous peoples in Latin America and Southern Africa during the Second International Decade for Indigenous Peoples and build the capacity of local journalists in Latin America and Southern Africa to advocate on behalf of indigenous peoples by providing them with the necessary knowledge and skills to do so (a) Build momentum during the Second International Decade for Indigenous Peoples to place the issues of indigenous peoples on the development agenda of Governments and development organizations (b) Promote pro-poor research by gathering and sharing first-hand experiences of indigenous communities from rural areas regarding innovative approaches to tackling indigenous rural poverty (c) Build the capacity of InterPress Service News Agency to influence pro-poor policies (d) Build the capacity of local journalists in developing countries of Latin America and Southern Africa to gain the skills and knowledge they need to report on indigenous peoples' issues Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru, Colombia, Paraguay, Brazil, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Nicaragua, Mexico Southern Africa South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland (a) Gathering, translating and distributing human interest stories (b) Workshops (c) Journalist award Indigenous peoples from Latin America and Southern Africa Country/ Panama/ Centro de Gestión Local de Darien y Comarcas Sustainable local tourism development in Darien Generate income and employment in the indigenous and Afro-descendant communities of the Darien region in a sustainable manner (a) Elaborate a development plan for the local tourism industry, based on national and international demand, in a participatory manner in consultation with sector stakeholders (b) Strengthen capacities of local business and support community-based initiatives for the development of local ecotourism (c) Create a communication strategy that would foster promotion of the local tourism initiatives and exchange with national/international ecotourism sector Darien region of Panama (a) Planning and organization of tourism (b) Promotion of the Darien region (c) Capacity strengthening and support to local tourism initiatives (d) Communication strategy The programme is expected to benefit 5 000 households (or 30,000 persons) Belize/ United Nations Development Programme Belize Building pro-poor capacities for local government and provision of rural financial services Support the decentralization process of the Government of Belize by strengthening local institutional capacities (a) Promote the increased outreach of the financial services that selected credit unions offer to low income households and small and microbusiness enterprises in rural and other poverty stricken areas (b) Strengthen village councils, district association and National Association of Village Council Organizations so that they can influence policymakers to foster national development particularly in reference to poverty alleviation in rural areas Selected districts of Belize (a) Institutional capacity-building of the Belize Credit Union League and selected member credit unions (b) Building up local organizational and governance capacities in National Association of Village Councils Organizations The Project will benefit indigenous populations of Belize, especially Mayan and Garifuna communities Madagascar/ Panos Limited Capacity-building of indigenous peoples in rural areas of Madagascar Increased understanding and awareness of the knowledge and experiences of indigenous peoples and build their capacity to make their development needs known to policymakers and influencers (a) Increase awareness throughout the development community and national governments of the importance of indigenous peoples' knowledge of and priorities for the environment and their development needs (b) Build the capacity of indigenous peoples to document their experience and knowledge and help them gain the skills to communicate this to external audiences (c) Improve the national media coverage on issues that affect indigenous communities (d) Amplify the voices and experiences of indigenous peoples living in rural areas of Madagascar (e) Develop a website to promote the testimonies, photographs and video clips to a large audience Rural areas of Madagascar (a) Project planning (b) Capacity-building (c) Testimony collection, transcription and translation (d) Video production and community discussion (e) Media fellowship for print journalist and a photographer (f) Analysis and editing of the testimonies and videos (g) Local, national and regional dissemination of the testimonies and video clips (h) International dissemination (i) Promotion Indigenous peoples of rural areas in Madagascar 