%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2007 resumed session 14-18 May 2007 Quadrennial reports 2002-2005 submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Addendum Contents Page 1. Greenpeace International 2. International Council of Voluntary Agencies (ICA) 3. International Psychoanalytical Association Trust (IPA) 4. International Women's Democracy Center -- IWDC 5. Real Women of Canada GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL General Consultative Status granted in 1998 Part One: Introduction Greenpeace is a global peace and environmental organisation consisting of Greenpeace International (Stichting Greenpeace Council) in Amsterdam and 27 national and regional offices around the world providing a presence in 40 countries. Committed to the principles of non-violence, political and economic independence and internationalism, Greenpeace does not seek or accept funding from governments, corporations or political parties or any other source that could compromise its aims, objectives, or its independence. Greenpeace has been campaigning since 1971, focusing on the most crucial issues surrounding the global threats to our planet's biodiversity, environment and security: Climate Change & Atmospheric Pollution; Oceans; Forests; Genetic Engineering; Toxic Chemicals; Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear Power; Trade and the Environment. Part Two: Contribution of the organisation to the work of the United Nations Representatives from Greenpeace International have been closely involved with many aspects of the work of the United Nations over the period 2002-2005. United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD): The period in question (2002-2005) was dominated by the preparation for the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg in 2002 and its aftermath. Greenpeace attended a number of Prepcoms leading up to the summit, including WSSD Prepcom 4, 24 May -7 June 2002, in Bali, Indonesia; as well as providing expert advice towards the process and holding regular consultations with Nitin Desai, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Jan Pronk, then Minister of Environment, Netherlands and Thabo Mbeke. Prime Minister, South Africa, at the Summit itself. Greenpeace's activities and submissions are outlined in some detail at: http://archive.greenpeace.org/earthsummit/ United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF): Greenpeace participated in the United Nations Forum on Forests process during 2002-5. This presence was relatively low-level, mainly due to the scepticism of our organisation towards the ability of the UNFF to have a significant mitigation effect on deforestation, but also because of the lack of political will on the part of the countries operating within this process to effectively address the forests crisis, whilst at the same time respecting the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities in an adequate manner. United Nations General Assembly: Greenpeace attended the First Committee meetings of the United Nations General Assembly, monitors and reports on developments, and provides briefing materials to the delegates. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Governing Council: Greenpeace participated in United Nations Environment Programme Governing Council sessions to follow the debate on toxics issues, especially mercury, as well as to advance better global governance on environmental issues. We have actively participated in debates, attending various meetings, including the 22nd session of the Governing Council/ Global Ministerial Environment Forum, 3 - 7 February 2003 in Nairobi, Kenya and the Eighth Special Session of the UNEP Governing Council/Global Ministerial Forum in Jeju Island, South Korea, 29 - 31 March 2004. United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD): Greenpeace has played a very active role in the CBD process from 2002-2005 on both forests and oceans issues, as well as with regards to the Biosafety Protocol. Greenpeace representatives have taken part in a number of Expert groups on a number of different issues, as well as participating in Working Groups and meetings of the Subsidiary Bodies for Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice (SBSTTA). United Nations Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES): Greenpeace has had a long history of involvement in the CITES process. Between 2002 and 2005, Greenpeace attended both the 12th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties in Santiago, Chile, 3-15 November 2002 and 13th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties in Bangkok, Thailand from 2-14 October 2004. Our main focus during these meetings was to maintain the `Appendix One' listing of a number of whale species, as well as actively supporting the listing of commercial timber and marine species onto `Appendix Two'. Basel Convention (BC): Greenpeace has been involved with the Basel Convention on Hazardous Wastes, participating throughout the treaty negotiation process, and in all meetings since the adoption of the Basel Convention in 1989. Greenpeace has contributed to the Conference of Parties meetings, as well as the technical and legal meetings, including the Open-Ended Working Group meetings. Greenpeace contributions include working on the Basel ban amendment, reducing hazardous waste generation at source through substitution, and working to eliminate hazardous materials used in the electronics industry, and for extended producer responsibility for end-of-life products. Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs): Greenpeace actively contributed to the negotiations of the Stockholm Convention leading up to its adoption in 2001. Since that time, Greenpeace has attended and contributed in many of the Stockholm Convention meetings, including all the meetings of the Conference of Parties. Greenpeace has been involved in contributing to the work of the subsidiary scientific and technical working group meetings. Greenpeace advocates within the Stockholm Convention that Parties adopt and implement action plans for the substitution of hazardous chemicals, and technologies yielding hazardous chemicals. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC): Greenpeace has been an active participant on both the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol since the beginning, making submissions, interventions and holding side events and workshops on key issues, with a particular focus on maintaining and enhancing the environmental integrity of the Kyoto Protocol. Greenpeace works both on its own and within the framework of the Climate Action Network (CAN) in this forum. United Nations Informal Consultative Process on the Law of the Sea (UNICPOLOS): Greenpeace has been actively engaged at UNICPOLOS during the period 2002-2005. Our work, often in coalition with non-governmental partners, has recently focused on the protection of deep-sea marine biodiversity, and the development of oceans governance regimes under the United Nations Law of the Sea. In 2005, on behalf of Greenpeace International, Ms. Karen Sack made a formal presentation to the UNICPOLOS discussion panel "Fisheries and their Contribution to Sustainable Development". This examined the need for the United Nations General Assembly to adopt a resolution to stop bottom trawling on the high seas. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO): Greenpeace attended both the Committee of Fisheries 25th Session from 24-28 February 2003 and the Committee of Fisheries 26th Session from 7-11 March 2005, in Rome, Italy. We have played an active role providing information about the threats to global fisheries and marine ecosystems, and putting forward solutions to issues such as illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing, over fishing, bottom trawling in sensitive ecosystems, and marine pollution. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA): During the reporting period, Greenpeace has been the foremost NGO attending IAEA meetings in Vienna, supporting the non-proliferation role of the Agency and providing information about nuclear power. For example: http://www.greenpeace.org/international/press/releases/greenpeace-statement-on-iaea-b United Nations Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT): Greenpeace played an active role in the NPT Preparatory Committee Meetings (Prep Com) and Review Conferences (Rev Con) over the period 2002-2005 and provided briefing materials that were subsequently used by delegates, contributing actively to the NGO presentations. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD): Greenpeace participated actively in the XIth Session of UNCTAD in Sao Paolo, Brazil (13-18 June 2004). Greenpeace focused on the need to make trade work for sustainability and equity and called on UNCTAD to ensure that corporations contribute to socially just and environmentally sound development. Millennium Development Goals - World Summit, 14-16 September 2005, New York: Like other civil society organisations, Greenpeace was not granted access to the official summit. However, Greenpeace attended the pre-meeting to the Summit organised by the United Nations and in the months prior to the summit commented on the draft outcome documents in order to work towards progress, especially in the areas of disarmament, corporate accountability, trade and climate change. 2. INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF VOLUNTARY AGENCIES (ICVA) General Consultative Status granted in 1974 Part I. Introduction The International Council of Voluntary Agencies (ICVA) is an association of non-governmental organisations from around the world that works as a collective body, to promote, and advocate for, human rights and a humanitarian perspective in global debates and responses. The heart of the ICVA mission is to support NGOs to protect and assist people in need, to address the causes of their plight, and to act as a channel for translating patterns and trends into advocacy. ICVA advocates vis-à-vis governments and international agencies for a strong NGO role in efforts to secure human rights, prevent conflicts, prepare for disasters, and improve humanitarian responses to distressed populations. One of ICVA's five primary functions, reaffirmed by ICVA's General Assembly held in 2003, is to facilitate relationships with United Nations agencies related to humanitarian response. Part II. Contribution of ICVA to the work of the United Nations ICVA has been invited by the Emergency Relief Coordinator/Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs who chairs the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) to participate in the IASC. The IASC has been created pursuant to United Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/182 (1991) on strengthening the humanitarian emergency assistance of the United Nations. The IASC, through its Chair, reports on its work to Economic and Social Council at its annual humanitarian segment. ICVA is also the focal point for NGO relations with United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and facilitates NGO interventions in the UNHCR Standing and Executive Committees. ICVA is in close contact and cooperation with various other UN bodies and UN humanitarian, human rights, and development actors and agencies on a regular basis. PARTICIPATION IN THE WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS AND COOPERATION WITH UN BODIES AND/OR SPECIALISED AGENCIES IASC During the reporting period, the IASC was the global forum for humanitarian coordination between the UN agencies, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and the NGO community. ICVA participated in IASC meetings as a standing invitee: at the Heads of Agency level (twice a year); at the Working Group level (three or four times a year), and in the various Reference Groups and Sub-Working Groups; and weekly meetings. ICVA has introduced or made active contributions on IASC agenda items: coordination of humanitarian response in several countries including, for example, Darfur/Sudan, Indonesia, and Uganda; internally displaced persons; staff security in the context of the changing global context; sexual exploitation and abuse of beneficiaries by humanitarian staff; and the reform of the humanitarian sector. With regards to the UN humanitarian reform process, ICVA has facilitated NGO input and involvement in this process. Among other activities, ICVA organised a meeting on 25 April 2005 (Environment House, Geneva) with NGOs which was opened by Assistant ERC/Director, OCHA, Geneva and co-chaired by ICVA, in the context of the Humanitarian Response Review; a study commissioned by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs/Emergency Relief Coordinator; and to map the global capacity for providing humanitarian assistance. In October 2005, the ICVA Executive Committee met with the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Emergency Relief Coordinator to discuss his reform plans and proposals. In strengthening the participation of NGOs in the IASC, ICVA has initiated and chaired monthly meetings between the IASC and NGOs on issues of common concern. In the context of the IASC Task Force on Human Rights and Humanitarian Action, ICVA co-organised a workshop, together with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and UNICEF, on 23 and 24 April 2004, at the Canadian Permanent Mission in Geneva for the report, in order to further sharpen the thinking and clarify the links between human rights and humanitarian action. Following the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad, Iraq, in August 2003, ICVA was involved in the High-Level Humanitarian Forum held in Geneva on 31 March 2004. This Forum, convened by the IASC and its Chair, discussed the challenges for humanitarian agencies in the context of the changing security environment. The meeting brought together some 40 humanitarian agencies from the United Nations system, the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, International Organization for Migration (IOM), and NGOs. Around 20 NGOs attended the Forum, including several from developing countries, such as Afghanistan, which had been identified by ICVA from within its membership. ICVA initiated and promoted consultations in the IASC and related forums on the concept of United Nations "integrated missions" that bring different mandates (humanitarian, development, rule of law, human rights, political, peacekeeping, etc.) under the leadership of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In humanitarian contexts, these missions can pose a challenge for NGOs, given the need to maintain humanitarian space and principles. Unfortunately, these missions may blur these distinctions when they combine humanitarian affairs and political objectives. UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (UNHCR) ICVA is the NGO focal point for facilitating partnerships between the UNHCR and NGOs. Not only do these relationships include implementing arrangements, but they also extend to operational and advocacy partnerships. ICVA coordinates the NGO input in the meetings of the Executive Committee of UNHCR's Programme (ExCom) and the sessions of its Standing Committee. In consultation with Member States, ICVA has worked to enhance the opportunities of NGOs to participate in the work of ExCom, including an increased number of potential slots for NGO speakers and NGO contributions to the drafting of ExCom decisions and conclusions. ICVA has continued to co-chair and co-organise with UNHCR the annual consultations between UNHCR and NGOs, which take place prior to ExCom, which was generally attended by some 200 NGOs. The format of these consultations has changed in order to make the sessions more interactive. ExCom Member States and Observers were also invited to the consultations. In support of the outcome of the Global Consultations, ICVA has worked to promote the Agenda of Protection with NGOs and to facilitate NGO participation in the High Commissioner's Convention Plus process. At the request of the Secretary-General's Chef de Cabinet, ICVA provided the names of three potential candidates for the position of UN High Commissioner for Refugees, which became vacant at the beginning of 2005. In line with new recruitment procedures for senior United Nations officials, ICVA was informed of the criteria and qualifications required for the position. ICVA's newsletter, Talk Back, published the views of the eight candidates who were part of the short-list (see Talk Back Volume 7-2, 30 March 2005). The interview panel used this issue of Talk Back in the interview process. COOPERATION WITH OTHER UN BODIES AND AGENCIES At the invitation of the President of the General Assembly, and in consultation with the United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service, ICVA was one of the NGOs that participated in his Task Force to organise the hearings with civil society and the private sector in the context of the General Assembly high level plenary session on the Millennium Development Goals in 2005 and related United Nations reform. ICVA attended and contributed to the work of two panels of the Secretary-General and drew the attention to its member agencies of them: the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations in 2003 and 2004, and the Global Commission on International Migration in 2004 and 2005. ICVA has also maintained regular relations with other United Nations (humanitarian) agencies and actors, including the World Food Programme (WFP) in the context of WFP's annual consultations with NGOs; the Representative of the Secretary-General on (the human rights of) internally displaced persons whose mandate was changed in 2005; and Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the context of the guidelines for United Nations Humanitarian Coordinators on human rights. 3. INTERNATIONAL PSYCHOANALYTICAL ASSOCIATION TRUST (IPA) Special Consultative Status granted in 1998 i Aims and purposes of the organization The International Psychoanalytical Association Trust (IPA) was created in 1910. Its mission is to assure the continued vigour and development of psychoanalysis. The Association works closely with its Constituent Organization in each continent to provide standards of training, conferences, international congresses, and to develop clinical, education and research programmes. Membership has grown from 240 in 1920 to over 11,000 now. In 1997, IPA created its committee on the United Nations which part of its mandate is to bring international issues and concerns to the psychoanalytic profession, with a view to developing a methodology linking individual development to socio-economic development in the world community. Part II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings 1. 46th-49th sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), 4-15 March 2002, 3-14 March 2003, 1-12 March 2004 and 28 February-11 March 2005 respectively at United Nations Headquarters, New York: Representatives of IPA participated every year at the Commission and through the CONGO NGO Committee on the Status of Women, helped in organizing orientation sessions for newcomers, regular briefings for NGOs and consultations and parallel events and booklets for NGO participants. IPA panelists addressed issues such as maternal modulation of male violence, psychology of women, inequality as well as domestic violence at the meetings. 2. 58th-61st sessions of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR), 18 March-26 April 2002, 27 March-25 April 2003, 15 March-23 April 2004 and 14 March-22 April 2005 respectively Geneva: IPA representatives attended the meetings, networked with the other NGO representatives and informed the IPA membership on the issues and problems dealt with during these sessions. 3. 2nd Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 7-10 April 2002: IPA participated throughout: Was a member of the NGO Forum organizing committee and was a panelist at a roundtable organized by the World Health Organization (WHO) on "Social Security". In addition, IPA representatives organized a panel on the "Psychoanalytic Perspectives of Ageing" during the NGO Forum (5-10 April 2002). 4. NGO Fora to the Economic and Social Council High-level Segments (annually New York and Geneva). As a member of the Conference of NGOs in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations (CONGO), IPA representatives participated and were active players in the process contributing input from the NGO perspective to inform the ministerial debate on the year's selected theme. 5. World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). IPA representatives participated in all Preparatory Committees (Prepcoms) of both phases but were unable to participate in the Summit. IPA representatives took part and helped as a member of CONGO in organizing the briefings for NGOs. Representatives of IPA presented in their panel on the issue of culture and psychology in the new Information Society. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters 1. Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA), IPA representative attended four meetings with ESCWA between the years 2002-2004. One meeting focused on the empowerment of women, the second on Arab NGOs and the United Nations Committee on the elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 2. Department of Public Information (DPI) Annual Conferences for the Non- Governmental Organizations (NGOs) DPI/NGO Conferences: 9-11 September 2002; 8-10 September, 2003 and 8-10 September 2005. IPA representatives attended the Conference every year and were speakers on panels. They organized one of the midday events (10 September 2002) with representatives from the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD). 3. In partnership with DPI, IPA representatives organized annual events such as in 9 September 2003 on Human Security; a briefing on 2 January 2004 on the "Psychoanalytic Perspectives of the Arab/Israeli Conflict" and on 22 January 2005 on "Unlearning Intolerance and common bases of prejudice". 4. With the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Department of Peace-keeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Public Information (DPI), IPA representatives met twice a month for two years (2002-2004) to discuss issues such as helping United Nations officers on mission in conflict areas, training of mental health professionals on mission and diagnosis and treatment of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Representatives wrote a proposal with IPA volunteers and prepared a list of those who would be ready to help whenever needed. Activities undertaken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 1. During the reporting period, IPA representatives were involved as members in several NGO Committees specifically those on Mental Health. The Status of Women, Human Rights and Child Rights, and the Alliance on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, worked with their colleagues in support of the MDGs. They were involved with the Conference of NGOs in consultative relationship with the United Nations (CONGO) and DPI in creating the Millennium +5 NGO Network. 2. An IPA representative was invited to Seoul, the Republic of Korea, twice to speak about the role of NGOs and the MDGs (1 July 2004 and 9-11 November 2005). 3. IPA representatives were panelists in Lima, Peru, 14-17 November 2002 at the conference "Al Fin De La Bastille" co-sponsored by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Activities in support of global principles 1. IPA representatives participated regularly as speakers at conferences and round-tables on United Nations related issues and on the MDGs. 2. IPA organized panels and discussion in many countries of the world on the Holocaust, for example during the IPA Congress in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 29 July 2005 3. IPA participated at the General Assembly of the Conference of NGOs (CONGO) in Geneva, Switzerland, 4-6 December 2003 4. IPA participated in Salt Lake City, Utah, the United States of America, on the "International Conference on Prejudice and its Prevention", 1-4 December 2005. 4. INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DEMOCRACY CENTER - IWDC Part I: Introduction The International Women's Democracy Center (IWDC) was established in 1995 to strengthen women's global leadership through training, education, networking and research with a focus on increasing the participation of women in politics, policy and decision making within their own governments. IWDC works in partnership with established non-governmental organizations around the world to implement all of its programs, projects, and activities to ensure that culture and tradition are honored. In the past eleven years, IWDC has trained women leaders in 29 countries how to stand as candidates for elected office, how to serve as an elected official, how to lobby their legislatures and how to advocate for issues central to their communities. Part II: Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and other United Nations entities at United Nations Headquarters New York. The International Women's Democracy Center has participated in the meetings and conferences of the Economic and Social Council with an official delegation of five representatives. The following are the conferences and events attended from 2002-2005. 1. 46th Commission for the Advancement of Women, 4-15 March 2002: Poverty, Environment and Natural Disasters. IWDC president facilitated two workshops at the Church Center at 45th & 1st on the 2nd floor for women leaders from 30 countries during the NGO Working Session. Workshops focused on training women in the technical skills of how to manage a campaign for elected office. IWDC participated in meetings with the North America/European, Africa and the Southeast Asia Caucuses. IWDC in partnership with the Center for Ethics in Action hosted an art show of women artists from around the world in the main lobby of the United Nations Headquarters. 2. 55th Annual Department of Public Information/Non-Governmental Organizations (DPI/NGO) Conference, 9-11 September 2002: "Rebuilding Societies Emerging from Conflict". IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors to the NGO Forum where they attended general sessions and issue caucuses on youth leadership and HIV/AIDS. The delegation also attended the reception of the United Nations Secretary-General. 3. 47th Session, Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), 3-14 March 2003: IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors to participate in the general meeting, daily NGO briefings and youth and Africa caucus meetings. 4. 56th DPI/NGO Conference, 8-10 September 2003: "Human Security and Dignity." IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors who participated in the general sessions and youth caucus meetings. 5. 48th Session, CSW, 1-12 March 2004: IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors to the annual meeting where they participated in general sessions and caucus meetings and attended a workshop and reception hosted by the Youth Caucus. 6. 57th Annual DPI/NGO Conference 8-10 September 2004. "Millennium Development Goals - Civil Society Takes Action." IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors to the conference where they attended general sessions and the youth caucus activities. 7. 49th Session, CSW, 28-11 March 2005: IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors to participate in the general proceedings. 8. 58th Annual DPI/NGO Conference, 7-9 September 2005. "Our Challenge: Voices for Peace, Partnership and Renewal." IWDC president led a delegation of high school seniors who participated in the open forum on the Millennium Development Goals. iii) Initiatives undertaken by IWDC in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals Goal 3. Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women Target: Train women in the technical skills of how to stand for office ACTIONS: · Trained women how to run a campaign = 3,500 · Trained women how to lobby = 4,000 · Advocacy training for community leaders = 8,000 · Training for parliamentarians in constituent services = 200 · Training for local councilors = 1,200 · Training for campaign managers = 2,000 Target: Train the next generation of women leaders to move into policy and decision making positions. · Placed youth delegates on IWDC Official United Nations Delegations = 32 · Trained 18 - 35 year olds in public policy strategies = 3,000 Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases Target: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS · Addressed the issue of stigma = 6,000 · Facilitated Community Forums = 2,500 · Training for community leaders = 150 · Training for youth leaders = 200 iv) Activities in support of Global Principles International Women's Day 8 March was observed each year by IWDC through special events, community forums, and partnerships for panel presentations with like-minded NGOs who shared a similar mission to empower women and girls. In 2002, IWDC hosted a panel presentation entitled "The Role of Women in Emerging Democracies," in Washington, DC, United States which was attended by students, activists, educators and NGO representatives. In 2003, IWDC hosted the Global Democracy Award on Capitol Hill, Washington DC, United States named in honor of Maria Elana Moyano who sacrificed her life to bring democracy to Peru. The award was given to Nikki Tesfai from the African Community Resource Center, NGO where a wide range of social and economic resources are provided to African immigrants. In 2004, IWDC held the Global Democracy Award which was given to Congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy who has fought for the rights of women and children in the United States Congress. IWDC United Nations Youth delegates gave a presentation about their experience at the annual DPI Conference in September 2004 to the "United Nations USA Chapter" organization in Cleveland, Ohio on 21 October 2004. IWDC would have performed much better in the implementation of United Nations Programmes if not for the following problems: 1. Scarce funds and a small staff make attendance at international meetings very difficult as travel is expensive; 2. Scarce funds allowed the IWDC Delegation to participate in only two meetings each year only at United Nations Headquarters in New York. REAL Women of Canada has conscientiously tried to use its Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) special status with Economic and Social Council to improve the status of women and their families both within Canada and abroad. In this regard, the organization has set out below the United Nations meetings in which it has participated since June, 1998. It has also participated by presenting workshops at the NGO Forums. The organization has attempted to have implemented in Canada the issues raised in United Nations treaties such as the United Nations treaties on Drugs, United Nations Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. REAL Women has also promoted the activities of the United Nations in the broadcast and print media in Canada. i. Aims and Purposes of REAL Women of Canada and its main course of action REAL Women of Canada is a women's organization that was federally incorporated in 1983. It is completely self supporting by way of its membership fees and donations. It receives no funding from the government. The purpose of the organization is to promote the equality and well being of Canadian women and their families in the home, the workplace and in retirement. REAL Women is a human rights organization whose work includes lobbying the Members of Parliament and appearing before government committees on behalf of women and their families, and intervening in court actions affecting women and their families. It also promotes its views in the print and broadcast media in Canada. REAL Women's geographical membership consists of mostly Canadian residents (with a few exceptions) and works within Canada, to insure the betterment of the status of women by lobbying both the federal and provincial governments by way of briefs and appearances before government committees and Royal Commissions. ii Changes that may have had a significant impact on the organization vision There have been no significant changes in the organization's mission or function since the submission of our 1998 - 2001 quadrennial report. i. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. REAL Women of Canada has participated in the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, 45th session, 6 - 16, March, 2001, New York; United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, 46th Session, 4 - 15, March 2002, New York; General Assembly Special Session on Children, 8 - 10 May, 2002, New York; World Summit on Sustainable Development, Preparatory Committee II New York, 25 March - 5 April, 2002, New York; United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, 47th session, 3- 14 March, 2003, New York; United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, 48th session, 1 - 12 March, 2004, New York, Commission of Sustainable Development, 12th session (CSD - 12), 14 - 30 April, 2004, New York; United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, 49th session, 28 February - 11 March, 2005, New York; United Nations 61st Commission on Human Rights, 14 March - 22 April, 2005, Geneva, Switzerland; United Nations NGO Informal Regional Network in Canada, 28 - 29 October, 2005, Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada. ii Cooperation with the United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters: REAL Women of Canada cooperated with the Treaty Monitoring Committee on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, by presenting a brief to the NGO Pre-session Monitoring Committee on 10 June, 2003, Geneva, Switzerland dealing with the best interests of children as relating to public education policies in Canada; REAL Women presented a brief on 17 September, 2003 to the Monitoring Committee on the Convention on the Rights of the Child in Geneva, Switzerland, in response to Canada's official response to the Committee; REAL Women participated in the World Day of Prevention of Child Abuse, 19 November, 2004, the event organized by the Women's World Summit Foundation, sponsored by the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva, Switzerland by holding a national press conference in Ottawa Canada promoting the rights of children. REAL Women of Canada participated annually in the consultation process organized by the Canadian Foreign Affairs Department which purpose is to provide input to the Canadian government in regard to its participation in the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) held in Geneva, Switzerland. During the reporting period, REAL Women of Canada also actively continued working on a regular basis with the federal and provincial governments in Canada to ensure that the provisions of the Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child are properly implemented. iii Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals During the reporting period, REAL Women of Canada also directly lobbied the Canadian government, issued press releases and held meetings to ensure Canada's compliance with the United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961), Convention on Psychotropic Substances (1971), Convention Against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (1988) and the Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 