%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2008 Regular session 21-30 January 2008 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2003-2006 submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Chinese Association for International Understanding Institute for Global Environmental Strategies International Confederation for Family Support Millennium Institute National Alliance of Women's Organizations (Special consultative status granted in 2003） I. Introduction Founded in September 1981 and sponsored by and composed of political parties, social organizations, prominent personages, scholars and social activists from all walks of life in China, the Chinese Association for International Understanding (CAFIU) is one of the most influential national non-governmental organizations in China with its relations with over 250 organizations, political parties, research institutes in more than 110 countries. Aiming at enhancing mutual understanding and friendship between China and other countries, safeguarding world peace and promoting common development, CAFIU has been carrying out various activities in the hope to "Let the world understand China, and let China understand the world"，including study visits, friendly exchanges, participations in bilateral and multilateral activities of other international NGOs as well as the United Nations, organization of seminars and workshops on different topics, cooperation with foreign NGOs engaged in development and poverty alleviation programmes in China. CAFIU has been a full member of the Conference of Non-governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations (CONGO) since October 2003. II. Participation in United Nations meetings (1) CAFIU representatives attended the 57th, 58th and 59th Annual Conference of the DPI (Department of Public Information)/NGO of the United Nations in New York in September of 2004, 2005 and 2006, and made presentations on Chinese NGOs' poverty-relief efforts at the 58th conference and co-sponsored workshops on human security and sustainable development at the 59th one. (2) CAFIU representatives attended the High Level Segment of the Economic and Social Council and made presentations on China's employment policy and Chinese NGO's endeavours on implementing the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in Geneva in June 2006. (3) CAFIU representatives attended the Annual Meeting of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in March of 2005 and 2006 in Geneva, and made speeches on China's human rights situation and Chinese NGO's role in human rights development at NGOs side events. (4) CAFIU representatives attended the related meetings/activities as well as the NGO's forums in the 1st and 2nd phase of the World Summit on Information Society (WSIS) held in Switzerland and Tunisia in December 2003 and November 2005 respectively, and hosted the workshop entitled "The Chinese NGOs in the civil society, the role as a bridge in Information Communication Technology (ICT) and the United Nations Millennium Development Goals" at NGOs Forum in the 2nd phase. III. Cooperation with UN entities and agencies (1) Invited Mr. Ramu Damodaran, Director of the Civil Society Service Office of the DPI of the United Nations and Mme. Joan Kirby, Chairwoman of the Executive Committee of the 58th DPI/NGO Annual Conference to China for a visit and to attend the Chinese NGOs Forum-Mimic 58th DPI/NGO Annual Conference of the United Nations co-hosted by CAFIU and other Chinese NGOs in Beijing from 3 to 10 July, 2005. (2) CAFIU representative attended the 58th and 59th Annual Session of the World Health Assembly in Geneva in May of 2005 and 2006. IV. Endeavours in implementing the Millennium Development Goals :: In 2003 - 1 million US dollar worth of medical equipments from the Assist International, a NGO in the United States of America, and Rotary Clubs from California, the United States of America to the local hospital in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region in China. One million people benefited. - A primary school in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region funded by French Catholic Committee Against Hunger and for Development（CCFD）was completed, more than 200 pupils benefited. :: In 2004 - 125,000 US dollar fund donation from Rotary Clubs of Australia and New Zealand for the water projects in Hebei and Shaanxi Provinces in China. 80,000 people benefited. - 25,000 US dollar worth of educational facilities from Japanese Berupokai to the local schools in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region, more than 400 pupils benefited. :: In 2005 - 125,000 US dollar fund donation from the Rotary Clubs of Australia and New Zealand for 43 projects in Shaanxi Province in China, including: (a) 15 water projects. 258 households benefited. (b) 18 educational projects. 3,795 teachers and students benefited. (c) 2 local medical service projects. 50,000 people benefited. (d) 18 women projects. 157 households benefited. - 25,000 US dollar fund donation from Japanese Berupokai for the local halite exploitation and education project in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, more than 50,000 people benefited. :: In 2006 - 8,750 US dollar worth of computers from Japanese Buraku Liberation League to the local school in Shaanxi Province, 400 pupils benefited. - 50,000 US dollar fund donation from Australian Rotary Club to Shaanxi Province for local water project and 25,000 US dollar fund donation from Japanese Berupokai for far-distance education in local school in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, more than 50,000 people benefited. V. Other activities (1) Symposiums and Workshops :: Co-sponsored with Friedrich Ebert Stiftung of Germany (FES) the Sino-Germany Human Rights Dialogue from 1999 to 2006 annually, covering the subjects on women, youth, the civil society, legislation/laws, etc. :: Co-sponsored with FES the Sino-Germany Comprehensive Security Symposium from 2001 to 2006 annually, on international hot issues such as regional security, energy security, Middle East situation, etc. :: Co-sponsored with Japanese Kazankai the symposium on International Cooperation in North East Asia in November 2003, co-sponsored with some Japanese organizations the 2nd and 3rd New Century Sino-Japanese Symposium on the Asian Situation and Peace in November 2004 and 2006 respectively. (2) Friendly Exchanges :: About 30 in-coming and out-going people-to-people friendly exchanges with other countries every year from 2003 to 2006, to increase mutual understanding and promote dialogues among different civilizations. :: Invited some friends from the United States of America and Japan to commemorating activities in Beijing on the occasion of the 60th Anniversary of the End of WWⅡin August 2005. (3) Participations in the International NGOs Activities :: CAFIU representatives attended the 5th and 6th Asia and Europe People's Forum, the parallel event of the Asia and Europe Summit Meeting (AESM) held in Viet Nam and Finland in October 2004 and September 2006 respectively, and also attended three preparatory meetings of the Forum from 2005 to 2006. :: CAFIU representatives attended the Civil Society Forum organized by CONGO in Geneva and co-sponsored a workshop, "Implementing the MDGs and Generating Employment" in June 2006. :: CAFIU representatives attended the 4th, 5th and 6th World Social Forum (WSF) held in Brazil (Porto Alegre), India (Bombay) and Pakistan (Karachi) in 2004, 2005 and 2006 respectively, and organized relevant workshops and exhibitions on the Forums. (Special consultative status granted in 2003) Part I: Introduction 1) The aims and purposes of IGES and its main course of action IGES is a research institute that conducts pragmatic and innovative strategic policy research to support sustainable development in the Asia-Pacific region. 2) Changes Additions to the signatory organisations of the charter for the establishment of IGES: The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) and United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) signed the charter, which has strengthened the global network of IGES. Establishment of regional offices: IGES established regional offices in Bangkok and Beijing to develop research activities multilaterally with various entities in the Asia Pacific region. Merger with an intergovernmental network: The Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research (APN) was merged with IGES, which has strengthened IGES' research network. Part II. Major contribution of IGES to the work of the United Nations 1) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings The Ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP9), 1-12 December 2003, Milan, Italy: IGES jointly organised side events "Global Climate Regime Beyond 2012: Incentives for Everyone!" on 3 December and "Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) in Asia: Opportunities and Obstacles" on 5 December. COP10, 6-17 December 2004, Buenos Aires, Argentina: IGES organized side events "Mainstreaming Adaptation in Development: Idealistic or Realistic?" on 11 December, and "The Kyoto Train: Where Do We Go Next?" and "Next Steps for CDM Activities: Gaps and Ways to Overcome" on 15 December. The 13th Session of the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD), 11-22 April 2005, United Nations Headquarters, New York, USA: IGES made a presentation on the outlines and current situation of Water Environment Partnership in Asia at the side event "Challenges of Portfolio of Water Actions" on 19 April. COP11 and the First Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP1), 28 November to 9 December 2005, Montreal, Canada: IGES organized side events "Asian Concerns on the Climate Regime Beyond 2012: Are You Concerned?" on 2 December and "Adaptation to Climate Change: Pathways into the Future Beyond 2012" on 5 December. The 14th Session of the CSD, 1-12 May 2006, United Nations Headquarters, New York, USA: IGES organized a side event "Asian Concerns and Perspectives on the Future Climate Regime: Implications for Sustainable Development" on 4 May. The Third Session of the World Urban Forum (WUF3), 19-23 June 2006, Vancouver, Canada: IGES organized a networking event "Integrating Global Concerns into Urban Management in Asia: Challenges and Experiences" on 20 June. COP12 and COP/MOP2, 6-17 November 2006, Nairobi, Kenya: IGES organized side events "CDM for Sustainable Development: Dream or Reality?" on 8 November and "Asian Aspirations for Climate Regime Beyond 2012" on 10 November. 2) Cooperation with United Nations bodies i) Joint organization of the workshops, seminars and meetings 2004: IGES organized with UNEP Risoe Centre on Energy, Climate and Development (URC) "International Workshop on Adaptation to Climate Change in Pacific Island Countries" on 12-13 October and "International Seminar on CDM in Pacific Island Countries" on 14 October in Apia, Samoa. 2005: IGES hosted with UNESCAP, URC and other organizations "Workshop on Financing Modalities of CDM" on 27-28 June in Jakarta, Indonesia. 2006: At the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico City, Mexico, IGES co-organized "Shared Groundwater Resources for Sustainable Development" with United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and others on 17 March and another session "Water Accounting and Information Platforms" with United Nations University and others on 20 March. IGES and the UNESCAP organized a meeting "Asia-Pacific Dialogue on Innovative Options for Non-Annex 1 Countries' Participation for Climate Change Action" on 29 March in Bangkok, Thailand. IGES and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) held the workshop "Developing a Regional Strategy for the CDM in the Asia-Pacific Region" on 30-31 March in Bangkok, Thailand. ii) Joint activities and research Kitakyushu Initiative for a Clean Environment, a programme of UNESCAP: With secretariat support from IGES, a range of activities has been developed. Research on Innovative and Strategic Policy Options (RISPO), a partnership project under the UNEP Network of Institutions for Sustainable Development (UNEPNISD): IGES serves as one of the core members of the project. The Asia-Pacific Forum for Environment and Development (APFED), collaboration with UNEP and UNESCAP: IGES serves as a secretariat for the forum. The APFED final report was launched at the side event co-hosted by IGES in conjunction with the fifth Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development (MCED2005). Global Environmental Outlook 4 (GEO4), initiated by UNEP: The contribution of IGES are the regional chapter, policy chapter and the summary for the policymakers. The 3R (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) Initiative: IGES has been working closely with the Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific of UNEP (UNEP/ROAP) and the United Nations Centre for Regional Development (UNCRD) for this initiative. Priority Paper on Sustainable Development for Northeast Asia: Commissioned by the UNEP Regional Resource Centre for Asia and the Pacific (UNEP RRC. AP), IGES prepared a draft on sustainable development for Northeast Asia. State of the Environment for Northeast Asia 2005: Commissioned by UNESCAP, IGES drafted chapter 7 on Northeast Asian subregion for the MCED 2005. 3) Initiative undertaken by IGES in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals, which now form the basis of the global agenda for the 21st century. IGES has set up a research programme on environmental education to contribute to the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (DESD). Some of the papers were utilized in policy formulation for local government in Asia. 3. International Confederation for Family Support (Special consultative status granted in 1999) Part I. Introduction The International Confederation for Family Support (CIAF) is an International Organization that gathers autonomous member organizations in Argentina, Uruguay, Peru, Mexico, Venezuela, South Africa, India and Haiti. Its date of registration is 2 September 1995. The main objectives of the institution are to: 1) Welcome children in a free, home-like day-care centre, so their parents can work without leaving them in risk. 2) Offer children a healthy and adequate environment, where they can receive pedagogic support, as well as a moral and religious education in a pluralistic and ecumenical approach. 3) Prevent juvenile delinquency and children abandonment, preventing children to remain without contention and to become street children. 4) Help families to integrate better, and improve their social and educational conditions. In Argentina, two centres were inaugurated in 2002, two more in 2004 and one in 2005. During the 10th CIAF International Assembly held in September 2006, CIAF arise 169 centres all over Argentina and 197 centres all around the world. Major growth has been seen in Peru. During that meeting, representatives of all centres belonging to CIAF worked together on a new working methodology, an activation model aimed at enabling children, teenagers and adults to become socially active members in the search of solutions to their own necessities. CIAF continues working in the three poorest continents, Latin America, Asia and Africa. Part II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. 2003: Participation in 56th Annual Conference for Non-Governmental Organizations associated with the United Nations Department of Public Information held at United Nations Headquarters in New York from 8-10 September 2003. 2004: Representatives attended the 48th session of the Commission on the Status of Women. 2005: Representatives attended the 49th session of the Commission on the Status of Women, from 28 February to 11 March. 2006: Representatives went to Geneva in May 2006 and had a meeting with the Vice-President of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, Norberto Liwsky. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters. The organization has not participated during this period in preparation of papers or studies, joint sponsorship or projects with United Nations bodies. iii) Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals. 1) Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals The organization contributed to the Millennium Development Goals in Latin America, South Africa and India. Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Children fed in CIAF centres: 11,000 daily Nutrition training for mothers: 3,940 Nutrition security programme established: 12 community farms and 240 family farms Goal 2: Achieve primary education Children given school daily support: 11,000 Libraries established: 20 Programmes to contact children's schoolteachers and centre's teachers to work together: 197 Goal 3: Promote gender equality and the empowerment of women Facilitation of parent work activities while children are in the centres: 2,955 parents Education Programmes for parents, especially mothers in issues related to Literacy plans, Marital and Family violence, Preventive medicine, etc.: 5,000 Organization of enterprises and workshops to get an economic income: 18 enterprises Goal 4: Reduce infant and child mortality: Education of parent in nutrition, sexual education and family: 3,500 parents Children under five given a complete and healthy diet: 3,200 Goal 5: Improve maternal health: Sexual education and family planning training: 2,955 Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability Drinking waters provision as part of the nutrition security programme: 5 Neighbourhood promoting enterprises: 197 2) Activities in support of Global Principles Our contribution to the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family was taking the programme, strategy and objectives of the tenth anniversary to a national and international level, strengthening channels of communication between United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations; enhancing research capacity for family policy development. Luxma, the Peruvian Federation for Family Support, developed with Integradem, the Project "Quality Education, a right for everyone" to training, build and equip the first Ecological Kindergarten in Peru. They also opened a Development Centre in a rural area near Torreón, to aim young women at improving their incomes and creating a cooperative for training and facilitate job collocation. In 2004 a Socioproductive Inclusion and Nutrition Security Project, approved by Spain, was put into practice. Twelve community farms, 27 enterprises linked to agro-nutrition, sanitary preventive courses, enterprises that are not necessarily related with nutrition, preventive habits. It is about guaranteeing nutrition safety and promoting socio-productive reinsertion in Argentinean families in a sustainable way. Family Support started in March 2006 a radio programme broadcast every Monday noon at AM 1390 called ENTRE REDES. The programme focuses on social issues related to family and childhood, and in each programme there is an interview with a different Centre belonging to CIAF where they explain their history, progress, necessities, etc. To continue expanding and spreading CIAF work methodology, the second edition of Institutional Book "On the way to solidarity, a social transformation" was edited in October 2006 in Spanish, English, French and Portuguese. 4. Millennium Institute Millennium Institute (MI) is a non-profit development research and service organization with a mission to promote sustainable development worldwide. Our wish is of a world that is sustainable, equitable and peaceful for the present and future generations. We strive to accomplish this mission through providing integrated modelling tools and capacity-building in System Dynamics for government, civil society, and private sector stakeholders, to conduct comprehensive and long-term development analysis and planning. Part II: Contribution to the work of the United Nations Participation in United Nations Meetings 2005: Member, Board of Trustees attended the following meeting in Europe related to trade and development: Geneva, Switzerland 21-23 October. 2006: Member, Board of Trustees attended the following meetings in Europe related to sustainable development and migration and remittances: Geneva, Switzerland 46 October; Geneva, Switzerland 26 June. Cooperation with United Nations Bodies i. Technical assistance to United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) for preparation of the African Environmental Outlook 2 (AEO2) report in 2006. ii. Organized workshop in collaboration with United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Regional Bureau for Africa for policymakers and planners from planning ministries of 11 Eastern and Southern African countries, 2006. Millennium Development Goals-related Activities i. MI refined its Threshold 21 (T21) macroeconomic planning model to support monitoring and evaluating progress towards attaining the MDGs. Twenty-four (24) of the 48 MDG indicators are now implemented in T21, thus enabling countries to perform simulations such as evaluating policies and strategies that are most effective for achieving the MDG; and estimating the investment required to meet them. ii. MI partnered with UNDP and United Nations Millennium Project to conduct an assessment of the best strategy and estimate the cost of meeting the MDGs in Ghana. The analysis showed, among other things, that using an integrated planning approach that considers cross-sectoral interdependency, typical costs for meeting the MDG in Ghana could be reduced by as much as 20 per cent. iii. MI developed macroeconomic models for Mozambique, Mali, Malawi, Jamaica, to support analysis of policies and strategies to achieve sustainable human development, in particular, relating to the MDGs. (Special consultative status granted 1999) Part 1: Introduction i) Aim and purpose The main objects of the Organization are to promote education on the position of women and on the inequalities which have been imposed on them by law and custom. To achieve this the National Alliance of Women's Organizations (NAWO) works towards eradicating discrimination on the basis of gender alone by raising public awareness, lobbying governments at national and international levels and liaising with other Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Members are women's organizations, women's sections of other organizations and individuals sharing the goal of gender equality. Members are located throughout the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. By informing and enabling women and their organizations to lobby and campaign, NAWO through consultation, and in partnership with other women's organizations, works to ensure that women's voices are heard and attended to both nationally and at European and international levels. ii) Significant impact a) Change to the Constitution: Whilst confirming that the objects of NAWO remain unchanged the revisions to the Constitution -- passed at a special meeting on 26 November 2003 -- updated administrative and procedural provisions. Submitted to the Charity Commission, established by law as the regulator and registrar for charities in England and Wales, they were confirmed by letter from the Charity Commission dated 30 April 2004. This has encouraged and effected a wider participation in our work from our membership. b) Funding: In October 2003 NAWO received a grant from an independent trust enabling it to formalize office arrangements and employ a part-time administrator. In addition this has had the effect of giving NAWO an enhanced and greater profile within the women's movement. This funding has enabled NAWO to substantially increase its reach and work regionally in England; NAWO is a second tier organization and has always sought to respond especially to the needs of smaller and more grass-roots organizations particularly in capacity-building. In June 2004 NAWO received funding from the EU enabling NAWO to hold four regional meetings on the "Role of civil society in a new EU Constitution". Part II i) Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or conferences and other United Nations meetings Since 1999, NAWO has attended and played an active role in NGO participation at the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) as well as submitting written statements. As well as lobbying particular delegates NAWO has also taken the opportunity to meet with the European Union delegation and European NGOs whilst attending CSW. In addition, NAWO works together with other NGOs in a larger geographical grouping through its membership of the European Women's Lobby. Commission on the Status of Women: 47th session New York United States of America March 2003. A written statement was submitted on "The participation and access of women to the media and information technologies and their impact on and use as an instrument for the advancement and empowerment of women, and on violence against women". Representatives from NAWO attended CSW. In partnership with other United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland non-governmental organizations, NAWO actively supported the side event entitled "You Can't Beat Women, High and Low Ways To Protect Women Against Violence". World Summit on the Information Society, part 1 Geneva 1-2 December 2003. NAWO was represented at this. Commission on the Status of Women: 48th session New York United States of America March 2004. A written statement was submitted on Theme 3: "Women's Roles in equal participation in conflict prevention, conflict management, conflict resolution, and peace building"; NAWO representatives attended CSW and ran a side event in partnership with the Women's National Commission (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) supported by other United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland NGOs entitled "1325 on trial: A Tribunal investigating the implementation of UN SCR 1325". United Nations Conference on Trade and Development XI Eleventh session of the Conference 13-18 June 2004 São Paulo, Brazil. -- Chair of NAWO attended the round table, representing the Gender Expert Group on Trade from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and was a key speaker at the special session -- Panel on gender and trade -- 15 June 2004. In August 2004 NAWO contributed to the Alternative report to the 10-year review of the Beijing Platform For Action 2005 and The Outcome of the Twenty-third Special Session of the General Assembly 2000 in respect of the response by the United Kingdom Government. Before collating this response NAWO undertook a consultation with its member organizations and associates. NAWO continues to monitor the United Kingdom Government's progress towards fulfilling its BPfA commitments and campaigns for women's concerns and needs at all levels of policymaking and implementation. It submitted its Alternative report to the United Nations in New York and Geneva. UNECE Regional Preparatory Meeting for the 10 year Review and Appraisal of the Beijing Platform for Action -- 14/15 December 2004 Geneva. Representatives from NAWO attended this and the NGO forum 13/14 December 2004 lobbying and inputting to the 8-page annex to the UNECE document from NGOs. Commission on the Status of Women: 49th session New York United States of America March 2005. Representatives from NAWO attended, a written statement was submitted on the "Review of the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly"; NAWO organized and ran its own side event entitled "Prosperous women connecting and networking women out of poverty". World Summit on the Information Society, part 2 Tunis, 16-18 November 2005. NAWO was again represented at this UN Conference. Commission on the Status of Women: 50th, session New York United States of America March 2006. Representatives from NAWO attended, a written statement was submitted on "Equal participation of women and men in decision-making processes at all levels". The side event NAWO organized and ran was entitled "Media exploitation of girls as a form of violence against girls". This was cosponsored by other United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland NGOs. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies In the Autumn of 2006 NAWO began negotiations with the office of the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against women with the objective of hosting a European Regional Consultation; this was accepted and confirmed for 11-13 January 2007. During the same period NAWO consulted widely throughout the membership in preparation for its contribution to the Government response to CEDAW. iii) Activities in line with the Millennium Goals NAWO continues through its work to uphold and lobby for the implementation of Millennium Goal 3 that is to promote gender equality and empower women, responding to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Government's Single Equality Body Consultation Paper in 2003. In August 2004 NAWO responded to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Government Green paper on anti-discrimination and equal treatment and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Government's White Paper, Fairness for All: A New Commission for Equality and Human Rights. In November 2004 NAWO submitted its response to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Government's consultation "Paying the Price -- a consultation paper on prostitution". In May and June 2005 NAWO was responsible for and organized four Consultations "Gender in the new Europe -- Your Voice" in collaboration with member organizations, and in October 2005 organized and held an open seminar on Trafficking. During 2006 NAWO held two conferences in the regions entitled "Enterprising women make a difference". In May 2006 NAWO submitted its contribution to the consultation by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Government on proposals for a United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland action plan, "Tackling Human Trafficking". Such activity is also reported in UPDATE -- NAWO's quarterly publication -- which as well as maintaining contact with its members covers other concerns and matters of interest to the membership. NAWO also maintains contact with its members through regular e-mail bulletins. 