%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2008 regular session 21-30 January 2008 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2003-2006 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Arab Lawyers Union Center for International Earth Science Information Network Centre d'accompagnement des autochtones pygmées et minoritaires vulnérables Congregations of St. Joseph International Bureau for Children's Rights (Special; 1971) Part I. Introduction The Arab lawyers Union (ALU) is a regional NGO. It is the first Arab NGO to gain a special status with the Council (ECOSOC). ALU members consist of 27 Arabic bar associations and law societies and more than 13.000 individual lawyers. ALU is in consultative status with UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) as well as observer status with the African Commission for Human Rights and the Arab Educational Scientific and cultural Organization. ALU is a member of The International Association of Lawyers (UIA), The International Bar Association (IBA), The International Criminal Bar (ICB), The Coalition for the International Criminal Court (CICC), The International Legal Aid Consortium (ILAC), The International Association of Democratic Lawyers (IADL), The Afro-Asian Peoples' Solidarity Organization (APPSO) and The World Organization Against Torture (OMACT) and several United Nations Committees such as Human Rights special committee. The ALU aims to promote and develop the legal profession in the Arab nations in order to enable it to fulfill its basic task of maintaining the principle of justice, to establish and defend the independence of the judiciary and guaranteeing the rights immunity and independence of judges, to compile and consolidate Arab legal resources to enrich Arab law and jurisprudence, to promote the basic principles of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the supremacy of the rule of law in Arab countries, in law and in practice and guaranteeing and defending them and to promote international law. In order to achieve these aims, ALU has been holding conferences, seminars and workshops all over the Arab world on relevant issues individually or jointly with other international and regional NGOs and Law institutions. ALU organized training courses for Arab Lawyers. Some are joint activities with other national, regional and international NGOs or governmental institutions such as: The International Association of Lawyers (UIA), The Law Society of England and Wales, the Arab League. Recently we joined the "Program on Promoting the Rule of Law and Integrity in the Arab Countries" with the United Nations Development Program and The Arab Center for the Development of the Rule of Law and Integrity (ACRLI.) Part II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. 55th session of "United Nations Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights", 28 July- 15 August (Geneva, Switzerland). "UNESCO General Conference", 29 September - 18 October (Paris - France). 60th session of "Commission on Human Rights", 15 March -23 April (Geneva - Switzerland). The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) Arab-International Forum on the Socio-Economic Rehabilitation and Development in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, 11-14 October, (Beirut - Lebanon). 61st session of "Commission on Human Rights", 14 March-22 April (Geneva - Switzerland). 57th session of "United Nations Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights", 25 July-12 August, (Geneva - Switzerland). First session of the Human Rights Council, 19-30 June, (Geneva - Switzerland). 24th session of "ESCWA", 8 - 11 May, ( Beirut - Lebanon), Second session of the Human Rights Council, 18 September to 6 October, and 27-29 November, (Geneva - Switzerland). Assembly of state Parties of International Criminal Bar, 23-25 November, United Nations Headquarters). Third session of the Human Rights Council, 29 November - 8 December, (Geneva - Switzerland). ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarter: As mentioned above, we started in the year 2006 to join, in a practical way, the UNDP "Program on Promoting the Rule of Law and Integrity in the Arab Countries". There was an activity during 2006 in which we participated in the co-coordination and preparation for a workshop held in 2007 Cairo - Egypt. ii) Activities in Support of Global Principles. The ALU continued during 2003 and 2004 the program of "Lawyers for the New Millennium", which is a joint program with the European Union (EU) and the Law Society of England and Wales. It is a capacity building program for Lawyers in the Arab World. In that period we organized the planned program workshops in Damascus, Syria Arab Republic; Beirut, Lebanon, and Amman, Jordan (for both Jordanian and Palestinian Lawyers). During the reporting period ALU was going through the process of establishing two forums. The first is "The Youth Lawyers Forum". The Founding Conference took place in 2005 (Cairo- Egypt). The first General Conference will take place at the end of 2007. The Second is "The Arab Women Lawyers Forum" which held several preparatory meetings during 2005 and 2006. The founding Conference will be held in 2007. We would like to mention that ALU has not participated as fully as might be expected in the work of ECOSOC and its subsidiary bodies, in major conferences or other United Nations meeting in this period because of some budget problems concerning the decrease in income of ALU during this period, the raising of the prices of flight tickets, the long process of entry visas, especially to United Nations Headquarter in New York, which takes several months, and official invitations generally arrive too late to be included in the budget and to have entry visas. 2. Center for International Earth Science Information Network (Special; 1995) Part I: Introduction The Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN) was established in 1989 as an independent non-governmental organization to provide information that would help scientists, decision makers, and the public better understand the changing relationship between human beings and the environment. CIESIN focuses on applying state-of-the-art information technology to pressing interdisciplinary data, information, and research problems related to human interactions in the environment. The International Council for Science (ICSU) has designated CIESIN the World Data Center for Human Interactions in the Environment. CIESIN's mission is to provide access to and enhance the use of information worldwide, advancing understanding of human interactions in the environment and serving the needs of science and public and private decision making. CIESIN disseminates environmental and socioeconomic data and information free of charge over the Internet and via other means on request, and provides value-added services and support, also free of charge. CIESIN scientists conduct research and participate in assessments on key issues regarding human-environment interactions, including the impacts of climate change, indicators of environmental sustainability, the distribution of poverty, land use and land cover change, the risks posed by natural and human-induced hazards, the interactions between environment and health, and the role of the environment in security. In collaboration with Columbia University, CIESIN also promotes long-term access to and preservation of key datasets, building on open international standards. CIESIN works collaboratively with a wide range of governmental and nongovernmental organizations including national agencies, United Nations bodies, and other multilateral organizations. There have not been any significant changes in CIESIN's organization or mission during this period. Dr. Robert S. Chen became CIESIN's Interim Director in May 2006 replacing Dr. Roberta Balstad, and has since become Director. Part II: CIESIN's Contributions to the Work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council subsidiary bodies and major United Nations conferences and meetings Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD). CIESIN participated in meetings of the CSD Expert Group Meeting on Indicators of Sustainable Development in New York City on 13 - 15 December 2005 and 3 - 4 October 2006, and assumed responsibility for improving the methodology for the core indicator "Percentage of total population living in coastal areas." CIESIN also contributed to discussions regarding a new core indicator on natural hazard vulnerability. On 5 May 2003, CIESIN and the Wildlife Conservation Society presented work on the Human Footprint in a side event at CSD - 11. United Nations Geographic Information Working Group (UNGIWG). CIESIN has continued to contribute to the UNGIWG. A CIESIN staff member gave a presentation at the UNGIWG seventh meeting in Santiago, Chile on 2 - 4 November 2006 (http://www.ungiwg.org/meeting2006.htm). CIESIN provided technical advice and data to the Second Administrative Level Boundaries (SALB) Project of the International and Administrative Boundaries working group (http://www.who.int/ whosis/database/gis/salb/salb_home.htm). CIESIN also provided inputs to the development of the United Nations Spatial Data Infrastructure (UNSDI) Compendium and Strategy Implementation Paper (http://www.ungiwg.org/docs/unsdi/UNSDI_Compendium_13_02_2007.pdf). World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). CIESIN's former Director attended the Phase I meeting of WSIS in Geneva 10-12 December 2003. CIESIN's current Director attended the Phase II meeting of WSIS in Tunis on 16 - 18 November 2005. He participated in several WSIS side events organized by the Government of the United States of America, the Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Association (GSDI), and the Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) of the International Council for Science (ICSU). United Nations Global Alliance for ICT and Development (GAID). As a follow-on to WSIS, CIESIN is now an organizational participant in one of the GAID "Communities of Expertise," the Global Alliance for Enhancing Access to and Application of Scientific Data in Developing Countries (http://www.un-gaid.org/en/node/237). ii) Cooperation with United Nations Bodies and Specialized Agencies Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). CIESIN collaborated with FAO in the development of the data set, Gridded Population of the World: Future Estimates, released in 2005. CIESIN also co-organized a user workshop with FAO, the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), the World Health Organization (WHO), and others, "Global Spatial Data and Information: Development, Dissemination and Use," held 21 - 23 September 2004 in Palisades, New York. (http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/GSDworkshop/). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The IPCC, established by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and United Nations Environment Program, has created a Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impact and Climate Analysis (TGICA). CIESIN is one of three organizations supporting the IPCC Data Distribution Center (http://www.ipcc-data.org/). In recognition of this role, CIESIN's Director serves as an ex officio member of the TGICA. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA). Several specialized agencies co-sponsored the MA. CIESIN supported the MA by providing two core data sets. CIESIN's Deputy Director was a Convening Lead Author, and another CIESIN scientist was an author (http://www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx). United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). CIESIN has worked closely with UNDP in the development of the Global Risk Identification Program, including co-organization of planning meetings on 4 - 6 January and 19 May 2006 in Palisades, New York. (http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/ chrr/news/2006/grip.html). United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). CIESIN's Deputy Director is a Convening Lead Author of UNEP's Fourth Global Environmental Outlook (GEO-4), currently in final review stages. CIESIN collaborated with several different UNEP Global Resource Information Database (GRID) centers during 2003 - 2006, including provision of data to UNEP-GRID Internet map services and development of the Global Natural Disaster Risk Hotspots data (http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/ chrr/research/hotspots/). CIESIN also provided population density data for the UNEP report, "After the Tsunami: Rapid Environmental Assessment" (http://www.unep.org/tsunami/tsunami_rpt.asp). United Nations Geographic Information Support Team (GIST). CIESIN has been an active observer in the GIST, participating in regular telecons and contributing relevant spatial data in response to various humanitarian crises, including the 2004 South African tsunami. United Nations Population Division. CIESIN co-organized a workshop with the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population (IUSSP), "Rethinking the Estimation and Projection of Urban and City Populations," in New York City on 9 - 10 January 2006 (http://www.iussp.org/Activities/wgc-urb/urb-agenda06.php). United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). CIESIN co-organized a workshop with UNFPA, "Population, the Urban Poor and Sustainable Development," in New York City on 2 - 3 June 2005 (http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/documents/Final_Report_31aug05.pdf). CIESIN organized a second workshop for UNFPA, "Gender and Poverty," on 28 July 2005. United Nations Economic and Social Council for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP). CIESIN presented work on environmental sustainability indicators in the Asia-Pacific region to the Second Green Growth Policy Dialogue, 23 - 25 May 2006, in Beijing. World Health Organization (WHO). A CIESIN research staff member presented at the WHO Conference, "The Health Aspects of the Tsunami Disaster in Asia," held 4 - 6 May 2005 in Phuket, Thailand (http://www.who.int/hac/events/tsunamiconf/en/). CIESIN has also worked closely with WHO staff through UNGIWG and other activities. iii) Activities in Support of Global Principles Millennium Project (MP). From 2002 - 2006, CIESIN actively supported the Millennium Project, an initiative commissioned by the United Nations Secretary General and supported by the United Nations Development Group (http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/). CIESIN worked closely with many of the MP Task Forces, assisting with their spatial analysis and mapping needs. In 2006, CIESIN began providing data management assistance to the Millennium Villages Project. 3. Centre d'accompagnement des autochtones Pygmées et minoritaires vulnérables (Special; 2003) I. Introduction 1. Principal aim and purpose of the organization: To ensure the full integration of the indigenous Pygmy people into modern society. The organization engages in the following activities: humanitarian assistance, basic education, promotion and protection of indigenous rights, peace and reconciliation, environmental education and sustainable development activities for indigenous Pygmies. 2. Significant developments in the life of the organization during the period 2003-2007: - Artificial personality granted by Order No. 067/CAB/MIN/J/2007 of 5 February 2007 of the Minister of Justice of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. - Following a proposal by the organization's Executive Director to the Administrative Board and with the approval of the organization's General Assembly, the supreme decision-making body, the following resolutions were adopted at its meeting on 2 March 2005: - The name of the organization was amended to: "Centre d'accompagnement des autochtones Pygmées et minoritaires vulnérables -- international (CAMV -- International)." - The resolution was approved by Order No. 067/CAB/MIN/J/2007 of 5 February 2007 of the Minister of Justice of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Notification No. JUST.GS/SG/20/265/2007 of 21 February 2007. - The organization is active in the following countries: Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, Gabon, Rwanda and Uganda. The organization has decided to add the following operational objective: to engage in advocacy on behalf of the interests of the indigenous Pygmy peoples at the local, national, subregional and international levels. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and other United Nations bodies - Twenty-first session of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 21 to 25 July 2003, on the theme "Indigenous peoples and globalization". Nature of participation: oral and written statement. - Twenty-second session of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, held in Geneva, from 19 to 23 July 2004, on the theme "Indigenous peoples and conflict resolution". Nature of participation: oral and written statement. - Third session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, held in New York from 10 to 21 May 2004, on the theme "Indigenous women". Nature of participation: oral and written statement. - Fourth session of the Permanent Forum, held in New York from 10 to 21 May 2005, on the theme. "The Millennium Development Goals and indigenous peoples: redefining the Goals". Nature of participation: oral and written statement. - Twenty-fourth session of the Working Group on Indigenous Peoples, held in Geneva, from 31 July to 4 August 2006, on the theme "Utilization of indigenous peoples' lands by non-indigenous authorities, groups or individuals for military purposes". Nature of participation: oral and written statement. - Fifth session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, held in New York from 15 to 26 May 2006, on the theme "The Millennium Development Goals and indigenous peoples: redefining the Goals". - Training session held by the International Labour Organization (ILO) in Yaoundé, Cameroon, from 27 November to 1 December 2006, on the theme "Rights of indigenous peoples: instruments and good practices". ii. Cooperation with United Nations agencies in the field - Participated in monthly meetings of the World Health Organization (WHO), in cooperation with the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as member of the National Malaria Programme. - Dissemination of ILO Convention No. 169 through the journal ECHO des pygmées (2003-2006), produced by the organization. (iii) Activities undertaken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals - Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Action taken: Income-earning activities for indigenous Pygmy families. Total US$ 87,288. - Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education. Action taken: Support for education of indigenous Pygmy children: $102,000. - Goal 3: Maternal and child welfare. Action taken: Malaria programme: $67,000. - Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability. Action taken: Environmental education programme for indigenous Pygmies: $133,567. 2. Activities in support of global principles (2003-2006) Celebration of the International Day of the World's Indigenous People. Total raised $14,280. (General; 1999) The Congregations of St. Joseph is an organization of women religious associated with the Catholic Church with 15,345 individual members in 55 countries with institutional infrastructure in the promotion of healthy societies. This NGO commits human and financial resources to further the promotion of human rights and responsibilities, the eradication of poverty, sustainable environmental development, the education of women and children, community health, and human social services. These areas are addressed through the establishment and staffing of schools, from primary to the university level; the establishment and staffing of health facilities including hospitals, clinics, hospices, nursing homes, and assisted living facilities; sponsoring community development projects at the grassroots, national and regional levels, and advocating for the promotion of the status of women, children, displaced, trafficked, marginalized and indigenous peoples. Since its last Quadrennial report, the Congregations of St. Joseph welcomed 2,000 members into the NGO from Australia. This addition of membership allows the NGO to promote United Nations programs and support in Australia, New Zealand, Cambodia, Indonesia, and Thailand. This additional membership contributes significantly to the work of the NGO in support of the United Nations in these areas and these members are very active in that region of the world regarding United Nations issues. This additional geographic membership contributes to the financial support of the NGO in nominal ways, parallel to the other NGO membership in the remaining 54 countries of geographical representation. 1. Representatives participated in the 61st Session of the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, Switzerland (14 March through 22 April 2005). Representatives attended United Nations preparatory meetings regarding the establishment of the Human Rights Council at United Nations Headquarters, New York, United States of America, submitted supportive written statements, and lobbied governments for the establishment of said Human Rights Council. 2. Representatives participated in the following annual Commission and Forum meetings held at United Nations Headquarters, New York through attendance, written statements and side events sponsored and/or co-sponsored: The 41st-44th Sessions of the Commission for Social Development 10-21 February 2003; 413 February 2004; 9-18 February 2005; 8-17 February 2006. Written statements submitted: 12/01/04: E/CN.5/2004/NGO/8: Improving public-sector effectiveness; 17/12/04: E/CN.5/2005/NGO/6: Review of further implementation of the World Summit for Social Development and the outcome of the 24th special session of the General Assembly; 14/12/05: E/CN.5/2006/NGO/1: Review of the 1st United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty; 10/11/2006: E/CN.5/2007/NGO/5: Promoting full employment and decent work for all. 47th- 50th Sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women, 3-14 March 2003; 1-12 March 2004; 28 February-11 March 2005; and 27 February-10 March 2006. Side events were sponsored/co-sponsored and members attended from India, United Republic of Tanzania and Mexico for the 2003 and 2005 sessions. 11th- 14th Session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, 28 April-9 May 2003; 1430 April 2004; 28 February-4 March 2005; 1-12 May 2006. Side events were sponsored/co-sponsored and youth participants attended from Canada and Brazil in 2004 and 2005. 2nd through 5th Sessions of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, 11-23 May 2003; 1021 May 2004; 16-27 May 2005; 15-26 May 2006. Side events were sponsored/ cosponsored and members attended from Brazil for 2004 session. Inter-governmental sessions on Financing for Development (26 April 2004; 18 April 2005; 24 April 2006) at United Nations Headquarters, New York. Lobbied governments for adherence to Monterrey Consensus outcomes, particularly systemic issues of 0.7% ODA, trade and debt. Created and delivered talking points for the multi-stakeholders consultations held annually. Co-sponsored Civil Society Forum prior to 2005 and 2006 annual meeting in New York. Participated in roundtable discussions on annual themes of sessions. 3. Representatives served on the following NGO committees from 2003-2006: NGO Committee of Religious NGOs, Disarmament, Human Rights, NGO Committee on Education (chairperson 2003-2004), NGO Committee on Social Development, Sustainable Development, NGO Committee on Financing for Development (executive committee 2003-2006), NGO Committee on Status of Women (executive committee 2003-2005). ii. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters. Local educational programs in cooperation with United Nations Environmental Programme to further sustainable development in Brazil, India, Mexico, the United States, France, Italy, Japan, and Senegal (2003, 2004, 2005). Cooperation with United Nations Children's Fund and United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS to implement healthcare for women and children in Mozambique (2004) and the United Republic of Tanzania (2005). Educational program supportive of UNESCO to promote the Decade for Education for Sustainable Development in Brazil, India, Canada, Australia, Kenya (2005). Shadow Report on Australia written and presented to the 34th session of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (16 January to 3 February 2006). iii. Initiatives undertaken to further the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) During the reporting period educational programs on the MDGs were presented in the United States, Canada, Mexico, France, Japan, India, Brazil, Ireland, Argentina, Egypt, Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania in elementary and secondary schools, colleges, and universities. Presentations took place in NGO member seminars and informal settings of local community organizing and development. Goal 1: "Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger:" nutritional care and food for 198,500 women and children in India (Bhopal, Nagpur, Visak and Kerala). Goal 2: "Achieve universal primary education:" education provided for 123, 850 girl children in India, Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania and Kenya Goal 3: "Promote gender equality and empower women:" women's empowerment and leadership development programs offered for 3,780 tribal women in the north of India Goal 7: "Ensure environmental sustainability:" 7 bore holes provided in Kenya, 5 purification water systems provided in India, funding and technical assistance provided for organic farming in Brazil. Goal 6: "combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases:" 125 bed nets provided in the United Republic of Tanzania, funding for healthcare training and establishment of HIV/AIDS clinics provided in Mozambique and the United Republic of Tanzania. iv. Activities in Support of United Nations themes and issues International Days (International Day of Peace, Eradication of Poverty Day, Literacy Day, Women's Day, Human Rights Day, International Day for Elimination of Racial Discrimination, World Water Day, International Youth Day, World Food Day, World AIDS Day, International Migrants Day and International Day of Families) were recognized and celebrated throughout the NGO membership with educational programs, awareness raising, celebrations and rallies. Many of these events received local media attention and promotion through the networking of our members in the specific countries. These events continually took place in Brazil, Mexico, India, United States and Canada (the locations where there is a critical mass of members). Lobbying of national governments relative to United Nations goals by NGO membership at local and national levels. Geographical Membership of Congregations of St. Joseph Africa Total: 290 Algeria - 3; Burkina Faso--18; Cameroon --6; Chad - 2; Egypt - 21; Gambia -- 2; Côte d'Ivoire: 63; Kenya: 4; Lebanon - 20; Madagascar - 70; Mozambique - 8; Democratic Republic of the Congo-- 6; United Republic of Tanzania - 16; Democratic Republic of the Congo - 48; Zambia -- 3 Asia Total: 1243 India - 1196; Japan -- 31; Pakistan -- 8; Philippines - 2; Papua New Guinea -- 5; Republic of Korea--1 Europe Total: 3205 Belgium - 3; Denmark -- 5; England -- 50; France -- 1953; Germany -- 5; Hungary -- 2; Ireland -- 64; Italy -- 1104; Norway -- 6; Romania -- 3; Scotland -- 2; Czech Republic -- 3; Switzerland -- 2; Wales-3 Caribbean Total: 39 Bahamas - 2; Dominican Republic - 4; Haiti - 6; Jamaica - 4; Puerto Rico - 23 Australia Total: 2000 Americas Total: 8568 Argentina - 54; Bolivia - 10; Brazil - 910; Canada - 574; El Salvador - 3; Guatemala - 4; Honduras - 3; Mexico - 216; Nicaragua - 2; Paraguay -- 3; Peru - 17; United States - 6765; Uruguay - 3; Chile -- 4 5. International Bureau for Children's Rights The mission of the International Bureau for Children's Rights (IBCR) is to contribute to the protection and promotion of children's rights. In pursuing its mission, the IBCR is guided by the principles enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and its related protocols as well as other relevant international instruments. The objectives of IBCR are to: inform and raise awareness about children's rights; develop strategies to address violations of children's rights; support international, regional and national initiatives to implement children's rights; facilitate cooperation within the international community. To carry out its mission, IBCR is raising awareness and increasing public understanding of children's rights through education and training; identifying and sharing good practices; developing guidelines and other practical and legal tools for the implementation of children's rights; providing technical and legal assistance to address situations that compound the vulnerability of children; and facilitating cooperation within the international community. Part II. Contribution to the work of the United Nations Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings 27-29 November 2006: Representatives of IBCR attended the Intergovernmental Experts Group Meeting to develop a questionnaire on United Nations standards and norms related primarily to victim issues, United Nations Office at Vienna, where they contributed to ensure the issue of child victims and witnesses of crime was duly reflected in the draft instrument. 24-28 April 2006: A representative of IBCR attended the Fifteenth session of the United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in Vienna, Austria. 18-19 April 2006: A representative of IBCR participated in the United Nations Expert Group Meeting on Criminal Justice Responses to Violence against Children: Best Practices and Innovative Solutions. 22 July 2005: The United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) adopted the final report of the fourteenth session of the United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and with it the new United Nations Guidelines on Justice in Matters Involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime (Economic and Social Council resolution 2005/20). The resolution as well as the Guidelines themselves, formally recognize the efforts of IBCR in laying the groundwork for the adoption of the Guidelines. 23-27 May 2005: A representative of IBCR attended the Fourteenth session of the United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in support of the adoption of a draft resolution which adopted the Guidelines on Justice in Matters Involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime, United Nations Office, Vienna. 18-25 April 2005: A representative of IBCR attended the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice held in Bangkok, Thailand. Furthermore, IBCR organized an ancillary meeting on the draft guidelines on justice for child victims and witnesses of crime. 15-16 March 2005: A representative of IBCR attended the Intergovernmental Experts Group meeting held in Vienna, Austria, to develop guidelines on justice for child victims and witnesses of crime, United Nations Office at Vienna. 21 July 2004: The Economic and Social Council adopted resolution 2004/27, which notes with appreciation the efforts of the IBCR in drafting the guidelines on justice for child victims and witnesses and calls for an intergovernmental experts group meeting to be held to develop United Nations guidelines. The resolution also calls for the guidelines to be discussed at the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, Bangkok, 18-25 April 2005. 11-20 May 2004: A representative of IBCR attended the Thirteenth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in Vienna, Austria, to support the adoption of a draft resolution on the IBCR guidelines on justice for child victims and witnesses, United Nations Office at Vienna. 27-28 November 2003: A representative of IBCR attended the 10th Plenary Session of the International Scientific and Professional Advisory Committee of the United Nations on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (ISPAC), in Courmayeur, Italy. 13-22 May 2003: A representative of IBCR attended the Twelfth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in Vienna, Austria. IBCR also organized a side-event on the IBCR Guidelines on Justice for Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime, United Nations Office at Vienna. i) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters 2006-2007: Launch of a 4-year project titled: "Assisting Member States in the implementation of the United Nations Guidelines on Justice in Matters Involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime". This UNODC project is implemented in partnership with UNICEF and IBCR and is intended to assist Member States in adapting their legislation and procedures to enhance the capacity of their respective criminal justice systems to respond to child victims and witnesses of crime in accordance with relevant international legal instruments and standards and norms, in particular the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Guidelines on Justice in Matters Involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime. 18-20 November 2004: IBCR hosted the Conference "Making Children's Rights Work: National and International Perspectives", held in Montreal, Canada to celebrate the 15th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The event also marked the 10th anniversary of IBCR. Keynote speakers included the Deputy Director General of UNICEF and the Rapporteur of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child. 12-24 November 2003: The IBCR provided follow-up technical assistance pertaining to Armenia's National Report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child and conducted training for the staff members of the Armenian Resource Center on Children's Rights. 10-12 February 2003: A representative of IBCR participated in the Meeting of Experts on the Use and Application of United Nations Standards and Norms in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Stadtschlaining, Austria. The representative also submitted a paper titled "Children's Rights: The Role of NGOs in Supporting the Application of United Nations Standards and Norms. Is There a Need For New Standards?" ii) Initiatives in line with internationally agreed development Goals Since 2004, IBCR's new programme on Country Profiles on the Status of the Implementation of the CRC aims to detect existing challenges and gaps, highlight progress made and identify commendable practices that are developed in the area of children's rights by States Parties, with a particular focus on developing countries. Moreover, the preparation and publication of the country profiles allow a comparative analysis and an enhanced knowledge of the situation of children's rights at both country and regional levels, highlighting achievements, variations and remaining challenges particular to a regional ensemble. The protection of children is fundamental to ensure access to human rights and needs, and is therefore a necessary step to fight poverty. The Millennium Development Goals are reflected in the structure of the Country profiles and indeed influence the research, analysis and reporting. For example, in relation to education, the Country profiles specifically report on statistics and analyses efforts made at national level to ensure that all children complete a full course of primary schooling and to eliminate gender disparity both in primary and secondary education. In relation to health, the Country profiles specifically report on and analyze States Parties' efforts to reduce the mortality rate among children under five, the maternal mortality ratio and measure to curb HIV/AIDS. In 2006, IBCR released its first regional report entitles, "Making Children's Rights Work: Country Profiles on Cambodia, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste and Viet Nam (2006)," available in English in PDF or hard copy. 