%%%DRUG PRODUCTION|DRUG TRAFFIC|AFGHANISTAN|INTERNATIONAL DRUG MONITORING|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|DRUG CONTROL|

Commission on Narcotic Drugs Fiftieth session Vienna, 12-16 March 2007 Item 6 (b) of the provisional agenda* * E/CN.7/2007/1. Illicit drug traffic and supply: follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly Implementation of the Paris Pact initiative Report of the Executive Director Summary The present report has been prepared pursuant to Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 49/5, entitled "Paris Pact initiative", in which the Commission expressed support for the proposal of the Russian Federation to convene in Moscow in June 2006, in continuation of the Paris Pact initiative, an international conference at the ministerial level on drug routes from Central Asia to Europe; encouraged the international conference to take stock of the progress made under the Paris Pact initiative and of existing structures in order to improve them or adapt them to existing needs; and requested the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, subject to the availability of extrabudgetary resources, to facilitate the organization and holding of the conference on that matter and to report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fiftieth session. The Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan was held in Moscow from 26 to 28 June 2006. The present report contains a summary of the main aspects of the Conference. Its outcome, the Moscow Declaration, is contained in the annex to document A/61/208 - S/2006/598. Paragraphs Page Introduction Paris Pact initiative Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan 1. In its resolution 49/5, entitled "Paris Pact initiative", the Commission on Narcotic Drugs reaffirmed the commitments made by Member States in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session (Assembly resolution S-20/2, annex), in which Member States recognized that action against the world drug problem was a common and shared responsibility and expressed their conviction that it must be addressed in a multilateral setting. In that resolution, the Commission also welcomed the Paris Pact initiative emerging from the Paris Statement (S/2003/641, annex), which was issued at the end of the Conference on Drug Routes from Central Asia to Europe, held in Paris on 21 and 22 May 2003, took note of the report by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), entitled Afghanistan: Opium Survey 2005, and noted with concern recent indications of a possible increase in cultivation in several regions. 2. In the same resolution, the Commission expressed its support for the efforts of Member States aimed at strengthening regional cooperation in order to counter the threat to the international community posed by the illicit cultivation of opium poppy in Afghanistan and the illicit trade in opium, welcoming a series of regional initiatives that had taken place to that effect. 3. The Commission further expressed support for the proposal of the Russian Federation to convene in Moscow in June 2006, in continuation of the Paris Pact initiative, an international conference at the ministerial level on drug routes from Central Asia to Europe; encouraged the international conference to take stock of the progress made under the Paris Pact initiative and of existing structures in order to improve them or adapt them to existing needs; invited all parties concerned to take an active part in the conference; and requested the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, subject to the availability of extrabudgetary resources, to facilitate the organization and holding of the conference on that matter and to report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fiftieth session. 4. The Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan was held in Moscow from 26 to 28 June 2006. The objectives of the Conference were, inter alia, to review the implementation of the Paris Pact initiative and to draw conclusions and establish targets for further joint efforts. 5. The present report provides information on the preparations for the Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan. Information on the outcome of the Conference, the Moscow Declaration, is available in the annex to document A/61/208 - S/2006/598. II. Paris Pact initiative 6. More than 55 countries and organizations sealed a pact in Paris at the Conference on Drug Routes from Central Asia to Europe, held in Paris on 21 and 22 May 2003. They agreed on concerted measures to limit the trafficking of Afghan opiates through West and Central Asia and Europe and on the need for stronger and better coordinated action in border control and law enforcement. UNODC was invited to act as a clearing-house mechanism and to provide comprehensive information on and analysis of action priorities in the most affected countries. 7. UNODC led the follow-up to the Paris Conference with a project entitled the "Paris Pact initiative", which facilitates consultations on counter-narcotics enforcement at the expert and policy levels. As part of the initiative, a new Internet-based coordination mechanism of technical assistance in the field of counter-narcotics enforcement, called the Automated Donor Assistance Mechanism (ADAM) was launched (see para. 11 below). In addition, a coordination and analysis unit was established in the UNODC Regional Office for Central Asia in Tashkent, providing Paris Pact partners with ongoing updated information, data and reports on counter-narcotics activities in Central Asia. 8. Since the inception of the Paris Pact initiative, nine round-table meetings of senior experts in counter-narcotics enforcement have been organized, each with a geographical or thematic focus: the first focused on the "Balkan route" (held in Brussels in September 2003); the second on the Islamic Republic of Iran (held in Brussels in October 2003); the third on Central Asian countries (held in Tashkent in April 2004); the fourth on the Russian Federation (held in Moscow in June 2004); the fifth on Pakistan (held in Islamabad in March 2005); the sixth again on the Islamic Republic of Iran (held in Tehran in September 2005); the seventh on South-Eastern Europe (held in Istanbul, Turkey, in October 2005); the eighth on cross-border cooperation and the exchange of information and intelligence between Afghanistan and neighbouring countries (held in Dushanbe in April 2006); and the ninth on States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (held in Doha in May 2006). At those meetings, opiate trafficking and counter-narcotics activities in priority countries were analysed and emerging trafficking routes identified. In addition, participants also recommended specific measures to improve existing border control and law enforcement measures, as well as corrective action to be taken by concerned Governments, the donor community and UNODC. 9. In 2006, the first expert round table, on cross-border cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, was held on 10 and 11 April 2006. The participants recommended a number of actions, including encouraging regular operational meetings between Afghan and Pakistani law enforcement officials; promoting the Kabul Declaration on Good Neighbourly Relations of 22 December 2002; carrying out joint assessment missions to border areas; moving swiftly to make the Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre (CARICC) operational; improving strategic and operational cross-border cooperation; improving the coordination of border control functions among national agencies or partners; integrating trade facilitation and control; promoting border liaison offices; and implementing precursor control activities at key border posts. Since the Round Table, UNODC has taken steps to implement those recommendations: it has opened a communication channel with the Government of Afghanistan, in particular with the Ministry of Counter Narcotics, for the purpose of exchanging information on the mechanism established in response to the Kabul Declaration on Good Neighbourly Relations; it has assisted the activities of the drug control agency of Tajikistan and border posts between Afghanistan and Tajikistan have been improved within the framework of a UNODC project; and a memorandum of understanding between Afghanistan and China was signed in June 2006, which in part stressed the need for China and other neighbouring countries to play a larger role in combating terrorism, extremism and drug trafficking in the region. 10. The second expert round table of 2006, for the member States of the Gulf Cooperation Council, was held in Doha on 22 and 23 May 2006. Participants identified the following actions: fostering cross-border cooperation and border management; promoting controlled delivery techniques; improving information and intelligence exchange; establishing precursor control measures; and combating money-laundering. Participants agreed that priority should be given to establishing cross-border cooperation procedures and guidelines for communication between specialized drug units at the border; developing and implementing joint training programmes for law enforcement and customs officials; introducing the use of dogs at seaports; promoting the appropriate use of controlled delivery operations; establishing a Gulf centre for criminal intelligence; organizing joint operational-level meetings between Afghanistan and neighbouring countries to develop a joint action plan and an operational strategy to prevent the flow of acetic anhydride and other precursors to Afghanistan; as well as implementing United Nations conventions and other international agreements against money-laundering. 11. ADAM provides Paris Pact partners with a state-of-the-art mechanism for coordinating donor assistance, offering functionality unrivalled by any existing database software solution: it currently provides, inter alia, electronic storage of project documents, files and pictures, and has the capacity to perform searches and produce graphs and tables at the press of a button. It also automatically alerts users of potential duplication of activities. ADAM holds information on more than 873 projects on counter-narcotics enforcement in Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan, the Russian Federation and Central Asian and South-Eastern European countries, as reported to UNODC. Among all Paris Pact partners, only 22 countries and 5 international organizations have designated their national focal points. 12. The Paris Pact initiative was independently evaluated by an external consultant in May 2006. The final evaluation report made a persuasive case for extending the initiative beyond 2006. The report stated that the principal outcome of the project was a clear acceptance of shared responsibility among the participant countries and organizations, coupled with an acknowledgement of the coordinating role of UNODC. The initiative has resulted in a greater willingness on the part of countries to acknowledge weaknesses in their controls and procedures and to seek guidance from others. Information-sharing in a collaborative and non-confrontational way has helped countries to develop and revise their national drug control strategies based on the shared experiences of other partners. The evaluation recognized that the Paris Pact was making a significant contribution to closer cooperation and the coordination of assistance projects and activities in the countries affected by the trafficking of heroin from Afghanistan. The success of the Paris Pact owed much to the fact that an extremely diverse range of organizations was participating, all of which accepted that UNODC had overall responsibility for coordination. The evaluation clearly stated that, if the infrastructure supporting the Paris Pact were to be withdrawn and the Paris Pact project were to end, it would be necessary to establish a similar structure to maintain the constructive dialogue that had blossomed within the Paris Pact forums. Furthermore, the evaluation supported the concept and design of ADAM and concurred with the view that it offered a unique opportunity to provide donor and recipient countries with a real-time assessment of assistance needs and priorities. In addition, the work of the coordination and analysis unit in Tashkent was assessed positively. Overall, the Paris Pact initiative was assessed as having been successful in improving coordination and cooperation, especially between UNODC and international organizations, and among recipient countries. Progress was less marked in coordination among donor countries, but that should be rectified when ADAM becomes available to and regularly used by all registered users. 13. The fourth Paris Pact policy consultative group meeting took place in Vienna on 27 November 2006, bringing together more than 100 participants from 32 countries and 8 international organizations. After reviewing the conclusions of the two expert round tables held in 2006, participants called for the implementation of a series of actions to strengthen border control and law enforcement measures in Afghanistan, its neighbouring countries and the States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Participants also decided on the geographic and thematic focus of the expert round tables to be held in 2007. The policy consultative group expressed strong support for the continuation of the Paris Pact initiative and agreed upon a series of measures and the following six objectives with a view to making the second phase of the initiative (2007 - 2009) more effective and operationally-oriented: (a) improve the operational focus of the Paris Pact; (b) ensure the effective and efficient monitoring and follow-up of Paris Pact action priorities; (c) advocate a balanced approach to drug issues; (d) strengthen counter-narcotics analytical capacities in the region; (e) ensure a wider use and the sustainability of ADAM; and (f) seek synergies and foster partnerships with relevant national, subregional, regional and international players. III. Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan 14. The Russian Federation, under its Group of Eight chairmanship, provided the extrabudgetary funds to host the Second Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan (held in Moscow from 26 to 28 June 2006), in cooperation with UNODC, to further promote the Paris Pact process and elaborate and recommend effective countermeasures against drug trafficking from Afghanistan. Overall, the progress in the implementation of the Paris Pact initiative was positively assessed and there was particular support for the continuation of the Paris Pact consultative mechanism. 15. During the Conference, delegates formed three working groups to review (a) border control and the trafficking of drugs and precursors; (b) regional and international cooperation; and (c) health and social issues. Among the recommendations formulated, of particular note was the agreement of all the members of the international community that continued efforts must be made to support Afghanistan in the fight against the cultivation of opium poppy and the illicit production of and trafficking in illicit opiates. Strong encouragement was expressed to support the Afghanistan Compact and the implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy of the Government of Afghanistan. It was recognized that strengthened cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours was required to achieve a modern and effective border management system. The need for a balanced approach in tackling both drug supply and demand issues was also highlighted. 16. The importance of conducting effective law enforcement, intelligence-gathering and operational activities at the cross-border and regional levels was reaffirmed and it was acknowledged that CARICC could play an integral part in that respect. The Conference urged participants to take urgent action to ensure that CARICC was made operational at the earliest possible date. The Conference also concurred that further international efforts were required in the area of precursor control. The exchange of information on the diversion of precursors in close cooperation with the Customs Cooperation Council (also known as the World Customs Organization) and the International Narcotics Control Board was encouraged. It was also agreed that efforts against money-laundering and corruption should be strengthened. In that context, the importance of the work of the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering, the Eurasian Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering was underlined. 17. The Conference also recommended that Member States should give priority to implementing policies related to the health aspects of drug use, including heroin use. In addition, emphasis was placed on the need to ensure sustainable reduction of the illicit cultivation of opium poppy and trafficking in opium. It concluded by expressing confidence that the discussions and recommendations of the Conference would become "an element of the `Paris - Moscow' process" and support for the continuation of the UNODC-led Paris Pact project. The outcome of the Conference, the Moscow Declaration, is contained in the annex to document A/61/208 - S/2006/598. 