%%%GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES|CONFERENCES|LANGUAGES|POLYGLOT GLOSSARIES|

Ninth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names New York, 21-30 August 2007 * E/CONF.98/1. ** Prepared by Salvatore Arca (Italy), Chairman of the Romano-Hellenic Division. Item 5 of the provisional agenda* Reports by divisions of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names on the situation in their divisions and on the progress made in the standardization of geographical names since the Eighth Conference Report of the Romano-Hellenic Division Submitted by the Romano-Hellenic Division** Since the eighth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names, the Romano-Hellenic Division has constantly encouraged participation in divisional activities of the countries that have not yet taken part in them. It is with a real pleasure that I have registered the participation of Andorra as an active member in the work of the Romano-Hellenic Division. Since the eighth Conference, the Romano-Hellenic Division has held four meetings: (a) The first meeting in 2003, was held in Madrid, hosted by the Instituto Geográfico Nacional (Ministerio de Fomento); (b) The second meeting was held in New York during the twenty-second session of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names; (c) The third meeting in 2005, in Lefkas (Greece), was hosted by the Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs and by the Municipality of Lefkas; (d) The fourth meeting was held in Vienna during the twenty-third session of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names. At those meetings, several items concerning the standardization of the geographical names were discussed. Special attention was paid to the following items: :: Toponymic guidelines :: Exonyms :: Minority languages :: Multilingual glossary As far as the multilingual glossary is concerned, I wish to stress that, since the eighth Conference, that project has been enriched by further contributions by member States. Nevertheless, the target of definitive completion of the glossary, namely the inclusion of versions in all national languages spoken inside the Romano-Hellenic Division, remains to be achieved. In conclusion, I feel it is my duty to express my appreciation and thanks to member States and to their delegates who participated in the divisional works with perseverance and fruitful contributions. Moreover, I hope that the countries that have not yet participated in the activities will accept the invitations, which have been made to them many times, for them to take part in the great project of the United Nations on the standardization of geographical names. 