%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|CONFERENCES|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/CP/2006/5 26 January 2007 Original: English CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twelfth session, held at Nairobi from 6 to 17 November 2006 Part One: Proceedings Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes Statement by the Secretary-General of the United Nations 23 Parties to the Convention, observer States, and United Nations organizations attending the twelfth session of the Conference of the Parties 26 List of representatives who made statements at the high-level segment under agenda item 9 of the Conference of the Parties and agenda item 19 of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol 29 Calendar of meetings of Convention bodies, 2007 - 2011 37 Documents before the Conference of the Parties at its twelfth session 38 For practical reasons, part two of the present report is being issued in an addendum (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1) Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1 Decision 1/CP.12 Further guidance to an entity entrusted with the operation of the financial mechanism of the Convention, for the operation of the Special Climate Change Fund 2/CP.12 Review of the financial mechanism 3/CP.12 Additional guidance to the Global Environment Facility 4/CP.12 Capacity-building under the Convention 5/CP.12 Development and transfer of technologies 6/CP.12 Continuation of activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase 7/CP.12 Level of emissions for the base year of Croatia 8/CP.12 Administrative, financial and institutional matters 9/CP.12 Date and venue of the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties and the calendar of meetings of Convention bodies Resolution Expression of gratitude to the government of Kenya and the people of the city of Nairobi Opening of the session (Agenda items 1 and 2 (a)) The twelfth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP), convened pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 4, of the Convention, was opened at the premises of the United Nations Office at Nairobi (UNON), Kenya, on 6 November 2006, by Mr. Enele Sopoaga (Tuvalu), Vice-President of the COP at its eleventh session, on behalf of the President of the COP at its eleventh session, Ms. Rona Ambrose, Minister of the Environment of Canada. Statement by the President of the Conference of the Parties at its eleventh session The President of the COP at its eleventh session thanked the Government of Kenya for hosting the conference in Nairobi and congratulated the incoming President on his election. The role of President of the COP presented important challenges as well as exciting opportunities to engage in discussions with leaders from around the world on their efforts to address global climate change and their ideas on how to move the process forward. Looking back to the progress made since the last conference in Montreal, she pointed out that the twenty-fourth sessions of the subsidiary bodies had provided an opportunity for initial discussions on the future of international climate change cooperation. Two new processes had been launched during those sessions that were integral to the deliberations at the present conference. Referring to informal consultations undertaken in relation to the proposal of the Russian Federation to develop appropriate procedures for the approval of voluntary commitments, she noted that it was encouraging that a number of Parties recognized the importance of discussions on this proposal. The President said that climate change was truly a global issue and genuine progress depended on all major greenhouse gas emitting countries playing a role in finding a solution. All nations needed to work together to identify common challenges and share ideas. The individual circumstances of each Party were unique and finding shared solutions could therefore be complex. However, it was imperative to move forward and engage one another in new ways. To this end, Parties would have to ask themselves what had worked to address climate change and what had not, and what could be done to broaden the efforts by Parties and work together more effectively. The most important issue was to find a truly effective global solution to the threat of climate change. Election of the President of the Conference of the Parties at its twelfth session (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 6 November, on the proposal of the presiding officer, the COP elected by acclamation Mr. Kivutha Kibwana, Minister for the Environment and Natural Resources of Kenya, as its President. The presiding officer congratulated Mr. Kibwana on his election and wished him every success in guiding the work of the COP at its twelfth session. Statement by the President On assuming office, the President welcomed all participants to the twelfth session of the COP and thanked his predecessor for the work undertaken under her leadership. Referring to the recently published Stern Review on the economics of climate change, the President said that tackling climate change was not only a fundamental environmental and developmental challenge but also an economic necessity. Climate change was rapidly emerging as one of the most serious threats to humanity which could cause large-scale disruption to economic and social activities, threaten the development goals of billions of the world's poorest people and jeopardize recent gains in poverty reduction, particularly on the African continent. Turning to major issues and possible outcomes of the conference at its twelfth session, the President outlined five broad themes. First, in the area of adaptation to climate change, the President noted that it was essential to move from assessment and planning to implementation and practical action, including the immediate provision of adequate, predictable and sustainable funding, and an agreement on concrete steps for the five-year programme of work on adaptation. The second theme aimed to ensure the continuing success of the clean development mechanism (CDM) and to facilitate equitable participation of all Parties, particularly African countries, which needed improved technical and institutional capacity. Third, the development and transfer of technologies to tackle climate change needed a new impetus in order for Parties to initiate concrete action and mobilize additional resources. A fourth theme was the critical need to build upon the momentum gained at previous sessions and the two-track process launched in Montreal, which had set the stage for a more effective and inclusive multilateral response to climate change. Fifth, the President invited delegates to "expand the creative space" by exploring options for a future climate change regime that would enable Parties to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases while allowing economic development to proceed in a sustainable way. In closing, the President reiterated his appreciation of the renewed spirit of solidarity he had observed while preparing for the conference and reminded delegates that its success depended on political leadership and sincere dedication to the ultimate objective of the Convention. Addresses of welcome At the opening of the twelfth session of the COP and the second session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP), the Vice-President of Kenya, Mr. Arthur Moody Awori, and the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations, Director General of UNON, and Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (United Nations HABITAT), Ms. Anna Tibaijuka, delivered addresses of welcome. Welcoming all delegates to Kenya and the city of Nairobi, the Vice-President said that hosting the conference represented a major accomplishment for Kenya. He expressed his gratitude to the countries which had provided generous support to the Government of Kenya, making the conference possible, and to UNON and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) for their assistance in organizing the event. The Vice-President said that climate change threatened to put at risk the livelihoods of the world's poorest communities. Sub-Saharan countries were the most vulnerable because of the predominantly agrarian structure of their economies. With over 25 per cent of the gross domestic product of those countries being derived from agriculture and over 70 per cent of the population living in rural areas, climate change would have a vast impact on their economies. Reducing the vulnerability of those most affected by climate change would require substantial external financial support to be provided through various channels, including bilateral and multilateral mechanisms. While financial resources and technology transfer were key to finding solutions, the Vice-President noted that success in confronting climate change depended largely on Parties' ability to forge an effective global strategy that was environmentally sound and fair. The Vice-President mentioned that the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol represented important steps in that direction. Based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, it was necessary to engage major emitters of greenhouse gases in a common long-term effort and develop an equitable and environmentally effective post-2012 response to the challenges posed by climate change. Speaking in her role as Director General of UNON, Ms. Tibaijuka said that UNON was honoured to host the first climate change conference to take place in sub-Saharan Africa, which she described as an historic event. Given that the biggest environmental challenges were to be found in developing countries, Kenya and UNON were particularly suited to host the conference. Referring to UNON as the home of two important programmes dealing with the natural environment and the human environment, UNEP and UN HABITAT, respectively, Ms. Tibaijuka highlighted the links between the work of those organizations and that of the Parties to the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. Since climate change had a direct impact not only on the environment but also on the lives of people, the work of the delegates was highly relevant to that of UNEP and UN HABITAT. Statement by the Executive Secretary Congratulating Mr. Kibwana on his election as President, the Executive Secretary extended his gratitude to the Government of Kenya for its special efforts in hosting the conference. He also thanked UNON and UNEP for their logistical support and expressed his gratitude to Ms. Ambrose for her able presidency of the COP. The Executive Secretary said in his statement that the international climate change process was about building the future. The urgency of addressing the challenge of climate change was such that the foundations and the walls had to be built at the same time. The foundations included crucial blocks such as capacity-building, technology transfer to developing countries and adaptation to climate change impacts. These were critical for developing countries to participate further in the process. The walls were being constructed in the discussions on the future under the dialogue on long-term cooperative action to address climate change by enhancing implementation of the Convention (the Dialogue) and the Ad Hoc Working Group on further commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG). Important initiatives were also emerging outside of the UNFCCC process, including the World Bank's new framework for generating investment into clean energy and green development, and the Stern Review on the economics of climate change. The Executive Secretary pointed out that much had been achieved in the course of the past year: the first session of the Dialogue and the first session of the AWG; two regional workshops on adaptation for the Latin America and the Caribbean and the Africa regions; an explosion of activities under the CDM; the launch of the Track 2 procedure under the joint implementation mechanism; the launch of the international transaction log; the start of the work of the Compliance Committee; and advances in the area of technology transfer, including the publication of the UNFCCC Guidebook on preparing technology transfer projects for financing. Recalling the five main themes outlined by the President in his opening statement, the Executive Secretary said that they represented a very challenging set of objectives but one that was crucial for success in building the future that all aspired to. In closing, he referred to Kenya's national motto, Harambee, or "pull together", and called upon all delegates to move the process forward and make the meeting the success that the world expected. Other statements At the 1st meeting, on 6 November, general statements were made by the representatives of South Africa (on behalf of the Group of 77 and China), Niue, Finland (on behalf of the European Community and its member States), Nigeria (on behalf of the African Group), Bangladesh (on behalf of the least developed countries), Australia (on behalf of the Umbrella Group), Saudi Arabia and Tuvalu (on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States). Organizational matters (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the rules of procedure (Agenda item 2 (b)) At the 1st meeting, on 6 November, the President informed the COP that the President of the COP at its eleventh session had undertaken consultations with Parties on the draft rules of procedure but that no consensus had been reached. On the proposal of the President, the COP decided that, in the meantime, as at previous sessions, the draft rules of procedure as contained in document FCCC/CP/1996/2 should continue to be applied, with the exception of draft rule 42. The President announced that he would report back to the COP in the event of any new developments in this matter. Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (c)) For its consideration of this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 6 November, the COP had before it a note by the Executive Secretary containing the supplementary provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/CP/2006/1 and Add.1). The provisional agenda had been prepared in agreement with the President of the COP at its eleventh session, taking into account views expressed by Parties during the twenty-fourth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and by members of the Bureau of the COP. Following the issuance of the provisional agenda (FCCC/CP/2006/1), the secretariat had received a request from the Government of Tuvalu, on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, to include an additional item. In accordance with rule 12 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, and in agreement with the President of the COP at its eleventh session, this item was included in the supplementary provisional agenda (FCCC/CP/2006/1/Add.1) as item 5 (f). The President recalled that item 6 of the provisional agenda, "Second review of the adequacy of Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b), of the Convention", which had been held in abeyance at the eleventh session, was included in the provisional agenda in accordance with rules 10 (c) and 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied. He also recalled that the President of the COP at its eleventh session had consulted with Parties on this item during the past year but no consensus had been reached on how to include it in the agenda. He therefore proposed that the supplementary provisional agenda be adopted as contained in document FCCC/CP/2006/1/Add.1, with the exception of item 6, which would be held in abeyance. He said that he would consider how to deal with this item and report back at a future meeting. On item 5 (f) of the supplementary provisional agenda, "Actions to address the specific needs and concerns of small island developing States pursuant to Article 4, paragraphs 4 and 8(a), and other relevant articles of the Convention", statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America, Tuvalu (on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States) and Jamaica. Noting there was no consensus on the inclusion of this item, the President proposed that it be held in abeyance. He would undertake informal consultations and report back to the conference at a later meeting. At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, adopted the agenda with item 5 (f) and item 6 held in abeyance. At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the President reported that his consultations on item 6, which was held in abeyance, had not produced a consensus. The COP, acting on a proposal by the President, followed the procedure established at previous sessions, whereby items held in abeyance are included in the provisional agenda of the next session with appropriate explanatory footnotes. At the same meeting, the President reported that his consultations on item 5 (f), which had been held in abeyance, had not produced a consensus. The COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, decided the item would not be included in the agenda of the COP and the item formerly numbered as 5 (g) would be re-numbered as 5 (f). The President noted there was consensus to include this item within the work of the SBI. The COP, acting on a proposal by the President, took note of this consensus. The agenda for COP 12 reads as follows: Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Election of the President of the Conference at its twelfth session; Adoption of the rules of procedure; Adoption of the agenda; Election of officers other than the President; Admission of organizations as observers; Organization of work, including the sessions of the subsidiary bodies; Date and venue of the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties and the calendar of meetings of Convention bodies; Adoption of the report on credentials. Reports of the subsidiary bodies and decisions and conclusions arising therefrom: Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice; Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation. Report of the co-facilitators of the dialogue on long-term cooperative action to address climate change by enhancing implementation of the Convention. Review of implementation of commitments and of other provisions of the Convention: Financial mechanism of the Convention; National communications: National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention; National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention; Development and transfer of technologies; Capacity-building under the Convention; Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention: Implementation of the Buenos Aires programme of work on adaptation and response measures (decision 1/CP.10); Matters relating to the least developed countries; Other matters referred to the Conference of the Parties by the subsidiary bodies. Agenda item held in abeyance. Information about the base year of Kazakhstan. Administrative, financial and institutional matters: Audited financial statements for the biennium 2004 - 2005; Budget performance in the biennium 2006 - 2007; Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat. High-level segment. Statements by observer organizations. Other matters. Conclusion of the session: Adoption of the report of the Conference on its twelfth session; Closure of the session. Election of officers other than the President (Agenda item 2 (d)) At the 1st meeting, on 6 November, the President informed the COP that Mr. Mark Berman (Canada) had undertaken consultations on this matter during the twenty-fourth sessions of the subsidiary bodies held in May 2006. However, nominations had not yet been received from all regional groups. On a proposal of the President, the COP decided to postpone the election of the Bureau until all nominations were finalized. Mr. Berman was invited by the COP to continue consultations. At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, elected by acclamation seven Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur of the COP, and the chairs of the two subsidiary bodies. The Bureau of the COP at its twelfth session was constituted as follows: President Mr. Kivutha Kibwana (Kenya) Vice-Presidents Mr. William Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana) Mr. Ibrahim Ahmed Ali Al-Ajmi (Oman) Mr. Heorhiy Veremiychyk (Ukraine) Mr. Alexander Pankin (Russian Federation) Mr. Erik Bjørnebye (Norway) Ms. Outi Berghäll (Finland) Mr. Feturi Elisaia (Samoa) Rapporteur Ms. Karen Nicole Smith (Barbados) Chair of Subsidiary Body for Implementation Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) Mr. Bagher Asadi (Islamic Republic of Iran) Admission of organizations as observers (Agenda item 2 (e)) At its 1st meeting, on 6 November, the COP considered a note by the secretariat on the admission of organizations as observers (FCCC/CP/2006/2), listing one intergovernmental organization and 29 non-governmental organizations that had asked to be admitted as observers. Pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 6, of the Convention, and following a recommendation by the Bureau of the COP, which had reviewed the list of applicant organizations, the COP decided to admit those organizations as observers. Emphasizing the importance of the involvement of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in the Convention process, the President welcomed the organizations newly admitted to the COP at its twelfth session and invited them to play an active role. Organization of work, including the sessions of the subsidiary bodies (Agenda item 2 (f)) In introducing this sub-item at the 1st meeting, on 6 November, the President drew the attention of the COP to the annotations to the provisional agenda contained in documents FCCC/CP/2006/1 and Add.1. He noted that the subsidiary bodies would be convened with the aim of developing, before their sessions ended on 14 November, draft decisions and conclusions for submission to the COP. On a proposal by the President, the COP decided to refer items to the subsidiary bodies for consideration and the submission of appropriate draft decisions or conclusions, as follows: Subsidiary Body for Implementation Item 5 (a) Financial mechanism of the Convention Item 5 (b)(i) National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention Item 5 (b)(ii) National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Item 5 (d) Capacity-building under the Convention Item 5 (e)(i) Implementation of the Buenos Aires programme of work on adaptation and response measures (decision 1/CP.10) Item 5 (e)(ii) Matters relating to the least developed countries Item 8 (a) Audited financial statements for the biennium 2004 - 2005 Item 8 (b) Budget performance in the biennium 2006 - 2007 Item 8 (c) Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice Item 5 (c) Development and transfer of technologies and response measures (decision 1/CP.10). Delegates were reminded that the SBI and the SBSTA would consider different aspects of item 5 (e)(i). The SBSTA, pursuant to paragraph 23 of decision 1/CP.10, would address issues relating to the five-year programme of work of the SBSTA on the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. The SBI could decide to address issues relating to expert meetings and workshops. With regard to agenda item 2 (g), "Date and venue of the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties and the calendar of meetings of Convention bodies", the President noted that expressions of interest had been received to host the thirteenth session of the COP and the third session of the CMP. He proposed to undertake consultations on this sub-item and report back at a future meeting. Drawing attention to agenda item 4, "Report of the co-facilitators of the dialogue on long-term cooperative action to address climate change by enhancing implementation of the Convention", the President informed Parties that a workshop under the Dialogue would be held from 15 to 16 November, in parallel with the high-level segment. He announced that Parties would hear an oral report on the event from the co-facilitators of the Dialogue at the plenary meeting on 17 November. With regard to agenda item 9, "High-level segment", the President recalled that the SBI at its twenty-fourth session had endorsed the dates of 15 to 17 November for the high-level segment. The high-level segment would be convened on the understanding that there would be one speakers' list and each Party, including Parties to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, would speak only once. No decisions would be taken in the joint meetings. The President, with the endorsement of the Bureau, proposed a time limit of three minutes for the statements at the high-level segment. The COP agreed to proceed on the basis of the proposals made by the President. (Agenda item 2 (g)) At the 1st meeting, on 6 November, the President proposed to undertake consultations on this sub-item and report back to a future meeting. At its 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting on a proposal by the President, adopted decision 9/CP.12 entitled "Date and venue of the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties, and the calendar of meetings of the Convention bodies" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). Adoption of the report on credentials (Agenda item 2 (h)) At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the President drew attention to the report on credentials (FCCC/CP/2006/4 - FCCC/KP/CMP/2006/8), which indicated that the Bureau had approved the credentials of the representatives of Parties. The COP, acting upon a recommendation by the Bureau, adopted the report. Attendance The twelfth session of the COP and the concurrent sessions of the subsidiary bodies were attended by representatives of 180 Parties to the UNFCCC, as well as Observer States, representatives of United Nations bodies and programmes, convention secretariats, and specialized agencies and institutions and related organizations of the United Nations system. For a complete list, see annex II. The sessions were also attended by 23 representatives of intergovernmental organizations and 269 non-governmental organizations. For a complete list, see FCCC/CP/2006/INF.1 and Corr.1. Documentation The documents before the COP at its twelfth session are listed in annex V. Reports of the subsidiary bodies and decisions and conclusions arising therefrom (Agenda item 3) Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (Agenda item 3 (a)) The COP had before it the report of the SBSTA on its twenty-fourth session, held at Bonn from 18 to 26 May 2006 (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/5 and Add.1). At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago), introduced the draft report of the SBSTA on its twenty-fifth session and gave an oral report on the results that pertain to the COP. The SBSTA, at its twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth sessions, had recommended two draft decisions and one set of draft conclusions for adoption by the COP. At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, took note of the oral report of the Chair, the report of the SBSTA on its twenty-fourth session and the draft report on the twenty-fifth session. The COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, also expressed its appreciation to Mr. Kumarsingh for his outstanding work as Chair and congratulated him on his re-election. At the same meeting, the President recalled that the nomination for Vice-Chair of the SBSTA was not received by the time of its closing meeting, and as an exception to rule 27, paragraph 6, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the SBSTA had requested the COP to elect the Vice-Chair of the SBSTA. The COP, acting on a proposal by the President, elected Ms. Ermira Fida (Albania) as Vice-Chair. Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation The COP had before it the report of the SBI on its twenty-fourth session, held at Bonn from 18 to 25 May 2006 (FCCC/SBI/2006/11). At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Thomas Becker (Denmark), introduced the draft report of the SBI on its twenty-fifth session and gave an oral report on the results that pertain to the COP. During its twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth sessions, the SBI recommended five draft decisions and one set of draft conclusions for adoption by the COP. At the same meeting, the COP, on a proposal by the President, took note of the oral report of the Chair, the report of the SBI on its twenty-fourth session and the draft report on the twenty-fifth session. The COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, also expressed its appreciation to Mr. Becker for his leadership and determination in guiding the work of the SBI over the past two years and noted that the work of the SBI had progressed because of his efforts. Report of the co-facilitators of the dialogue on long-term cooperative action to address climate change by enhancing implementation of the Convention (Agenda item 4) At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP heard an oral report by the co-facilitators of the dialogue on long-term cooperative action to address climate change by enhancing implementation of the Convention, Ms. Sandea de Wet (South Africa) and Mr. Howard Bamsey (Australia). The co-facilitators recalled that, with decision 1/CP.11, Parties resolved to engage in a dialogue to exchange experiences and analyse strategic approaches for long-term cooperative action to address climate change, which should be undertaken without prejudice to any future negotiations, commitments, process, framework or mandate under the Convention. The dialogue is an open and non-binding exchange of views, information and ideas in support of enhanced implementation of the Convention, focusing on four thematic areas: advancing development goals in a sustainable way; addressing action on adaptation; realizing the full potential of technology; and realizing the full potential of market-based opportunities. In addition to setting the context and identifying the thematic areas, Parties at COP 11 also agreed on the actions, activities and approaches which could result from the dialogue. The co-facilitators reported on the two workshops that had been held in 2006. The first took place on 15 and 16 May and the second on 15 and 16 November. Both were attended by representatives from Parties and observer organizations. At the first workshop, Parties had an initial discussion on all four themes and initiated analysis of strategic approaches to address climate change. At the second workshop, the discussion focused on concrete actions for two of the dialogue themes, namely, development goals and market-based opportunities, as well as on effective and appropriate national and international responses to climate change. Nineteen Parties submitted their views and ideas. During the workshops, Parties heard presentations from government experts, representatives of businesses, observer non-governmental organizations, United Nations bodies, and initiatives outside the UNFCCC process. All submissions, presentations and other material are available on the UNFCCC web site. The COP, by its decision 1/CP.11, agreed that the process will be informed by the best available scientific, technical, social and economic information. The findings of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change were presented during the dialogue in Nairobi. Parties are looking forward to a thorough briefing on the findings of the working group contributions to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in May 2007. The co-facilitators reported that the dialogue offers a unique opportunity for expanding the creative space and building confidence among Parties through an informal and open exchange of experiences unconstrained by any formal negotiating process. This informal nature provided the setting for very exciting, interesting and open discussions, which covered a range of issues that need to be addressed as strategic approaches to climate change and development. The co-facilitators noted that they have been impressed by the quality of the information provided and by the willingness of all Parties to contribute to the discussions. They were encouraged by the eagerness of Parties to follow-up on the ideas presented in the first workshop by developing their submissions and presentations at the second workshop. The business community has taken a keen interest in the dialogue process and prepared thoughtful inputs. Other observers have also contributed. The co-facilitators noted that the last two workshops will take place in 2007. The third one will be scheduled during the first sessional period in 2007 and will focus on concrete actions on the two remaining dialogue themes dealing with adaptation and technology. They recalled a draft decision to be adopted by the COP on holding the fourth workshop between the first and second sessional periods in 2007. This arrangement will allow the co-facilitators to provide a written report to the COP at its thirteenth session. Responding to a number of requests by Parties and in order to facilitate the discussions on cross-cutting and overarching issues, the facilitators requested the secretariat to provide, before the fourth workshop, an analysis of existing and planned investment flows and finance schemes relevant to the development of an effective and appropriate international response to climate change. At the same meeting, the COP, acting on a proposal by the President, took note of the oral report of the co-facilitators. The COP, acting on a proposal by the President, also endorsed the request to the secretariat mentioned in paragraph 61. The President congratulated Parties on the progress made so far and wished them success in their future work. He also thanked the co-facilitators for their skilful leadership of this important process. Review of implementation of commitments and of other provisions of the Convention (Agenda item 5) Financial mechanism of the Convention (Agenda item 5 (a)) Proceedings Under this sub-item, the COP had before it the report of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) (FCCC/CP/2006/3 and Corr.1). This sub-item had been referred to the SBI for consideration. At its 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBI, adopted decision 1/CP.12 entitled "Further guidance to an entity entrusted with the operation of the financial mechanism of the Convention, for the operation of the Special Climate Change Fund" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBI, adopted decision 2/CP.12 entitled "Review of the financial mechanism" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, adopted decision 3/CP.12 entitled "Additional guidance to the Global Environment Facility" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). At the same meeting, the COP considered and adopted conclusions recommended by the SBI. Conclusions The COP took note of the report of the GEF containing information on its major activities in the period 1 September 2005 to 31 August 2006 and also noted that the GEF should continue to report on its efforts to implement decisions of the COP, indicating specific actions it has taken to respond to guidance from the COP. National communications (Agenda item 5 (b)) National communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 5 (b)(i)) This sub-item had been referred to the SBI for consideration. At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the President reported that the SBI could not reach conclusions on this item and urged the SBI to continue its consideration of this item in future sessions. National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting on a proposal by the President, took note of the conclusions adopted by the SBI on this item and invited the SBI to continue its consideration. (Agenda item 5 (c)) This sub-item had been referred to the SBSTA for consideration. At its 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBSTA, adopted decision 5/CP.12 entitled "Development and transfer of technologies" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). (Agenda item 5 (d)) At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBI, adopted decision 4/CP.12 entitled "Capacity-building under the Convention" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). Implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention (Agenda item 5 (e)) Implementation of the Buenos Aires programme of work on adaptation (Agenda item 5 (e)(i)) This sub-item had been referred to the SBSTA and to the SBI for consideration. At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the President reported that the SBI could not reach agreement and will include this matter in the provisional agenda for its next session. At the same meeting, the President recalled that the SBSTA had adopted important conclusions on this item that contained a work programme. The COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, accepted a proposal by Canada to re-name the work programme as the "Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change". The President congratulated Parties for their meaningful progress on this important issue in Nairobi and encouraged the SBSTA and the SBI to continue their work on this crucial issue. Matters relating to the least developed countries (Agenda item 5 (e)(ii)) At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, took note of the conclusions adopted by the SBI and invited the SBI to continue its work on this item. Other matters referred to the Conference of the Parties by the subsidiary bodies (Agenda item 5 (f)) At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBI, adopted decision 7/CP.12 entitled "Level of emissions for the base year of Croatia" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBSTA, adopted decision 6/CP.12 entitled "Continuation of activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a proposal by the President, took note of the conclusions adopted by the SBSTA on the in-session workshop on carbon capture and storage. (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/11). At the same meeting, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBSTA, adopted conclusions on issues relating to greenhouse gas inventories. The COP noted the importance of the annual review process of greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties), in accordance with decision 19/CP.8, in ensuring the reliability of information available to the COP and requested the secretariat to continue with the individual reviews of GHG inventories from Annex I Parties. The COP, by its decision 7/CP.11, recognized that streamlining of the review process is required during the period 2006 - 2007. It decided that for the 2006 GHG inventory submissions, the annual inventory review for Annex I Parties may be rescheduled in order to facilitate coordination with other reviews. The COP noted with concern the high volume of review work in 2007 related to the ongoing reviews of the national communications, the rescheduled reviews of 2006 GHG inventory submissions coordinated with other reviews, and forthcoming reviews of 2007 GHG inventory submissions. This places considerable pressure on, and demand for resources from, the Parties, review experts and the secretariat. The COP noted the need for continued flexibility in the timing of the review activities for the 2007 GHG inventory submissions. The COP requested the secretariat to continue to exercise a certain degree of flexibility with regard to the timing of the review in organizing review activities, in accordance with decisions 19/CP.8 and 7/CP.11, for the 2007 GHG inventory submissions. Agenda item held in abeyance (Agenda item 6 held in abeyance) Information about the base year of Kazakhstan (Agenda item 7) At the 1st meeting, on 6 November, the President recalled that this item had been proposed by Kazakhstan in order to provide information about its base year. Kazakhstan had submitted relevant information to the secretariat, which had been made available on the UNFCCC website. A representative of Kazakhstan made a statement, followed by statements from representatives of five Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. On a proposal by the President, the COP agreed that the President, with the assistance of Mr. Normand Tremblay (Canada), would undertake informal consultations on this matter. At its 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting on a proposal by the President, adopted conclusions on this item. The COP recalled the notification by the Government of Kazakhstan dated 23 March 2000 that, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2(g), of the Convention, Kazakhstan intends to be bound by Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and 2(b), of the Convention. The COP also recalled its conclusion, which recognizes that, upon ratification of the Kyoto Protocol, Kazakhstan will become a Party included in Annex I for the purposes of the Kyoto Protocol in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol, while remaining a Party not included in Annex I for the purposes of the Convention. The COP noted that Kazakhstan wishes to use 1992 as its base year for the purposes of the Convention. The COP took note of the communication of the Government of Kazakhstan to Parties to the Convention dated 14 October 2006. It requested Kazakhstan to submit its national communication and annual greenhouse gas inventories in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2(b), and Article 12 of the Convention, using the relevant UNFCCC guidelines. (Agenda item 8) Audited financial statements for the biennium 2004 - 2005 (Agenda item 8 (a)) Budget performance in the biennium 2006 - 2007 (Agenda item 8 (b)) Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat (Agenda item 8 (c)) These three sub-items had been referred to the SBI for consideration. At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP, acting upon a recommendation by the SBI, adopted decision 8/CP.12 entitled "Administrative, financial and institutional matters" (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). High-level segment (Agenda item 9) At the 2nd meeting of the COP and the 5th meeting of the CMP, on 15 November, the President opened the joint high-level segment of the COP at its twelfth session and the CMP at its second session. Welcoming all present, the President reiterated that evidence showed that climate change was becoming one of the greatest challenges in the history of humankind with devastating economic, social and environmental impacts, particularly in vulnerable regions of the world such as Africa. Those impacts would further hamper Africa's ability to eradicate poverty and hunger and meet its Millennium Development Goals. It was truly unfortunate that countries such as Kenya, which had done little in the past to cause climate change, should have to bear the full brunt of its effects. However, with the continuing spirit of cooperation in the ongoing negotiations, he said he was optimistic that realistic, concrete actions for the present and the future are within reach. Considerable progress had already been made at the conference so far and there was an emerging consensus on several other important issues. Among the issues discussed, adaptation was critical to African countries. However, numerous constraints limited their capacity to adapt effectively. The conference had the potential to be a historic one, not only because it was the first of its kind in sub-Saharan Africa but also because the international community was close to operationalizing the Adaptation Fund and taking concrete action on adaptation. Nairobi could be the starting point for adaptation to be given the attention it required next to ongoing mitigation efforts. The conference could also provide a positive signal for the future of the CDM by taking action to encourage equitable and broader distribution of CDM projects. The President expressed his appreciation that delegates were ready to discuss issues which seemed to have been on the fringe, such as those pertaining to voluntary commitments, small island States and indigenous people. He further said that he was encouraged by the enthusiasm of youth delegates, who were intent on creatively engaging in climate change issues. In closing, he called upon Parties to pull together as an international community and take responsibility for past and present environmental misdeeds. Referring to a recent article by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President said that Parties at Nairobi would have to send a signal, in resolute and unmistakeable terms, that the world's political echelons take climate change seriously. Statement by the Secretary-General of the United Nations At the opening ceremony of the joint high-level segment of the COP and CMP, on 15 November, the Conference heard a message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan. The text of this message is reproduced in full in annex I. Statement by the President of Kenya Welcoming all participants and thanking the Secretary-General of the United Nations for joining the conference, the President of Kenya, Mr. Mwai Kibaki, said that Africa faced some of the severest effects of climate change. These would have a significant impact not only on the continent's ecosystems but also on its economic activities, particularly agriculture and tourism, which were major sources of income. Tackling climate change was not a matter of choice, but an imperative. The international community had to agree on the necessary solutions today and decide on their implementation. Stressing the need for global joint action, he urged all countries to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. For developing countries, tackling climate change was unlikely to succeed unless deliberate efforts were made to support their efforts in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Poor countries, particularly in Africa, needed support to invest in alternative ways of producing energy without increasing the amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere. That could be done by supporting African countries in energy conservation, creating new efficiency standards for vehicles and investing in clean energy that was renewable, low in carbon dioxide emissions and affordable. It was also important to ensure that information on climate change as well as technological and financial support was readily available to developing countries. There was an urgent need to work out the modalities and mechanisms of bringing these technologies to wider use. Furthermore, the Adaptation Fund should be finalized to facilitate access to financial resources for poor countries, and projects under the CDM needed to be promoted to ensure that developing countries could share in its benefits in a more equitable manner. Both the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol provided a good basis for multilateral action. Now was the time for meaningful action which would benefit present and future generations. Statements by heads of state or government Mr. Moritz Leuenberger, President of the Swiss Confederation, also made a statement at the opening of the high-level segment. The President highlighted the need to combine efforts to adapt to the effects of climate change with measures to prevent future global warming. In order to increase the availability of financial resources for these efforts, he proposed an international carbon tax on individuals and businesses, based on the "polluter pays" principle. Such a tax would serve the dual purpose of encouraging major emitters of greenhouse gases to reduce emissions and of providing sufficient and reliable resources to fund adaptation. Reminding Parties that climate change knows no borders, he called upon them to rise above differing economic and national interests and find a common approach to address the global challenge of climate change. The Executive Secretary said that the urgency to act on climate change was unquestionable. With the well-being of humankind at stake, it was unacceptable to see time being lost in the international climate change process. Referring to discussions on a future climate change regime, he suggested that the solution to the problem did not lie in limiting economic development or harming national competitiveness but in incentives for economies to grow along a greener path and the implementation of mechanisms to ensure that necessary resources were available. The international climate change process showed that it was possible to create a regime that encouraged action and achieved results in the areas important to developing countries. However, it required the right policy signals and the trust and full engagement of everyone. Cooperation on reducing emissions provided for a cost-effective solution that could "green" economic growth, facilitate technology transfer and generate funding for adaptation in developing countries. If half the emission reductions required by 2050 to effectively combat climate change were met through investment abroad, it could generate up to USD 100 billion per year in green investment flow to developing countries. That amounted to less than half of one per cent of the economic output of industrialized countries. Getting that to work would be a move towards a self-financing climate compact. UNFCCC and other United Nations agencies were committed to support Parties in that process, as was evidenced by the launch of the Nairobi Framework announced by the Secretary-General in his address to the conference. As Parties had chosen to address climate change within a United Nations context, the Executive Secretary expressed confidence that they were intent on finding a global solution that respected the interests of all Parties. Statements by ministers and other heads of delegation At the 3rd meeting of the COP and the 6th meeting of the CMP, on 15 November, and also at the two subsequent meetings of each body, national statements were made by 90 ministers and other heads of delegation. For the list of speakers, see annex III. Statements were made by the representatives of Bangladesh (on behalf of the least developed countries), Fiji (on behalf of the Pacific Forum Island States), Finland (speaking on behalf of the European Community and its members States), South Africa (speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the African Group) and Tuvalu (speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States). Statements by observer organizations (Agenda item 10) Statements by United Nations bodies and specialized agencies At the opening of the joint high-level segment of the COP and the CMP, on 15 November, statements were made by the Secretary-General of the World Meteorological Organization; the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme; the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Global Environment Facility; the Chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; a vice-president of the World Bank; the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification; and the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Statements by intergovernmental organizations At the 6th meeting of the COP and the 9th meeting of the CMP, statements were made by the Director of the International Institute of Refrigeration and the Acting Secretary General of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. Statements by non-governmental organizations At the 6th meeting of the COP and the 9th meeting of the CMP, statements were made by representatives of the World Council of Churches; the International Chamber of Commerce (on behalf of the business and industry organizations); the SAGE Centre (on behalf of CAN International); the General Secretary of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions African Region (on behalf of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions); the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (on behalf of the local governments and municipal authorities); the International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (on behalf of the research and independent non-governmental organizations); Climate Network Africa (on behalf of the local non-governmental organizations); LIFE e.V. (on behalf of the women's caucus on gender perspectives on climate change present at COP 12 and CMP 2); the International Alliance of Tribal Peoples of the Tropical Forests (on behalf of the indigenous peoples organizations); the World Business Council for Sustainable Development; Practical Action (on behalf of CAN International); and representatives of youth organizations. Other matters (Agenda item 11) There were no other matters considered by the COP under this agenda item. Conclusion of the session (Agenda item 12) Adoption of the report of the Conference of the Parties on its twelfth session (Agenda item 12 (a)) At its 7th meeting, on 17 November, the COP considered the draft report on its twelfth session and adopted the text, authorizing the Rapporteur to complete the report, under the guidance of the President and with the assistance of the secretariat. Expression of gratitude to the host country At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, a representative of Switzerland introduced a draft resolution entitled "Expression of gratitude to the Government of Kenya and the people of the city of Nairobi". At the same meeting, the COP adopted resolution 1/CP.12 by acclamation (FCCC/CP/2006/5/Add.1). Closure of the session (Agenda item 12 (b)) At the 7th meeting, on 17 November, a number of Parties made statements paying tribute to the work of the President and to the chairs and co-chairs of the different groups and subsidiary bodies. The President then declared the twelfth session of the COP closed. Annex I I thank the Government and people of Kenya for hosting this international conference. You have warmly welcomed thousands of people into your midst, and created excellent conditions for the crucially important work on our agenda. Thank you for yet another strong show of support for the United Nations. All of us in this hall are devoted to the betterment of the human condition. All of us want to see a day when everyone, not just a fortunate few, can live in dignity and look to the future with hope. All of us want to create a world of harmony among human beings, and between them and the natural environment on which life depends. That vision, which has always faced long odds, is now being placed in deeper jeopardy by climate change. Even the gains registered in recent years risk being undone. Climate change is not just an environmental issue, as too many people still believe. It is an all-encompassing threat. It is a threat to health, since a warmer world is one in which infectious diseases such as malaria and yellow fever will spread further and faster. It could imperil the world's food supply, as rising temperatures and prolonged drought render fertile areas unfit for grazing or crops. It could endanger the very ground on which nearly half the world's population live - coastal cities such as Lagos or Cape Town, which face inundation from sea levels rising as a result of melting icecaps and glaciers. All this and more lies ahead. Billion-dollar weather-related calamities. The destruction of vital ecosystems such as forests and coral reefs. Water supplies disappearing or tainted by saltwater intrusion. Climate change is also a threat to peace and security. Changing patterns of rainfall, for example, can heighten competition for resources, setting in motion potentially destabilizing tensions and migrations, especially in fragile States or volatile regions. There is evidence that some of this is already occurring; more could well be in the offing. This is not science fiction. These are plausible scenarios, based on clear and rigorous scientific modelling. A few diehard sceptics continue to deny "global warming" is taking place and try to sow doubt. They should be seen for what they are: out of step, out of arguments and out of time. In fact, the scientific consensus is becoming not only more complete, but also more alarming. Many scientists long known for their caution are now saying that global warming trends are perilously close to a point of no return. A similar shift may also be taking place among economists. Earlier this month, a study by the former chief economist of the World Bank, Sir Nicholas Stern of the United Kingdom, called climate change "the greatest and widest-ranging market failure ever seen". He warned that climate change could shrink the global economy by 20 per cent, and cause economic and social disruption on a par with the two World Wars and the Great Depression. The good news is that there is much we can do in response. We have started using fossil fuels more cleanly and efficiently. Renewable energy is increasingly available at competitive prices. With more research and development - current levels are woefully, dangerously low - we could be much farther along. Spurred by the Kyoto Protocol, international carbon finance flows to developing countries could reach $100 billion per year. Markets for low-carbon energy products are expected to grow dramatically. But we need more "green" approaches to meet surging energy demand. And we need to put the right incentives in place to complement the constraint-based efforts that have prevailed to date. The climate challenge offers real opportunities to advance development and place our societies on a more sustainable path. Low emissions need not mean low growth, or stifling a country's development aspirations. So let there be no more denial. Let no one say we cannot afford to act. It is increasingly clear that it will cost far less to cut emissions now than to deal with the consequences later. And let there be no more talk of waiting until we know more. We know already that an economy based on high emissions is an uncontrolled experiment on the global climate. But even as we seek to cut emissions, we must at the same time do far more to adapt to global warming and its effects. The impact of climate change will fall disproportionately on the world's poorest countries, many of them here in Africa. Poor people already live on the front lines of pollution, disaster and the degradation of resources and land. Their livelihoods and sustenance depend directly on agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Think, for example, of the women and girls forced to forage for fuel and water in the absence of basic energy services. Or of the innumerable African communities that have suffered climate-related disasters in recent years. The floods of Mozambique, the droughts in the Sahel and here in Kenya, are fresh in our memories. For them, adaptation is a matter of sheer survival. We must make it a higher priority to integrate the risks posed by climate change into strategies and programmes aimed at achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The message is clear. Global climate change must take its place alongside those threats - conflict, poverty, the proliferation of deadly weapons - that have traditionally monopolized first-order political attention. And the United Nations offers the tools the world needs to respond. Regional and national initiatives have their value. But the UN Framework Convention is the forum in which a truly global response is being formulated. The Kyoto Protocol is now fully operational, and its Clean Development Mechanism has become a multibillion-dollar source of funding for sustainable development. This mechanism is an outstanding example of a UN-led partnership linking government action to the private sector in the developing world. I am pleased to announce that six UN agencies have launched, at this conference, the "Nairobi Framework", a plan to support developing countries, especially in Africa, participate in the Clean Development Mechanism. I encourage donor countries to help make these efforts a success. I am also pleased to note that today, UNDP and UNEP are embarking on an initiative to help developing countries, again including in Africa, to factor climate change into national development plans - so-called "climate proofing" in areas such as infrastructure. UN agencies will continue to bring their expertise to bear. But the primary responsibility for action rests with individual States - and for now, that means those that have been largely responsible for the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. They must do much more to bring their emissions down. While the Kyoto Protocol is a crucial step forward, that step is far too small. And as we consider how to go further still, there remains a frightening lack of leadership. In developing countries, meanwhile, emissions cannot continue to grow uncontrolled. Many of them have taken impressive action on climate change. Rapidly growing economies, like China, have been increasingly successful in decoupling economic growth from energy use, thereby reducing the emission intensities of their economies. But more needs to be done. Business, too, can do its part. Changes in corporate behaviour, and in the way private investment is directed, will prove at least as significant in winning the climate battle as direct Government action. And individuals too have roles to play. A single energy-efficient light bulb placed in a kitchen socket may not seem like much; but multiplied by millions, the savings are impressive. Voting power could be similarly compelling, if people were to make action on climate change more of an election issue than it is today and individuals, through their purchasing choices, can put pressure on corporations to go green. There is still time for all our societies to change course. Instead of being economically defensive, let us start being more politically courageous. The Nairobi Conference must send a clear, credible signal that the world's political leaders take climate change seriously. The question is not whether climate change is happening or not, but whether, in the face of this emergency, we ourselves can change fast enough. Annex II Parties to the Convention, observer States, and United Nations organizations attending the twelfth session of the Conference of the Parties Parties to the Convention Albania Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia European Community Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Monaco Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Observer States Holy See Iraq Somalia United Nation bodies and programmes United Nations United Nations Children's Fund United Nations Conference on Trade and Development United Nations Development Programme United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) United Nations Human Settlements Programme United Nations Forum on Forests United Nations Institute for Training and Research United Nations University UN/International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLA) Convention secretariats Convention on Biological Diversity United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and its Montreal Protocol Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol Specialized agencies and institutions of the United Nations system Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization International Civil Aviation Organization International Maritime Organization World Health Organization World Bank/International Finance Corporation World Meteorological Organization (WMO) United Nations Industrial Development Organization WMO/UNEP Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Global Environment Facility Related organization of the United Nations system International Atomic Energy Agency World Trade Organization List of representatives who made statements at the high-level segment under agenda item 9 of the Conference of the Parties and agenda item 19 of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol [ENGLISH/FRENCH/SPANISH ONLY] S.E. Sra. Romina Picolotti Secretaría de Ambiente y Desarrollo Sustentable de La Nacíon (SAYDS) H.E. Mr. Ian G. Campbell Minister for the Environment and Heritage Bangladesh (speaking on behalf of the Least Developed countries) Mr. Md. Hyder Ali Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests Mr. Aleksander N. Apatsky First Deputy Minister of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection H.E. Mr. Bruno Tobback Minister for the Environment Mr. Dasho Nado Rinchhen Deputy Minister, National Environment Commission Sra Ximena Paredes Directora de Planificación Ambiental Ministerio de Planificación del Desarrollo Mr. Luis Manoel Rebelo Fernandes Vice-Minister Ministry of Science and Technology H.E. Mr. Laurent Sedogo Minister of Environment and Living Framework S.E. M. Odette Kayitesi Ministre de l'Aménagement du Territoire, du Tourisme et de l'Environnement H.E. Ms. Rona Ambrose Minister of the Environment Mme Jacqueline Madozein Directeur de Cabinet du Ministre des Eaux, Forêts, Chasse et Pêche, chargé de l'Environnement (MEFCPE) H.E. Mr. Rodrigo Gaeta Ambassador of Chile to Kenya H.E. Mr. Weixin Jiang Minister Vice-Chairman, National Development and Reform Commission Congo (Republic of) H. E. Mr. Henri Djombo Ministre de l'Économie Forestière et de l'Environnement Mr. Paulo C. Manso Director del Instituto Meteorológico Nacional, punto focal ante la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas para el Cambio Climático Mr. Nikola Ružinski State Secretary of Environmental Protection, Physical Planning and Construction S.E. Sr. Julio César González Marchante Embajador de la República de Cuba ante Kenya y UNEP H.E. Mr. Petr J. Kalaš S.E. M. Elias Mulungula Hobigera Nalwindi Ministre de l'Environnement, Conservation de la Nature, Eaux et Forêts H.E. Ms. Connie Hedegaard Minister for the Environment and Nordic Cooperation S.E. Sr. Maximiliano Puig Miller Secretary of State, Secretariat of Environment and Natural Resources Mr. Roberto Urquizo Undersecretary for Environment Quality Ministry of Environment Mr. Mohamed Sayed Khalil Deputy Minister, Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) H.E. Mr. Stavros Dimas Commissioner for the Environment Fiji (speaking on behalf of the Pacific Forum Island States) H.E. Mr. Poseci Bune, Minister of Environment Finland (speaking on behalf of the European Union) H.E. Mr. Jan-Erik Enestam S.E. Mme Nelly Olin Ministre de l'écologie et du développement durable S.E. Mme Georgette G. K. Koko Vice Premier Ministre, Ministre de l'Environnement et de la protection de la nature, de la recherche et de la technologie H.E. Mr. Edward Singhatey Secretary of State Department of State for Forestry and the Environment H.E. Mr. Sigmar Gabriel Federal Minister for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety Mr. Abraham Dwuma Odoom Deputy Minister, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Environment Ms. Kadiatou N'Diaye Secrétaire Générale, Ministère de l'Environnement H.E. Ms. Jónína Bjartmarz H.E. Mr. Namo Narain Meena Minister of State for Environment and Forests Ms. Masnellyarti Hilman Deputy Minister for Nature Conservation Enhancement and Environmental Degradation Control H.E. Ms. Fatemeh Vaez Javadi Vice President and Head Department of the Environment H.E. Mr. Dick Roche Minister for Environment, Heritage and Local Government H.E. Mr. Alfonso Pecoraro Scanio Minister for the Environment, Land and Sea H.E. Mr. Dean Peart Minister of Local Government and Environment H.E. Mr. Masatoshi Wakabayashi Mr. Faris Al-Junaidi Secretary-General H.E. Mr. Nurlan A. Iskakov Minister of Environment Protection H.E. Mr. John Koech Minister for East African Cooperation Mr. Rikiaua Takeke Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Lands and Agriculture Development Mr. Mohamed Etayari Scientific Relations and Cooperation Manager Libyan Petroleum Institute H.E. Mr. Lucien Lux Mme Jacqueline Rakotoarisoa Directeur Géneral, Ministère de l'Environnement, des eaux et forêts H.E. Mr. Henry F. Chimunthu Banda Minister of Energy, Mines and Natural Resources Mr. Dato' S. Sothinathan Deputy Minister of Natural Resources and Environment Mr. Abdullahi Majeed Deputy Minister, Ministry of Environment, Energy and Water Mr. Hamoud Ould Sid Ahmed Director of Regulation and International Conventions State Secretariat of Environment Mr. Jose Ramon Ardavin Deputy Minister for Environmental Management Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Mr. Dagvadory Damdin Director of Information and Monitoring Department, Ministry of Nature and Environment Mr. Mohamed Ameur General Secretary, Ministry of Territorial Planning, Water and Environment H.E. Mr. Willem Konjore Minister of Environment and Tourism Mr. Bal K. Prasai Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology H.E. Mr. Pieter van Geel State Secretary of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment H.E. Mr. David Parker Minister Responsible for Climate Change Issues Mr. Pokotoa Sipeli Associate Minister for Meteorology and Climate Change H.E. Ms. Helen Bjørnøy H.E. Mr. Makhdoom Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat Minister for Environment Mr. Manuel Ernesto Bernales Alvarado President, National Environmental Council (CONAM) Ms. Armi Jane Borje Undersecretary for Legal Department of Environment and Natural Resources H.E. Mr. Jan Szyszko Mr. Humberto Rosa Secretary of State for Environment, Spatial Planning and Regional Development H.E. Mr. Chi-Beom Lee Mr. Attila Korodi State Secretary of Environment Ministry of Environment and Water Management H.E. Mr. Alexander Bedritsky Head, Russian Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (ROSHYDROMET) H.E. Ms. Patricia Mugorenejo Hajabakiga Minister of State of Lands, Environment, Forestry, Water and Mines H.E. Mr. Ali I. Al-Naimi Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources H.E. Mr. Ronald J. Jumeau Minister for Environment and Natural Resources H.E. Mr. Ibrahim Yaacob Minister for the Environment and Water Resources South Africa (speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the African group) H.E. Mr. Marthinus Van Schalkwyk Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism S.E. Sra. Cristina Narbona Mr. Saadeldin Ibrahim Izzeldin Deputy Minister for Environment and Natural Resources H.E. Mr. Andreas Carlgren Mr. Kitti Limsakul Advisor and Member of the National Climate Change Committee National Environment Board S.E. M. Issifou Okoulou-Kantchati Ministre de l'Environnement et des resources forestières H.E. Mr. Osman Pepe Minister of Environment and Forestry Tuvalu (speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States) H.E. Mr. Tavau Teii Minister of Natural Resources and Environment H.E. Ms. Jessica Eriyo Minister of Water and Environment Mr. Sviatoslav Serhiyovych Kurulenko First Deputy Minister, Ministry of Environmental Protection H.E. Mr. Mohamed Saeed Al-Kendi Minister of Environment and Water United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland H.E. Mr. David Miliband Secretary of State, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) H.E. Mr. Mark James Mwandosya Minister of State for Environment H.E. Ms. Paula Dobriansky Under Secretary for Democracy and Global Affairs H. E. Ms. María Jacqueline Mendoza Ambassador/Permanent Representative to Kenya and to the United Nations Environment Programme H.E. Mr. Kabinga J. Pande Minister of Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources Ms. Margaret Sangarwe Permanent Secretary Ministry of Environment and Tourism Calendar of meetings of Convention bodies, 2007 - 2011 The Conference of the Parties at its twelfth session adopted the dates for the 2011 sessional periods. The Calendar of meetings of Convention bodies for 2007 - 2011 is reproduced below for ease of reference. First sessional period in 2007: 7 - 18 May Second sessional period in 2007: 3 - 14 December First sessional period in 2008: 2 - 13 June Second sessional period in 2008: 1 - 12 December First sessional period in 2009: 1 - 12 June Second sessional period in 2009: 30 November to 11 December First sessional period in 2010: 31 May to 11 June Second sessional period in 2010: 8 - 19 November First sessional period in 2011: 6 - 17 June Second sessional period in 2011: 28 November to 9 December Documents before the Conference of the Parties at its twelfth session FCCC/CP/2006/1 and Add.1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/CP/2006/2 Admission of observers: intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. Note by the secretariat FCCC/CP/2006/3 and Corr.1 Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties. Note by the secretariat FCCC/CP/2006/4 FCCC/KP/CMP/2006/8 Report on credentials. Report of the Bureau FCCC/CP/2006/INF.1 and Corr.1 List of participants FCCC/CP/2006/MISC.1 Provisional list of participants FCCC/CP/2006/L.1 Draft report of the Conference of the Parties on its twelfth session FCCC/CP/2006/L.1/Add.1 FCCC/KP/CMP/2006/L.1/Add.1 Draft report of the Conference of the Parties on its twelfth session. Draft report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its second session. Addendum FCCC/CP/2006/L.2 Information on the base year of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Draft conclusions proposed by the President FCCC/CP/2006/L.3 FCCC/KP/CMP/2006/L.5 Expression of gratitude to the Government of Kenya and the people of the city of Nairobi. Draft resolution submitted by Switzerland FCCC/CP/2006/L.4 Financial mechanism of the Convention. Proposal by the President FCCC/CP/2006/L.5 Date and venue of the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties and the calendar of meetings of Convention bodies. Proposal by the President FCCC/SBSTA/2006/5 and Add.1 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-fourth session, held at Bonn from 18 to 26 May 2006 FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.18 Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-fifth session FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.19/Add.1 Continuation of activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.20/Add.1 Issues relating to greenhouse gas inventories. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.24 In-session workshop on carbon dioxide capture and storage. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.27 and Add.1 Development and transfer of technologies. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/11 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its twenty-fourth session, held at Bonn from 18 to 25 May 2006 FCCC/SBI/2006/L.19 Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its twenty-fifth session FCCC/SBI/2006/L.23 Matters relating to the least developed countries. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.24 Provision of financial and technical support. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.25 Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.26 Article 6 of the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.30 Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.20 Level of emissions for the base year of Croatia. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.21/Add.1 Administrative, financial and institutional matters. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum FCCC/SBI/2006/L.32/Add.1 Third review of the financial mechanism. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum FCCC/SBI/2006/L.33 Special Climate Change Fund. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBI/2006/L.35/Add.1 Capacity-building under the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair. Addendum 