%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|GROUPS OF EXPERTS|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2007/10/Add.1 23 March 2007 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION Twenty-sixth session Bonn, 7 - 18 May 2007 Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Report on the activities of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Note by the Chair of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Addendum Outcomes of the stocktaking exercise for the period 2003 to 2007 Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes I. Development of the mandates and activities of the Consultative Group of Experts 12 II. Historical submission of initial national communications (INCs) and projected submissions of second national communications (SNCs) 13 Introduction Mandate The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its twenty-fourth session, requested the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) to take stock of the implementation of its work programme 2003 - 2007 and to identify possible elements of a future role for the group in facilitating the improvement of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (nonAnnex I Parties) and to report to the SBI at its twenty-sixth session (FCCC/SBI/2006/11, para. 28). Scope of the note This report provides an overview of the work programme of the CGE for 2003 - 2007. It takes stock of the achievements of the group to date and presents some insights gained and lessons learned in implementing the work programme in relation to the objective of improving the process of preparation of the second and subsequent national communications, and in providing technical advice and support to non-Annex I Parties that have yet to submit their initial national communications. Possible action by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation The SBI may wish to consider the recommendations contained in this report in its deliberation on the future work of the CGE to support non-Annex I Parties in improving the process of preparing national communications. Work programme of the Consultative Group of Experts for 2003 - 2007 Background The CGE, at its first meeting as a reconstituted body, discussed and formulated its work programme for 2003 - 2007 based on the new mandate provided by the Conference of the Parties (COP) in its decision 3/CP.8. The group agreed that the necessary first step in developing its new work programme was to take stock on how its recommendations (work programme for 2000 - 2002) have been implemented by, for example, the Parties to the Convention, as well as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the National Communications Support Programme (NCSP) of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The CGE prepared its work programme for 2003 - 2007 (FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.17, annex II) in accordance with its mandate as contained in decision 3/CP.8, annex, paragraph 9. To facilitate its work, the group set up the following thematic groups: national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories; vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessments; mitigation; and cross-cutting issues, which include research and systematic observation, technology transfer, capacity-building, education, training and public awareness, information and networking and financial and technical support. Overall, the activities outlined in its work programme enabled the CGE: To provide technical advice to the SBI through the preparation of technical reports including on the examination of initial national communications; To provide advice and technical support to Parties through the organization of handson training workshops; To cooperate with other expert groups under the Convention and with the NCSP. Provision of technical advice to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation In providing technical advice to the SBI, the CGE prepared several reports, as presented in table 1. The CGE also identified and assessed technical problems and constraints that have affected the preparation of initial national communications by non-Annex I Parties and difficulties encountered by Parties in using the guidelines and methodologies for preparing national communications, and made recommendations to the SBI on ways to improve these guidelines and methodologies. Table 1. Summary of technical reports prepared for the Subsidiary Body for Implementation by the Consultative Group of Experts Report Status First meeting of the reconstituted Consultative Group of Experts (CGE), Mexico City, Mexico, 23 - 24 September 2003 decision 3/CP.8 FCCC/SBI/2003/INF.17 Second meeting of the CGE, Manila, Philippines, 3 - 4 May 2004 FCCC/SBI/2004/INF.5 Third meeting of the CGE, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2 - 3 December 2004 FCCC/SBI/2005/7 CGE hands-on training workshop on national greenhouse gas inventories for the Latin America and the Caribbean region, Panama City, Panama, 25 - 29 October 2004 FCCC/SBI/2004/10, paragraph 23 CGE hands-on training workshop on national greenhouse gas inventories for the Asia region, Shanghai, China, 8 - 12 February 2005 FCCC/SBI/2004/19, paragraph 27 Fourth meeting of the CGE, Maputo, Mozambique, 14 - 15 April 2005 FCCC/SBI/2005/22 CGE hands-on training workshop on vulnerability and adaptation assessments for the Africa region, Maputo, Mozambique, 18 - 22 April 2005 FCCC/SBI/2004/19, paragraph 31 CGE global workshop on mitigation assessments, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 26 - 30 September 2005 Fifth meeting of the CGE, Montreal, Canada, 24 - 25 November 2005 FCCC/SBI/2006/8 Sixth meeting of the CGE, Jakarta, Indonesia, 17 - 18 March 2006 CGE hands-on training workshop on vulnerability and adaptation assessments for the Asia and the Pacific region, Jakarta, Indonesia, 20 - 24 March 2006 FCCC/SBI/2005/23, paragraph 32 CGE hands-on training workshop on vulnerability and adaptation assessments for the Latin America and the Caribbean region, Asuncion, Paraguay, 14 - 18 August 2006 FCCC/SBI/2006/25 CGE hands-on training workshop on national greenhouse gas inventories for the Africa region, Pretoria, South Africa, 18 - 22 September 2006 FCCC/SBI/2006/11, paragraph 29 Seventh meeting of the CGE, Pretoria, South Africa, 25 - 26 September 2006 Eighth meeting of the CGE, Belize City, Belize, 1 - 3 March 2007 FCCC/SBI/2007/10 Ways to improve access to financial and technical support to prepare second and subsequent national communications FCCC/SBI/2005/23, paragraph 30 FCCC/SBI/2006/24 Outcomes of the examination of initial national communications from non-Annex I Parties paragraph 31 FCCC/SBI/2006/4 Template on cross-cutting themes in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/SBI/2006/11, paragraph 27 FCCC/SBI/2007/3 Cost-effective and comprehensive training strategy to support the preparation of national communications FCCC/SBI/2007/6 Ways to improve the reporting of projects identified in national communications from non-Annex I Parties paragraph 29 FCCC/SBI/2007/7 Integration of information contained in national adaptation programmes of action into second and subsequent national communications paragraph 26 To be reported at SBI 27 Examination of initial national communications submitted to the secretariat from 2 April 2005 paragraph 25 Provision of technical assistance to non-Annex I Parties, upon request in identifying tools and methods needed in the preparation of national communications, which are applicable to their particular circumstances At SBI 24, the CGE reported on the outcome of the examination of 41 initial national communications submitted to the secretariat between May 2002 and April 2005 (FCCC/SBI/2006/4). In preparing the report, the CGE thematic groups identified the technical constraints encountered by nonAnnex I Parties in preparing their initial national communications and provided recommendations on how to address the constraints. As an outcome of the regional hands-on training workshops on V&A assessments, the CGE received requests from non-Annex I Parties for technical advice on methodologies and tools needed that are applicable to particular circumstances such as the bottom-up approach to V&A assessments. In particular, at its twentyfourth and twentyfifth sessions, the SBI requested the CGE to assist non-Annex I Parties in identifying these tools and to provide information on their availability. To this end, the CGE is to conduct, before SBI 27, a workshop on exchange of experiences and good practices among non-Annex I Parties in preparing national communications and on cross-cutting issues. Provision of advice and technical support to Parties The CGE work programme for the period 2003 - 2007 emphasised the importance of regional hands-on training workshops as a means to provide technical support to non-Annex I Parties. Accordingly, the group organized six regional workshops on V&A assessments and national GHG inventories, and one global workshop on mitigation assessments, involving 325 experts from 125 nonAnnex I Parties. Training materials on GHG inventories, V&A assessments and mitigation were developed to support the workshops. These materials provided the participants with an overview of the guidelines for preparing their national communications and the various applications of relevant tools and methodologies available. In order to improve the training materials, the CGE requested input from other expert groups, as well as feedback from participants of each workshop. As a result, the CGE modified the training materials based on, inter alia, the following recommendations: Include climate risk assessments and both top-down and bottom-up approaches (which involve the local community, and applied science and indigenous knowledge) in vulnerability assessments; Update the GHG inventory software to make it more user-friendly; Include tools for institutional assessments and technology needs assessments (TNAs) in mitigation assessments. The CGE has played an important role throughout the development and implementation of the training workshops, including providing guidance on the development of the training materials. CGE members have made presentations on the UNFCCC guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties and have served as chairs and rapporteurs in several of the workshops. Cooperation with other expert groups under the Convention and with the National Communications Support Programme In keeping with its mandate, the CGE fostered effective cooperation with other organizations and expert groups under the Convention to ensure the implementation of its work programme. A synopsis of the steps taken by the CGE in this regard is presented in tables 2 and 3. Timeframe Actions and outcome June 2004 - March 2005 Invited other expert groups to comment on training materials on greenhouse gas inventories (GHG). The Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) briefed the members of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT), at its meeting in December 2004 in Buenos Aires, about the activities of the CGE. April 2005 - September 2005 The Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) provided comments on the CGE training materials on vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessments. CGE members participated in the seminar on the development and transfer of technologies for climate change held in Tobago, Trinidad and Tobago, from 14 - 16 June 2005. September 2005 - April 2006 The CGE cooperated with the EGTT and the LEG in determining how results of technology needs assessments could feed into the national communications. The Chair of the CGE met with chairs of the LEG and the EGTT at SBI 24 to discuss the planned joint workshop of the expert groups to exchange technical information on V&A. April 2006 - November 2006 The EGTT and LEG provided comments to the draft template on cross-cutting themes in the national communications. The CGE agreed that exchange of information with the EGTT will be strengthened through active participation in the workshops organized by the expert groups. The Chairs of the CGE and LEG met at COP 12 to discuss the preparation of a joint report at SBI 27 on how to integrate information contained in national adaptation programmes of action into national communications. Table 3. Overview of cooperation between the Consultative Group of Experts and the National Communications Support Programme June 2004 - March 2005 The National Communications Support Programme (NCSP) Advisory Committee met in Bonn to address ways to enhance cooperation, such as exchange of training materials and making the Chair of the CGE an ex-officio member of the Advisory Committee. The NCSP briefed the CGE on the status of its activities including workshops and the development of a web-based adaptation tool. The NCSP invited the CGE to provide comments on managing the greenhouse gas inventory process. The NCSP presented an overview of its work programme at the global hands-on training workshop on mitigation assessments. The NCSP provided a trainer for the climate change and socio-economic models at the CGE workshop on vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessments for the Asia and the Pacific region. The secretariat developed a matrix of CGE and NCSP activities that included time frames and indications of who will be responsible in implementing the activities. October 2006 The CGE discussed the roles of the CGE and NCSP to ensure consistency and effectiveness in the delivery of technical support to Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. The NCSP provided a trainer on developing adaptation projects at the CGE workshop on V&A assessments for the Latin America and Caribbean region. Status of cooperation with other expert groups under the Convention Regular meetings were convened by the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies to facilitate collaboration among expert groups established under the Convention on their work programmes. In addition, the Chair of the CGE met bilaterally with chairs of other expert groups to discuss the implementation of specific mandates from Parties that were relevant to the work conducted by the CGE. The members of the CGE, who were also members of other experts groups, reported on the outcomes of the activities and workshops of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) and the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT). The CGE continued to cooperate with other expert groups through: Participation of its members in workshops organized by other expert groups to provide technical information and insights relating to national communications; Preparation of technical papers on how to integrate information contained in NAPAs and results of TNAs in the second national communications; Cooperation with the LEG and the EGTT on specific issues including the preparation of a template on cross-cutting themes (transfer of technologies, research and systematic observation, capacity-building, education, training and public awareness, and information and networking); Input to TNAs prepared by the EGTT, and input to the secretariat on the preparation of the synthesis report under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, as these relate to the information that Parties may include in their national communications. Status of cooperation with the National Communications Support Programme The CGE collaborated with the NCSP in many ways, including: The conduct of joint training workshops on national communications; Involvement in the development of the NCSP work programme. The Chair of the CGE served as an ex-officio member on the Advisory Committee of the NCSP to enhance cooperation between the CGE and the NCSP. A representative of the NCSP also served as a member of the CGE. The NCSP and CGE identified as a priority area the continued provision by the NCSP of indepth training on specific methods and techniques, provided through the organization of additional thematic workshops. To respond to this priority need, the NCSP organized the hands-on training course on the use of the longrange energy alternative planning model for mitigation studies in Cairo, Egypt, from 3 - 7 April 2006. In addition, at the request of the Eastern Europe and Commonwealth of Independent States countries, the NCSP organized a training workshop on V&A assessments in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, on 17 - 19 October 2006. This workshop addressed issues relating to mainstreaming adaptation into national development plans. Furthermore, following the recommendations by the CGE to improve the preparation of national communications relating to national GHG inventories (FCCC/SBI/2006/4), the NCSP is preparing a document on developing and managing national GHG inventories. Status of cooperation with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change The CGE has maintained close links with the IPCC, particularly in the field of preparation of national GHG inventories where the CGE has been regularly informed of developments in the work of the IPCC on methodologies. At the same time, the IPCC GHG inventory programme, through its participation in CGE work, took into account the needs and difficulties of non-Annex I Parties in inventory preparation. For example, the UNFCCC GHG inventory software, which is widely used by non-Annex I Parties, including at the CGE regional hands-on training workshops, was developed by updating and expanding the 1997 IPCC GHG inventory software. The IPCC has also contributed expertise to the CGE regional hands-on training workshops on GHG inventories. Achievements of the Consultative Group of Experts for 2003 - 2007 Implementation of the work programme Overall, the CGE is seen to have been successful in the implementation of its work programme for the period 2003 - 2007 with respect to: Providing technical advice to the SBI through the preparation of technical reports including on the examination of initial national communications; Providing advice and technical support to Parties through the organization of hands-on training workshops; Cooperating with other expert groups under the Convention and with the NCSP; Conducting activities in response to guidance from the SBI. The CGE has successfully implemented its activities outlined in its work programme for 2003 - 2007, including the provision of technical support to Parties, the completion of the hands-on training workshops on GHG inventories, V&A assessments and mitigation assessments, through the financial and technical support provided by Parties and international organizations. The workshops were effective in building the capacities of national experts to improve the preparation of second and subsequent national communications by using various tools and methodologies introduced at the workshops. They also provided opportunities for experts to exchange information and experience regarding national communications. The CGE also continued to strengthen its cooperation with the other expert groups under the Convention, as well as with the NCSP and the IPCC through exchange of information and training materials, and has prepared a series of technical reports pertaining to financial and technical resources and the examination of national communications. In addition, as technical guidance to Parties in preparing their national communications, the CGE completed a template for crosscutting themes, as well as a manual for using the guidelines for preparing national communications. A comprehensive training strategy was prepared to guide and strengthen future training initiatives for non-Annex I Parties. The CGE recognized that Parties have also contributed directly to work on national communications at the country level. It noted that financial contributions from Parties were vital for the CGE to achieve its work programme for 2003 - 2007. It is highly appreciative of this support and recognizes that any future mandate of the CGE should have the endorsement of and continued support from Parties to carry out the activities entrusted to the group. Annex I presents a summary of the CGE mandated activities since the establishment of the group in 1999, and shows how the role of the CGE in supporting the process of national communications from non-Annex I Parties has been strengthened. Lessons learned and observations While the merits of training strategies to date are clearly acknowledged and significant progress has been made towards improving the training sessions offered, feedback from the workshops indicates that the future training agenda should include: Revision of current CGE training materials to include more case studies, taking into account national and/or regional circumstances; Further development of existing training packages on mitigation and V&A to incorporate socio-economic aspects of climate change. This may require greater involvement of social scientists and economists; Effective use of and synergies with other similar training initiatives. The CGE has benefited greatly from the experience and technical strengths of experts, primarily from non-Annex I Parties. This has been of vital importance for the group in conducting its work, and consideration should be given to this point in any future mandate. The CGE also recognized that its cooperation with the NCSP enhanced the technical support provided to non-Annex I Parties in preparing their national communications. This cooperation resulted in the NSCP undertaking many initiatives to ensure that the more than 100 non-Annex I Parties that are preparing their second national communications will have access to appropriate technical tools and methodologies for elaborating specific areas in the national communications. While much work has been carried out by the CGE in the areas of its mandate (decision 3/CP.8, annex, para. 9), it was observed that in providing technical advice to the SBI on matters relating to the implementation of the Convention by non-Annex I Parties (decision 3/CP.8, annex, para. 9(f)), a future group may benefit from receiving further guidance from the SBI in this regard. The CGE, in examining initial national communications, observed that the cycle for the submission of the reports spanned approximately 10 years (see annex II). The group recommends that action be taken to reduce the cycle of submission of national communications. The CGE also observed that resources to support its work have been reduced. Any future mandate of the CGE should ensure that adequate resources are made available for the implementation of activities or tasks assigned to the group. The CGE, in examining information on V&A assessments contained in national communications, identified a range of adaptation actions, measures and strategies to address the adverse impacts of climate change. With this information, the group can make a valuable contribution to the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. In examining national communications, the CGE also noted that the policy relevance of issues contained in initial national communications is an area that needs to be strengthened in the future. To this end, the CGE will be conducting a workshop on exchange of experiences and good practices among non-Annex I Parties in preparing national communications and on cross-cutting issues before SBI 27. While this workshop represents an initial response by the CGE to the policy analysis of national communications, the group underlines the need to provide support to non-Annex I Parties for mainstreaming climate change into national sustainable development planning, and for building capacity to ensure continuity of work on national communications in the future. The CGE, in its collaboration with the LEG on providing advice to the SBI on how to integrate information contained in the NAPAs into the national communications, believes that further work is needed in this area to ensure that NAPAs become fully integrated into the national communications. Elements of a possible future role of the Consultative Group of Experts It is envisioned that, should the mandate of the CGE be renewed and/or redefined, the group would continue to play a leading role in improving the process of preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties. In pursuing any possible future mandate, the CGE, without duplication of efforts, would make use of resources and outputs by other relevant international organizations and programmes such as the UNFCCC, NCSP and IPCC. The CGE identified the following elements that could shape its future role taking into account and drawing upon its existing mandate on insights gained from implementing its work programme 2003 - 2007, and subject to the availability of resources: Identification and assessment of technical problems and constraints that adversely affect the preparation by non-Annex I Parties of their national communications and make recommendations to address them; Identification and assessment of difficulties encountered by non-Annex I Parties in the use of the guidelines and methodologies for preparation of their national communications and make recommendations for their improvement, as necessary; Examination of national communications prepared in accordance with the guidelines annexed to decision 17/CP.8, with additional assistance of the secretariat and/or other appropriate means, with a view to making appropriate recommendations aimed at improving the quality and consistency of information to be provided in the future national communications; Provision of guidance on elaborating the scope of work required to analyse socioeconomic implications of V&A and mitigation, as well as the integration of climate change issues into national development policy and planning processes; Provision of technical advice and support, including through workshops and the development of good practice materials in areas such as national GHG inventories, V&A, mitigation and on their socio-economic implications; the integration of climate change issues into national development policy and planning processes; and training on use of the guidelines for preparing national communications; Provision of technical advice and support on the development and implementation of systems for facilitating the regularization and institutionalization of the national communications process; Provision of technical advice and support for dissemination and outreach of the national communications; Review existing activities and programmes, including those of multilateral and bilateral funding sources, to facilitate and support the preparation of national communications by non-Annex I Parties, and report on its findings; Preparation of technical advice to the SBI on matters relating to the implementation of the Convention by non-Annex I Parties, as appropriate. Annex I Development of the mandates and activities of the Consultative Group of Experts Annex II Historical submission of initial national communications (INCs) and projected1 submissions of second national communications (SNCs) 