%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2007/22 4 October 2007 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION Twenty-seventh session Bali, 3 - 11 December 2007 Item 6 of the provisional agenda Article 6 of the Convention Review of the implementation of the New Delhi work programme on Note by the secretariat Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes Status of implementation of activities suggested in the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention 17 Countries and organizations with designated focal points for Article 6 of the Convention 18 Introduction Mandate The Conference of the Parties (COP), by its decision 11/CP.8, adopted the five-year New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention. This programme sets out the scope of activities relating to Article 6 and provides the basis for action by presenting a non-exhaustive list of activities that Parties could undertake, taking into account national circumstances and priorities. For the purpose of reviewing the New Delhi work programme in 2007 and evaluating its effectiveness, the COP, at its eighth session, requested Parties to report in their national communications, where possible, on their accomplishments, lessons learned, experiences gained, and remaining gaps and barriers observed. The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its nineteenth session, noted that additional and/or separate reports could be submitted as a voluntary initiative by Parties. The SBI, at its twenty-sixth session, requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the extent of implementation of the New Delhi work programme, including consideration of the usefulness of regional workshops, for consideration at its twenty-seventh session. Scope of the note This review summarizes available information on the extent of implementation of the New Delhi work programme and draws upon recent efforts and initiatives by Parties, United Nations agencies and other relevant organizations as reported in national communications or other reports, or shared at mandated regional workshops on Article 6, as well as views from Parties through submissions to the secretariat. Additionally, the report draws upon compilations and syntheses of national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) and from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties), in particular with matters relating to the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention, as well as various submissions and reports on this issue. To the extent possible, activities and initiatives relevant to the New Delhi work programme that have been reported by Parties in their latest national communications have been posted on CC:iNet, the information network clearing house <unfccc.int/ccinet>. Possible action by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation The SBI may wish to take note of the findings of the review presented in this document and make recommendations on further action for guiding the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention. Extent of implementation of the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention Overview of the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention The five-year New Delhi work programme serves as a flexible framework for country-driven action addressing the specific needs and circumstances of Parties, and reflecting their national priorities and initiatives. As such, it does not define a time frame or milestones for action, or specify objectives, roles and responsibilities. Under the New Delhi work programme, as part of their national programmes to implement the Convention and taking into account national circumstances and capacities, Parties are encouraged to engage all stakeholders, such as local governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), business and industry, in undertaking activities under the categories listed below, which reflect the six elements of Article 6: Education - development and implementation of education and training programmes focused on climate change, targeting young people in particular, and including exchange or secondment of personnel to train experts; Training - development and implementation of training programmes focused on climate change, for scientific, technical, and managerial personnel at the national and, as appropriate, subregional and regional levels; Public awareness - development and implementation of public awareness programmes on climate change and its effects at the national and, as appropriate, subregional and regional levels; Public participation - promotion of public participation in addressing climate change and its effects and in developing adequate responses; Public access to information - facilitation of public access to information on climate change and its effects; International cooperation - promotion of subregional, regional and international cooperation in undertaking activities within the scope of the work programme to enhance the collective ability of Parties to implement the Convention. The COP, by its decision 11/CP.8, requested the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to provide financial resources to non-Annex I Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, to support the implementation of the New Delhi work programme. It also encouraged multilateral and bilateral organizations to support the activities relating to the implementation of Article 6 and the New Delhi work programme. Achievements Overview Since the adoption of the New Delhi work programme, most Parties from developing and developed countries have reported, in their national communications or other reports, on specific achievements within the scope and in line with the guiding principles of the New Delhi work programme. Over the past five years, Parties have demonstrated progress in planning and implementing activities relating to Article 6, have assessed their specific needs and identified major obstacles hampering proper implementation, and many Parties have already put into practice what they have learned from their national experiences. The level and nature of climate change outreach activities continues to be driven by national circumstances and capacities, and many non-Annex I Parties still lack the institutional, financial and technical capacities to plan, coordinate and implement sustainable education, training and public awareness programmes. But these Parties are committed to engaging all stakeholders and developing sustainable, long-term climate change education and outreach strategies, preferably integrated into national development plans and strategies. Central governments continue to play a major role in developing strategies and coordinating the implementation of Article 6 initiatives. There is a clear tendency towards wider involvement of local government and NGOs in climate change consultations, as well as closer coordination with them in the design and implementation of Article 6 initiatives. The private sector is recognized as a key target for educational and awareness-raising initiatives to help bridge the communication gap between researchers and decision makers, and partnership is sought to secure participation and commitment of all economic players affected by issues relating to energy and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The scope of cooperative activities covers all aspects of Article 6, with special emphasis on outreach, education and participation in decision-making. Annex I Parties Climate change education and outreach efforts by Annex I Parties have evolved considerably from 2000 onwards, owing to coordinated efforts by governments, international organizations and non-governmental institutions. All Parties reported on education and outreach activities in their fourth national communications and most of them provided a wealth of information and details on related initiatives and programmes undertaken. Parties generally demonstrate a solid track record of achievements, building on successes and lessons learned; working collaboratively by building networks and partnerships with all levels of government, the private sector, educators, NGOs and youth groups; providing tools, support and direction to programmes; and increasing the emphasis on measurable objectives, tracking and performance measurement tools. Today, most citizens from Annex I Parties have heard about climate change, and there is a much better understanding of its causes and impacts. Some Parties also reported on their specific efforts to implement the New Delhi work programme and reported on a variety of new and additional education, training and outreach activities, products and policies that have been developed to further support the implementation of Article 6, as shown in box 1. Education, training and public awareness is key in Parties' response to climate change, and education and awareness components have typically been shaped into a broad range of policies and measures to support their implementation among different target groups. As part of their national programmes and activities in implementing the Convention, and in the context of their specific national priorities and capacities, most Parties have established or strengthened the institutional and legal frameworks for supporting the design and implementation of educational and awareness programmes on climate change or broader sustainable development issues, and a few specific measures systematically supporting and monitoring the implementation of innovative projects have been developed. The need for sustained effort to raise awareness and provide information on climate change remains a challenge for all Parties. In this context, they have put in place a range of measures, often in concert with other measures such as economic and fiscal instruments and voluntary agreements, to maintain awareness and influence consumer behaviour. Most Annex I Parties have developed the institutional and technical capacity referred to in the New Delhi work programme to plan, coordinate and implement Article 6 activities; to assess their effectiveness; and to consider the linkages between these activities, the implementation of policies and measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and other commitments under the Convention. However, some Parties in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) recognize that Article 6 activities are often performed in an uncoordinated manner and often on an ad hoc basis. Education Parties give regular comprehensive reports on formal and non-formal education, recognizing that an effective national level of commitment to environmental education is necessary if systemic and lasting behavioural change is to be achieved. Most Parties report that education on the environment or for sustainable development - including climate change aspects - has become an integral part of primary and secondary education, and that climate change issues are being given more attention in higher education. In many countries, the United Nations Decade for Education for Sustainable Development (2005 - 2014) (the Decade) has offered a new framework for educational activities, both in schools and in a wider context. The goal of the Decade, for which the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is the lead agency, is to integrate the principles, values and practices of sustainable development into all aspects of education and learning. This is intended to encourage changes in behaviour that could create a more sustainable future in terms of environmental integrity, economic viability and a just society for present and future generations. The agenda of the Decade recognizes the complexity of today's world and draws on many disciplines in addressing education and training on climate change. While formal education addresses climate change mostly within the larger scope of environmental protection and sustainable development, recent initiatives reflect efforts by Parties to increase the emphasis on climate change and further its integration into curricula. Most Annex I Parties have also developed new, climate change focused materials in print or electronic form. In many instances, training and retraining of staff is considered necessary in view of the multidisciplinary background and teaching skills required. Training Parties emphasize the importance of training and the breadth of opportunities it provides to support policies and measures relating to mitigation. The need for information on topics relating to climate protection, especially on energy, energy-saving measures and technology, has increased during recent years. A few countries have confirmed additional policies that include training those involved in energy-intensive businesses in ways to reduce GHG emissions through improved energy efficiency. A wide range of training activities focusing on climate change issues and adapted to specific target groups has been initiated by most Annex I Parties, for example, workshops and seminars, advisory services, online training, CD-ROMs, guides, and leaflets or other training kits. There is increasing recognition of the importance of collaborative activities with NGOs and the private sector. New priority areas for training are regularly identified, and new programmes developed. Public Awareness In many countries, the communities have become more aware of the significance of climate change. The various stakeholders involved in promoting awareness have contributed to this greater understanding. The NGOs actively involved in climate change outreach now cover all sectors of the economy in most countries. Municipalities, businesses, industry, mass media and individuals also play an important role in encouraging action by society. An important feature that recently emerged is the establishment of comprehensive communication strategies that are usually defined by the current status of awareness and understanding of the population with regard to environmental issues. Climate change awareness strategies often have three key objectives: ensure broad community understanding of climate change and its impacts; inform key stakeholders of the policies and programmes being implemented to respond to climate change; and encourage industry and individual action and involvement in initiatives to reduce GHG emissions. In recent years, many Parties have launched elaborate and often expensive public awareness programmes and campaigns as part of comprehensive communication strategies specific to their national circumstances. Such programmes involve a range of instruments to reach specific audiences, and, in recent years, many Parties have shifted their objective from creating awareness of the problems to gaining and maintaining support for implementing solutions while attempting to change behaviour. New information campaigns have as their target a more focused audience, such as the consumer rather than the general public; they use a message that is easy to understand, attempt to explain the prospective national impacts of climate change and place emphasis on simple actions or focus on alternative behaviour in day-to-day living. Annual events, such as World Environment Day and Earth Day, also provide opportunities for some countries to conduct public awareness campaigns on climate change. Other countries have designated their own day(s) at the national or regional level, with climate change as the main theme or as an area of focus within a broader theme. Sponsoring competitions and awards on climate change is also an effective means of raising public awareness. One important emerging component of awareness programmes is their systematic evaluation, often at different phases of the programmes, that enables Parties to prepare the ground or adjust for the next phase, as well as learn from the experience. Some Parties are introducing new and innovative outreach programmes, building on work that has been done, and on the lessons learned. Public participation and public access to information There is evidence of a growing tendency to encourage public participation and public access to information. Parties generally concur that climate change issues have to be integrated into the decisions and investment choices made by the economic players. Therefore, many Parties further encourage cooperation and consultations with those in business and industry who are concerned about climate change and willing to act to reduce emissions, in order to secure participation and commitment of all economic players affected by energy and GHG emissions issues. As problems tend to occur in the interaction between the scientific community and other societal actors, Parties often seek to address the need to bridge the communication gap between researchers and decision makers. In this context, one key factor which was identified by some Parties is the level of scientific knowledge on climate change issues. Therefore, the cooperation of scientific institutions in this process has often been encouraged and promoted, in particular with regard to the dissemination of the latest information on the science of climate change. An example of these initiatives is the dissemination of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) findings. Public participation is recognized as critical in enhancing public input into decision-making, and many Parties have undertaken national consultations on their national action plans or on domestic policy options on climate change with the general public and all sectoral stakeholders. Many innovative initiatives and mechanisms are now being drawn on to enable the public to comment on, and to have input into, policy development. Non-Annex I Parties Since the submission of the first national communication in 1997, Parties have gained experience in the implementation of education, training and public awareness programmes. All Parties have now embarked on initiatives to implement activities relating to climate change education, training and public awareness, although usually not associated with the New Delhi work programme. Some countries are less advanced than others, as they encounter barriers to the development and implementation of programmes and activities due to limited financial and human resources, but all continue to emphasize their commitment to developing sustainable, long-term public awareness strategies to engage all stakeholders. Many countries still do not have in place a formal implementation plan for Article 6 of the Convention, and some Parties lack the institutional capacity to initiate and coordinate climate change outreach programmes. Parties recognize that the establishment of a national climate change committee is useful in addressing climate change issues effectively. To date, 24 Parties have designated and provide support to a national focal point for Article 6 activities assigned with specific responsibilities. Parties recognize that training and public awareness programmes are often a component of projects funded by the GEF. Bilateral and multilateral agencies and other organizations also support Parties in their efforts. But for most Parties the lack of financial and technical resources remains the main barrier to the implementation of education, training and public awareness programmes, and Parties emphasize the need to leverage additional and adequate support. Owing to lack of institutional capacity, many environment ministries are stretched by the need to service several international processes. Most non-Annex I Parties therefore focus their efforts to address climate change and activities relating to Article 6 within the framework of other national environmental and sustainable development projects. Box 2 summarizes the needs of non-Annex I Parties in relation to education, training and public awareness. Non-Annex I Parties identify lack of teaching materials and teachers qualified to instruct on climate change issues as barriers to the implementation of educational programmes. Several Parties plan to address, or have addressed, these barriers through the development of climate change materials and training of teachers. Some Parties have developed innovative educational material, and others have successfully developed collaborative efforts in education, with the involvement of the NGO community and cooperation with universities or other institutions. Many universities have either established, or are considering establishing, environmental departments that take a multidisciplinary approach. Some countries have developed national policies to ensure the continuity of environmental education programmes, which sometimes include climate change issues, aimed at integrating environmental issues and climate change into basic subjects in education. Although most non-Annex I Parties continue to face the challenge of integrating the subject of climate change into different curricula, some Parties do report progress in this area. For example, climate change is incorporated into university courses such as geography, forestry and natural resource management, ecology, biology, physics and meteorology. Other Parties report the establishment of university courses on the environment and revisions of curricula on environment, energy and atmospheric studies to include elements of climate change. Parties also report a number of universities offering graduate-level programmes and research opportunities on climate change. The shortage of experts and professionals working on climate change issues is a barrier to implementing projects relating to climate change, and education plays an important role in ensuring the development of a sufficient number of experts. Government efforts and initiatives from the academic sector are under way in most Parties to mainstream climate change into school curricula and to address the lack of education on this issue. Some Parties provide information on the scholarships offered to support, for example, students, researchers, media practitioners and civil servants working in environmental agencies who undertake courses at universities at home or abroad. Extra-curricular or non-formal educational programmes have been developed and implemented by most Parties, usually in cooperation with IGOs and NGOs. Schools also offer many opportunities for students to learn about climate change outside the formal curriculum, such as through competitions at primary and secondary levels. Television and web-based courses are effective means for enhancing the implementation of Article 6 and are recognized as useful media through which large audiences may be targeted. All non-Annex I Parties have implemented climate change training programmes in relation to the national communications process, with financial support from the GEF. These are aimed at building or enhancing the capacities of national experts and staff in institutions and government agencies involved in climate change issues. Most Parties recognize that activities undertaken in this context result in greater awareness of climate change issues among policymakers and decision makers, who remain the primary targets for these initiatives. Specialized training and seminars are also provided to government officials and legislators to facilitate the development and implementation of policies relating to climate change. Some Parties mentioned the participation of their experts and senior officials in the sessions of the subsidiary bodies and the COP as a means of increasing their knowledge about the Convention and enhancing their negotiating skills. Other Parties integrate environment and climate change issues into the training courses offered for senior and mid-level government officials through their national schools of public administration. Most Parties also report the participation of their experts in various international training workshops on climate change. To ensure continuity in building local capacities, some Parties have developed `training-of-trainers' programmes aimed at creating a pool of trainers and experts. Some universities already undertake climate change research and related training, more training programmes to build capacity are planned or identified as a priority in most countries. The lack of experts working on climate change issues is partly due to the high turnover of the relevant experts. In this regard, many non-Annex I Parties express the need to strengthen governmental, non-governmental and academic institutions in order to sustain the programmes aimed at building and enhancing local capacities to respond to climate change. Lack of funds or facilities to coordinate these training activities remains the first obstacle to their implementation. Public awareness The level of climate change awareness and understanding at various levels of society remains low in most non-Annex I countries, and is often a key capacity-building indicator. A number of outreach initiatives are being undertaken to raise public awareness on a range of environmental issues; many of these have direct relevance to climate change, such as energy-efficiency awareness campaigns or water conservation campaigns. Many Parties recognize that public awareness campaigns would need to encompass subjects relevant to specific groups, and some Parties have developed campaigns that target diverse groups to enhance their efficacy. Public involvement in climate change issues depends in part on the level of knowledge of those issues. The primary aim of public awareness campaigns is to enable the public to participate in efforts to address climate change. Specific objectives are to inform people about the causes and threats of climate change; to encourage action through implementation of energy efficiency and other conservation measures; and to solicit feedback regarding national communications and national action plans. The most common means identified is the dissemination of printed materials. The availability of different media, even in remote places, provides a means for reaching out to the public. According to surveys reported in the national communications, the three main sources of information on the environment and climate change are television, newspapers and the Internet. There is increasing coverage of climate change in newspapers, and information campaigns are often carried out through the radio because television is not widely available. However, media coverage of climate change issues depends on the ability of journalists to write articles on environmental issues and translate technical terms into language that the public can easily understand. Some Parties have conducted training activities for journalists and media practitioners. The training programmes are aimed at encouraging journalists to take an active role in raising public awareness and to facilitate dialogue among stakeholders in the various sectors affected by climate change. The UNFCCC secretariat organized, in cooperation with the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development and the World Bank, a training session for journalists to expand climate change coverage in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) also provides similar training for journalists. The technical nature of climate change issues often is a barrier to public education. Even though English is commonly used in disseminating information to policymakers, some countries use local languages and dialects to raise awareness and communicate climate change messages to motivate action among the general public. Parties recognize the important role that civil society and religious groups play in raising awareness on climate change issues. NGOs often take a lead role in advocating policies on climate change, conducting training, facilitating the participation of civil society groups and implementing projects. NGO networks are involved in climate change issues at the local, regional and international levels. The effectiveness of programmes and activities on public awareness may be gauged by the degree of change in the attitudes and behaviour of people, and actions taken by different sections of the society, in relation to climate change issues. Some Parties have conducted national surveys, but measuring the impacts and effectiveness of activities remains a challenge for most Parties. Ensuring the continuity and sustainability of the awareness programmes that have been initiated continues to be a challenge in most countries because of limited financial and human resources. Public participation and access to information Public participation and public access to information on environmental issues in general, and climate change in particular, are also commonly encouraged by non-Annex I Parties. Local communities and NGOs play a vital role in promoting public awareness, and a number of laws and regulations are in force in many countries to, for example, increase participation in the conservation of natural resources, or disseminate environmental information. Climate change issues and study results are made available through different media, from scientific and technical journals to newspapers, radio, television or websites and online databases. Parties also organize discussions, dissemination of information and consultative workshops on climate change issues, inviting all stakeholders to encourage and stimulate interest in climate change in the various sectors of the national economy. Limitations to communications range from illiteracy to slow Internet connections, weak information networks, limited distribution of newspapers and lack of information available in local languages. Public participation in climate change decision-making processes and access to information require an effort by Parties to ensure that libraries and educational institutes can offer a range of materials on climate change in English and local languages. International cooperation International cooperation takes different forms, and can occur at various levels, from the bilateral to the regional, according to needs and conditions. Activities include funding of bilateral and regional activities that focus on: capacity-building; information networks; research and training; contributing to IPCC work; and support to regional workshops under the New Delhi work programme and to CC:iNet. International NGOs and IGOs are increasingly supporting efforts to implement activities under Article 6 through their regular programmes, and through provision of financial and technical support, such as the ongoing support of UNEP. They also play a pivotal role in collecting and diffusing information on climate science, in cooperation with national and regional bodies, as well as with the media and other elements of civil society. Bilateral assistance programmes remain an important medium through which new initiatives to build human and institutional capacity are launched, while providing support to governmental and non-governmental organizations on topics relating to all aspects of sustainable development and climate change. Under such programmes, special attention is paid to sensitizing and training key decision makers in the science of climate change and its impacts, adaptation, mitigation and related policymaking. International support often comes with time-consuming reporting procedures. Financial and technical support from international institutions contributes significantly to the implementation of education and outreach activities, but there remain many unmet needs. In particular, non-Annex I Parties recognize that greater clarity and a more coherent approach is needed on the process of the GEF and its implementing agencies relating to funding Article 6 activities, including for the preparation of national communications. Lessons learned and opportunities Technical and financial issues Institutional arrangements and legal frameworks A common theme for non-Annex I Parties is the importance of establishing a national climate change committee with a dedicated outreach unit or information centre. By drawing together officials from different ministries and departments, such a committee can help engage in multisectoral climate change issues, as well as communicate the climate change message to national policymakers. The establishment of national and regional centres of excellence is also identified as a means to advance the study of various fields relating to climate change. As a minimum, Parties recommend the nomination of a national focal point for Article 6, but recognize that these focal points may need more support to be able to undertake their role efficiently. Providing a legal framework remains important, and is well developed in Annex I Parties. In particular, new or updated legislation and regulations that strengthen the commitment to environmental education in the national curricula are being enforced. Many Annex I Parties identify recent national and regional laws and agreements that provide a framework for public participation and access to information on environmental matters, and can serve as a basis for related programmes. The national communications process can play an important role in strengthening education and outreach activities, and is a valuable opportunity for countries to present their needs and assess the status of implementation of activities. Monitoring and evaluation As Parties recognized in developing the New Delhi work programme, the nature of Article 6 activities can easily be reported, but measuring or quantifying the impacts of these activities may be more challenging. Parties emphasize the need to evaluate existing tools and identify baseline indicators to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of actions. Monitoring activities aimed at determining the extent to which awareness has been raised among the target groups and the extent to which this has resulted in action are recognized to be costly; therefore monitoring is limited to major activities such as information campaigns. Considerable efforts have been made by Annex I and non-Annex I Parties to use national surveys to assess the current level of awareness and understanding of the population; the results of these surveys are then used as an indicator for monitoring the efficiency of the climate change policies that are being implemented. Parties need to known more about, inter alia, consumer priorities and the relationship between consumer behaviour and environmental impact. Financial and technical support One concern shared by non-Annex I Parties and some Parties with economies in transition (EIT Parties) is the lack of financial support. While Parties agree to explore various opportunities to make the best use of available resources, they also recognize that there is no special arrangement for funding specific activities under Article 6 or under the New Delhi work programme, and request the GEF and other potential donors to enhance financial resources for climate education and outreach. The lack of technical skills and expertise is another impediment for non-Annex I Parties to implement climate outreach activities. Parties call on a more active role of United Nations bodies and other IGOs to facilitate the continued implementation of outreach activities and to identify consistent methodologies for undertaking work at the national, subregional and regional levels. National priorities The focus of action for formal education is generally twofold: developing and implementing a sound framework to further integrate climate change issues into curricula; and identifying needs and developing tools for facilitating the implementation of the framework. Promoting public participation in climate change decision-making and public access to information can also play an important role. Efforts could focus on ensuring that libraries and educational institutions offer a wide range of relevant materials, from national communications and the IPCC Third Assessment Report to videos and brochures. Key target audiences include policymakers in government ministries and in parliament, followed by the general public, and young people in particular. Policymakers are a priority because officials responsible for national climate change programmes often find that their colleagues in other ministries are not fully engaged. Climate change is a cross-cutting issue and policymakers therefore need the active engagement of their colleagues in order to develop effective policies. Using local languages and dialects is necessary to raise awareness among these target audiences. International and regional cooperation Participants in regional workshops emphasized the need to identify and engage existing national and regional resources, and suggested that, in implementing work under Article 6, priority should be given to strengthening regional cooperation. The benefits of regional cooperation include reduced operational costs, increased efficiency in resources used, and improved access to technical assistance and experts. The overall goal of regional cooperation strategies would be to assist governments and communities within regions to identify local opportunities and develop capacity to respond to and exploit opportunities. For example, a regional focal point for Article 6 has been recently designated at the Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe (REC) to foster national efforts in the 17 REC beneficiary countries in Central and Eastern Europe, South-Eastern Europe and Turkey Parties recognize the value of partnerships and the important role that IGOs and NGOs can play in enhancing their capacities, and have identified synergies with other conventions, in particular the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and the Convention on Biological Diversity, as a potential catalyst for international cooperation. Building on its successful partnership with UNEP in supporting the implementation of Article 6 activities in developing country Parties and EIT Parties, the secretariat could further collaborate with IGOs and other United Nations agencies with relevant expertise. Regional workshops Over 200 experts from 115 countries as well as some 55 experts from IGOs, NGOs and United Nations agencies, have had the opportunity to share experiences, lessons learned and best practices at the regional workshops mandated by the SBI within the framework of the New Delhi work programme. The purpose of the workshops was to promote the further development and implementation of the New Delhi work programme in the regions. The specific objectives of the workshops were to share ideas and experiences on national and regional Article 6 activities, develop options and strategies for strengthening and expanding these activities and promote greater regional and international cooperation on implementing the New Delhi work programme in the regions. The expected outcomes of the workshops were to evaluate progress in implementing Article 6 activities in the regions, identify specific opportunities for international and regional cooperation, identify gaps and needs in implementing the New Delhi work programme and promote partnerships with all sectors of the economy. Many participants expressed their appreciation on the usefulness of the workshops. As reflected in the respective workshop reports, the expected outcomes were mostly achieved. Views from Parties on the implementation of the New Delhi work programme provide further insights into the impact of the workshops on the implementation of Article 6 activities. While some countries suggest that regional workshops should be subject to an in-depth evaluation of the audience they have reached and the impact they have had (South Africa, Switzerland), most Parties consider that the workshops have helped to advance the New Delhi work programme by providing useful inputs to countries and by encouraging follow-up work at national, subregional and regional levels (China, European Community, Gambia, Uruguay, United States of America, and Uzbekistan). As stated in the communication from the United States, some common themes emanated from the workshops, including interest in a regional focus, potential for replicability, common languages and similar cultural practices and norms. Workshops were also occasions to get direct feedback from Parties on their specific needs and to try to address them. In particular, UNEP, which contributed to the participation of some 20 Parties and was represented at all the workshops, provided further financial and technical support to selected Parties to assist them in starting Article 6 national programmes, and, depending on Parties' own priorities, to focus on specific areas of Article 6. So far, 15 national outreach programmes have been implemented (in Albania, Armenia, Cambodia, Gambia, Georgia and Ghana (stage 1); Kenya, Saint Lucia and Uzbekistan (stages 1 and 2); and Namibia and the Russian Federation (stages 1 to 3)). In addition, UNEP assisted some Parties to produce, publish and disseminate a regional educational guidebook on climate change (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan), to convene a workshop for businessmen (China) and to develop regional approaches (Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean). Working closely with civil society and responding to their needs, UNEP implemented a series of targeted outreach programmes for youth groups, mass media, businessmen and decision makers, either through national Article 6 programmes, or through dedicated workshops, seminars and other activities on a regional basis. Lessons learned from those projects and the experience gained with the UNFCCC regional workshops were summarized by UNEP in a handbook, which was widely distributed during the twelfth session of the COP. Conclusions and issues for further consideration Assessment of the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention Since the adoption of the New Delhi work programme, many Parties have reported, in their national communications or other reports, on specific achievements within the scope of, and in line with, the guiding principles of the work programme. Parties have had the opportunity to express their views on the implementation of the New Delhi work programme, as referred to in paragraph 72 above. The five regional workshops were also an ideal forum to assess the extent of implementation of the New Delhi work programme, identify gaps and needs, and discuss ways to improve the framework for action. A synthesis of these views and discussions is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2007/29. Key elements of this synthesis include: All Parties agree that the New Delhi work programme is an adequate framework for country-driven action, and has so far served as a useful guide for the implementation of Article 6, greatly helping to make progress in implementing related activities; Most Parties recognize that the success of the New Delhi work programme lies in its flexible and country-driven approach, which recognizes that no single strategy for raising awareness or building capacity is appropriate for all countries; Many Parties admit that too little attention has been given to the implementation of the New Delhi work programme at the national and regional levels because of its lack of: defined time frames and milestones; specific references to the needs of target population groups; measurable indicators of level of implementation; concrete elements to facilitate regional cooperation; and adequate financial and technical resources. Possible next steps In preparing a draft decision on the review of the implementation of the New Delhi work programme, Parties may wish to consider the following elements: Parties have demonstrated progress in planning and implementing activities relating to Article 6 in accordance with the guiding principles of the New Delhi work programme, which has proven to be an adequate framework for action; The lack of financial and technical resources is the major impediment for non-Annex I Parties in their attempts to adequately implement climate education and outreach activities. One way to secure funding is to integrate education and outreach components into various GEF-funded projects; even so, there is a need to leverage additional and adequate support from the GEF and/or other donors; There is a need to evaluate existing tools and identify baseline indicators to monitor and evaluate effectiveness of actions. This implies collecting baseline data and establishing performance target indicators; Regional cooperation can complement but not replace efforts at the national level, but promoting cooperation at the subregional and regional levels can help reduce operational costs, increase efficiency of resource use and improve access to technical assistance and experts; Workshops have helped to advance the New Delhi work programme by providing useful inputs to countries of the regions and encouraging some follow-up work at national, subregional and regional levels; CC:iNet is an important tool for promoting the implementation of Article 6; it should be further developed to enhance its functionality and user-friendliness. Status of implementation of activities suggested in the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention List of activities presented in decision 11/CP.8 Status of implementation (a) Develop institutional and technical capacity to: Identify gaps and needs for the implementation of Article 6 Assess the effectiveness of Article 6 activities Consider the linkages between Article 6 activities, implementation of policies and measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and other commitments under the Convention (b) Prepare assessments of needs specific to national circumstances in the area of the implementation of Article 6, including the use of surveys (c) Designate, and provide support to, a national focal point for Article 6 activities and assign specific responsibilities 1 For a list of countries, see annex II. (d) Develop a directory of organizations and individuals with a view to building active networks involved in the implementation of these activities (e) Develop criteria for identifying and disseminating information on good practices for Article 6 activities, in accordance with national circumstances (f) Increase the availability of copyright-free and translated climate change materials (g) Enhance efforts to develop and use curricula and teacher training focused on climate change as methods to integrate climate change issues at all educational levels and across disciplines (h) Seek opportunities to disseminate widely relevant information on climate change. Measures could include translation into appropriate languages and distribution of popularized versions of the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (i) Seek input and public participation in the formulation and implementation of efforts to address climate change and encourage the involvement and participation of representatives of all stakeholders and major groups in the climate change negotiation process (j) Inform the public about causes of climate change and sources of greenhouse gas emissions, as well as actions that can be taken at all levels to address climate change (k) Share the findings contained in their national communications and national action plans on climate change with the general public and all stakeholders (l) Seek to enhance cooperation and coordination at international and regional levels, including the identification of partners and networks with other Parties, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, the private sector, state and local governments, and community-based organizations Countries and organizations with designated focal points for Article 6 of the Convention Australia Algeria Belgium Angola Bulgaria Belize Canada Bhutan Croatia Bolivia Czech Republic Colombia France Comoros Germany Democratic Republic of the Congo Hungary Dominica Ireland Dominican Republic Romania Gambia Russian Federation Guinea-Bissau Spain Kenya Sweden Liberia Turkey Mexico United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Morocco Mozambique Peru Rwanda Saint Lucia Sri Lanka Tajikistan Uruguay Uzbekistan Organizations United Nations Environment Programme Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe 