%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|ACCESS TO INFORMATION|PROJECT FINANCE|PUBLIC SECTOR|PRIVATE SECTOR|GREENHOUSE GASES|EMISSION INVENTORIES|BARBADOS|ECUADOR|ETHIOPIA|GEORGIA|JORDAN|LEBANON|NIGERIA|SOLOMON ISLANDS|SRI LANKA|VIET NAM|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2007/7 26 February 2007 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION Twenty-sixth session Bonn, 7 - 18 May 2007 Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Ways to improve the reporting of projects identified in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Note by the Chair of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Summary The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its twenty-third session, requested the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention to make recommendations on ways to improve the reporting of projects identified in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change; to report on ways to improve access to financial and technical support for such projects; and to advise the SBI of this matter at its twenty-sixth session. This document has been prepared in response to that request. It addresses three issues: first, it examines what types of information are required by potential funders in order to make a decision on a project; second, it looks at what types of information are generally provided in national communications from non-Annex I Parties; and third, it asks what are the principal improvements that can be made to meet the information needs of the funding agencies. Paragraphs Page Annex Summary tables of greenhouse gas projects reported in 10 initial national communications. 13 Introduction Mandate The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its twenty-third session,1 requested the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) to make recommendations on ways to improve the reporting of projects identified in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (nonAnnex I Parties) in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (the Convention); to report on ways to improve access to financial and technical support for such projects; and to advise the SBI of this matter at its twentysixth session (May 2007). Scope of the note This document focuses on improving the information provided on projects in national communications as an important step towards improving access to financial and technical support for developing and implementing these projects. The UNFCCC guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties states that "non-Annex I Parties are encouraged to provide, to the extent their capacities permit, a list of projects proposed for financing, in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Convention, in preparation for arranging the provision of technical and financial support."2 The user manual3 for the guidelines on national communications from non-Annex I Parties adds that: "Parties could provide information on the proposed projects aimed at reducing emissions by sources and enhancing removal by sinks. Information on the proposed projects could include: Specific technologies to be used Materials/equipment required Techniques or practices that would be needed to implement such projects, together with, if possible: an estimate of all incremental costs, of the reductions in emissions and increments of removals of greenhouse gases; and an estimate of the consequent benefits. "The proposed projects could be presented as part of the national communications or as separate documents for financing." This paper is based on the premise that one of the most effective ways for nonAnnex I Parties to improve their reporting of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction projects is to increase the prospects of securing funding for such projects. In addition to projects that mitigate GHG emissions, as addressed in Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Convention, this paper includes information on the Global Environment Facility (GEF) adaptation focused funds such as the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF), in order to provide potentially useful information on these types of project that are also of interest to non-Annex I Parties. This paper addresses three issues and is organized accordingly. First, it examines what types of information are required by potential funders in order to make a decision on a project; second, it looks at what types of information are generally provided in national communications from non-Annex I Parties; and, third, it asks what are the principal improvements that can be made to meet the information needs of the funders. To respond to the third issue, the paper compares the information sought by potential project funders with that provided in national communications, and makes recommendations for improvements that can be made within a limited number of pages in the national communications to encourage funders to seek out more detailed information about the projects listed. Beyond the national communications, separate documents for applying for funding would be most useful if they were tailored to the requirements of specific funding institutions. The content of these separate project documents is beyond the scope of this paper and cannot be addressed effectively here. However, references to the detailed requirements of these funding institutions are provided. Project information needed by funders The most important sources of potential funding for the types of projects usually identified in national communications from nonAnnex I Parties are likely to be (1) the GEF and (2) multilateral and bilateral institutions that have been established to help developing countries overcome poverty and other associated problems, which often include environmental problems. Other relevant potential sources of funding would include local development banks, private foundations and private social investors willing to accept a lower than fully commercial rate of return. Projects that offer market rates of return are assumed to be working on a normal commercial basis and not likely to account for a significant number of projects in national communications from non-Annex I Parties. The information requirements4 of the following institutions were examined for this paper: the GEF,5 elements of the World Bank,6 the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD),7 the Asian Development Bank,8 the Inter-American Development Bank,9 and the African Development Bank.10 The information requirements of the funders fall into two broad categories: (1) those that apply to funding for public sector institutions, defined as governments and nongovernmental organizations; and (2) those that apply to funding for private sector entities. The requirements for loans to public sector institutions - which are provided primarily by the GEF - focus more on policy conformity, institutional and structural barriers, and stakeholder involvement. The requirements for loans to private sector entities tend to be similar amongst the lending institutions and are focused on financial criteria. Financial analysis is also required for public sector lending; however, it follows a different format from conventional financial analysis. In general, the funds aimed at the private sector emphasize the reporting of the financial and management parameters of the projects. Environmental and climate change issues are dealt with as secondary matters, usually in the form of an environmental assessment or environmental impact statement. This also holds true for the funds aimed at energy efficiency and renewable energy. The message is clear - if the recipient is a private sector client, they must achieve financial returns first and conform with various environmental and social policies second. The best known of the private sector funders is the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which is the private sector arm of the World Bank Group. The IFC provides loans, equity and structured finance to build the private sector in developing countries. The IFC information requirements are the most descriptive of the private sector funds, and have been relied on the most to form the recommendations for improved reporting. The private sector funders generally require project-by-project reporting and do not have options for streamlined or expedited reporting. Each private sector project that requests financial assistance must develop detailed financial, market and investment analyses regardless of the amount requested. Some lending institutions do have specific minimum lending requirements; the EBRD, for example, has set a minimum of EUR 5 million (USD 6.4 million) per project. The primary public sector fund that deals with climate change issues is the GEF. It has supported over 600 mitigation projects in the past 15 years. Most of these projects have been aimed at removing public sector barriers and promoting capacity-building that will facilitate future climate change projects, rather than individual projects. Accordingly, the information requirements are different from those for the private sector funds, and focus on issues such as conformity with countries' existing laws and environmental policies, project sustainability and replicability, stakeholder involvement, and monitoring. There is a financial component, too, but it is different from the conventional financial analyses required by the private sector funds. The GEF financial analysis focuses on a cost-effectiveness evaluation of the various objectives of the project and it is generally understood that the returns from the project will occur in areas other than cash flows. The GEF also requires information on the technical aspects of the GHG emission reductions, including a baseline analysis and comparison with the project. There are currently several funding avenues for supporting adaptation projects. These include the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), the SCCF and the GEF Trust Fund (under the Strategic Priority on Adaptation (SPA)).11 The GEF is the major funding source that currently supports adaptation projects for climate change. It does so through the GEF SPA and two newer funds, the LDCF and the SCCF. The LDCF and SCCF funds are focused on development within the specific country. The projects supported by these funds emphasize agriculture and food security, health, water resources and disaster prevention. The GEF Trust Fund supports adaptation projects that also generate global environmental benefits, such as the adaptation of large-scale vulnerable ecosystems on which human life and livelihoods depend. The SPA, the SCCF and the LDCF can be complementary in the adaptation activities they fund. SPA projects that generate global benefits are funded on an `incremental' basis, and receive funds for the additional costs required to transform a project from one that meets national development goals to one that generates global environmental benefits. SCCF and LDCF projects that generate local or national benefits are funded on an `additional' basis, and receive funds for the additional costs caused by climate change. Except for this requirement to discuss incremental versus additional funding and the lack of an explicit need to discuss potential GHG emission reductions, the information requirements for GEF adaptation projects are similar to those for mitigation projects. The GEF has funds available for climate change related projects in three tiers: full-size projects, medium-sized projects (up to USD 1 million) and Small Grants Programme (SGP) projects (up to USD 50,000). The reporting requirements are generally the same for full- and medium-sized projects, although the financial analysis is streamlined for medium-sized projects. SGP projects have greatly streamlined requirements and in some countries can be presented in a variety of formats and media types such as videos or flip charts. The carbon finance funds are relatively new and follow formats similar to each other that focus on the volume of GHG reductions that will occur and the recipient's expected price for the GHG reductions. As with the GEF, the carbon funds require detailed knowledge of the baseline case and the expected project emissions so that the potential volume of emission reductions is understood in advance of the project receiving finance. Some streamlined procedures are available for projects defined as small-scale under the clean development mechanism. Project information provided in initial national communications Document FCCC/SBI/2004/INF.13 lists 741 project proposals contained in 117 initial national communications from non-Annex I Parties submitted as at 24 September 2004. It contains the estimated emission reduction or uptake and the cost of the project, if provided in the individual national communication. Document FCCC/SBI/2005/INF.8 lists 469 project proposals contained in 125 initial national communications submitted by non-Annex I Parties as at 1 September 2005. Unlike the longer list contained in document FCCC/SBI/2004/INF.13, this list contains only projects identified in document FCCC/SBI/2004/INF.16 as "project concepts and profiles proposed for financing in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Convention". Document FCCC/SBI/2006/INF.8 contains the estimated emission reduction or uptake and the cost of the project, if provided in the individual national communication. Document FCCC/SBI/2004/INF.16 provides information on possible means to implement proposed projects and additional information on the 741 projects listed in document FCCC/SBI/2004/INF.13. Fortytwo of the projects were identified as already implemented, approved for funding or planned for implementation. Two hundred and fifty-nine of the project proposals were described as "prioritized areas/activities for mitigation or mitigation options" and "indicative of important national enabling and capacity-building activities". Of the 741 projects, 440 were identified as project concepts (196) and profiles (244). The 196 project concepts were described as containing minimal information, usually a title and one or two lines of information. The 244 project profiles contained additional information such as estimates of costs and GHG reductions, estimated impacts and a list of stakeholders. Seventy-seven of these project profiles referred the reader to additional documentation. To supplement the information contained in these documents, the national communications of 10 countries were examined for this paper. Owing to constraints on the time and language skills available, the selection of national communications was limited to those available in English. The 10 national communications examined cover 158 project opportunities and provide geographical diversity. The selected countries and the year in which their national communications were submitted are as follows: Barbados (2001); Ecuador (2000); Ethiopia (2001); Georgia (1999); Jordan (1997); Lebanon (1999); Nigeria (2003); Solomon Islands (2004); Sri Lanka (2000); and Viet Nam (2003). The national communications were examined in the light of the information required by the funding institutions described earlier in this paper, using the same major headings developed for these institutions. This was done to identify specific topic areas with information gaps that could be addressed in future national communications from non-Annex I Parties. The project information examined in the national communications was grouped according to general information, GHG emissions, costs and financial criteria. With a few exceptions, these national communications focus on projects that are intended to be carried out by the respective governments. Many of the proposed projects are related to capacity-building and removing institutional barriers and are not directly related to specific GHG reductions. In cases where the projects identified in the national communications can potentially be undertaken by the private sector, such as one project in Ecuador's national communication, it is still unclear whether the government intends to move forward with the project or whether the private sector will be responsible. Most of the projects examined provide no corresponding GHG, cost or financial information. An overview of the information provided in the national communications is outlined in table 1 below, while more detailed country-specific summaries are provided in tables 1 to 10 in the annex to this document. Table 1. Summary of adaptation and mitigation projects, emissions, cost, and financial data provided in 10 national communications from nonAnnex I Parties Country Number of projects Greenhouse gas reductions identified Costs identified Financial analysis data provided Barbados Ecuador Ethiopia Georgia Jordan Lebanon Nigeria Solomon Islands Sri Lanka Viet Nam Total Percentage of total Only four of the national communications contain information about cofinancing for which the project may qualify. In two of the national communications that identify co-financing, only the GEF is named. In two other national communications, co-financing possibilities are noted for just one project in each country. Since co-financing is a central component of the information requirements of the target lending institutions, information on co-funding generally available in the country would be beneficial. Eight of the national communications contain information on government policies pertaining to climate change and its interrelationship (or lack thereof) with other government policies. This information is essential background material when preparing an application for GEF funding for the public sector and it is also very helpful for private sector funds. The 10 national communications contain information on adaptation and vulnerability. In all cases, this information was presented in a separate chapter on adaptation and vulnerability issues with subsections typically containing information on future precipitation patterns, temperature patterns, sealevel rise, aquatic bioculture changes, and the implications for water resources, for the agriculture sector and for drinking water purposes, if relevant. All the national communications note some adaptation measures that should be undertaken, although only five list any of the potential measures as project ideas. Of the 39 adaptation project ideas outlined in the national communications, only five - all in Ecuador's national communication - contain any information on costs and financial data. Improvements in project information There is a wide gap between the information required by funders to enable them to consider projects in a meaningful way and the information provided on projects in the national communications of non-Annex I Parties. When identifying specific areas where information can be improved in the reporting of projects by nonAnnex I Parties, it is helpful to consider the gaps and differences according to the sector covered by the funding - public, private or carbon finance. A similar distinction in the projects reported by the non-Annex I Parties would be useful. A discussion of specific improvements that could strengthen the reporting of projects in the national communications from nonAnnex I Parties appears below. It is organized according to the three funding sectors of coverage (public, private or carbon finance). Given the sometimes limited resources and space for developing project descriptions in national communications from non-Annex I Parties, the recommendations focus on priority information that will help to encourage potential investors to seek out more information on the listed projects, or at least serve as the basis for meeting the more detailed reporting requirements of individual funds. In short, the recommendations are developed to provide an initial prospectus of each country's potential projects and emission reduction opportunities, with the understanding that additional and more detailed information will be provided for application to a specific fund. Public sector funding - the Global Environment Facility To encourage potential investors to seek out an application for funding, reporting by nonAnnex I Parties of GHG projects in the public sector should target the major evaluation requirements of the institutions that finance public sector projects. These institutions primarily include the GEF implementing agencies, which, as outlined above, focus on a mix of financial, social and environmental objectives, such as conformity with country policies, removal of institutional barriers, stakeholder participation and potential for co-financing. The GEF information requirements mainly concern programme and policy conformity and financing. Considering the need to cover the wide range of objectives promoted by the GEF and other public sector funds, the recommended list of information topics for this type of project includes a combination of environmental, financial and policy data. A list of the most important topics to cover is as follows: Type of implementing agency (e.g., public, private); Project objective(s); Conformity with country's overall policies; List of barriers that will be addressed; Expected GHG reductions/sequestration (metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq), mitigation projects); Project cost; Project's rate of return or cost-effectiveness ratio (mitigation projects); Incremental or additional cost analysis (all adaptation projects; many mitigation projects will also need to perform an incremental or additional cost analysis); Options for co-financing; Sources for further information on the project. Projects described in the national communications are generally not eligible for the GEF SGP funds as they normally exceed the USD 50,000 limit. If a project of under USD 50,000 is proposed in a national communication, a financing plan is not required in order to obtain GEF support, and there is no specific application format. However, it would still be useful to cover a number of the listed topics in the national communication, including project description, project objectives, the programme's conformity with country development goals and an annual budget. Private sector funding Lending institutions that target projects in the private sector place a higher emphasis on the financial viability of the project than on other objectives, such as emission reductions or social involvement. Therefore, in cases where the project is intended for the private sector or where a public sector agency carries out an infrastructure or industrial project with a conventional financial approach, the national communication information should be structured to address cost and financial issues first and foremost. Private sector funds have the same basic information demands. In addition to the more straightforward issues of project cost and internal rate of return, these funds also look at the potential market for the product and any other issues that may affect the success of the project, such as tariffs, level of privatization, capital controls, management arrangements and potential co-financing. It is difficult for non-Annex I Parties to cover all of these topics in their national communications; a list of the topics in which potential investors are most interested is as follows: Project description (e.g., sector, technology/strategy, location); Brief summary of the market for the product; Project rate of return; Co-financing options; Expected GHG emission reductions; Level of government ownership or involvement; One of the suggested topics includes a discussion of any potential government involvement in the implementation of the proposed project. This requirement was included because potential private sector investors need to clearly understand whether the proposed project can be carried out by nongovernmental entities. In many countries, the degree to which various industry and infrastructure sectors are privatized or partially privatized is not entirely clear and/or these sectors may be in a state of transition. Therefore, to alleviate any uncertainty relating to project ownership, the potential involvement of the government in the implementation of the project should be clarified in the national communication. Summary and conclusions Improving the reporting of GHG emission reduction or adaptation projects in national communications from nonAnnex I Parties would help to increase the prospects of non-Annex I Parties for securing financing for these projects. By comparing the information sought by potential project funders with that provided in national communications from non-Annex I Parties, the objective of this paper was to make recommendations for information improvements that can be made within a limited number of pages to encourage potential investors to seek out additional information on the listed projects. An examination of relevant lending institutions and a representative sample of national communications from nonannex I Parties indicates that project funders seek a great deal of detailed information, which is addressed only to a very limited extent in the national communications. The project descriptions provided by the non-Annex I Parties could be strengthened to address some of these information gaps. Because nonAnnex I Parties may have only limited resources with which to prepare national communications and may be constrained in terms of space when describing their potential projects, the project information provided in the national communications should be designed to be brief and mainly serve as a general prospectus on project opportunities in the country. Still, it should be sufficiently detailed and relevant to lead potential funders into requesting additional information on the listed projects. The information requirements of the financial institutions depend on whether the project involves assistance to a public or a private institution, or whether it is intended for carbon finance, suggesting that projects identified in the national communications should be described differently, depending on which type of financing is sought. As table 2 shows, there is some overlap between the types of information that could be required for different project categories, including in the areas of general project descriptions, GHG reduction estimates, project cost and documentation. However, there are also some clear differences. Projects intended for public sector adaptation and mitigation financing should address a mix of cost and policy topics, while projects intended for the private sector should focus on cost, financial and market data. Projects targeting carbon funds should emphasize GHG reduction potential and costeffectiveness. Adaptation projects, with the exception of those funded through the LDCF, should address the issue of whether they will provide global benefits, thus receiving incremental funding from the GEF, or local and national benefits, thus receiving additional funding. In this framework, non-Annex Parties may want to take advantage of decision 5/CP.11, paragraph 2, which "requests the Global Environment Facility, in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 4, of the Convention, and decision 11/CP.1, to assist, if so requested, Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention in formulating and developing project proposals identified in their national communications, when Parties are formulating their national programmes to address climate change issues". Non-Annex I Parties may also refer to "A guidebook on preparing technology transfer projects for financing",12 prepared by the Expert Group on Technology Transfer, the aim of which is to assist project developers in developing countries and other stakeholders in preparing financing proposals that will meet the standards of international finance providers. Table 2. Recommended information requirements by project category Information requirement Project category Public sector Private sector Mitigation Adaptation General project background Project description Type of implementing agency Project lifetime Project owners Policy background Project objective National development priority and policy conformity Barriers addressed GHG data GHG reductions Annual GHG reductions GHG baseline scenario Cost and financial data Cost of GHG reductions Project cost Incremental or additional cost analysis Rate of return Co-financing options Market data Government involvement Documentation Information sources As outlined above, the paper makes recommendations for priority information needs that could be addressed in the national communications from non-Annex I Parties to encourage potential investors to seek out more information about the projects listed and thus improve the prospects of securing funding. Documents tailored specifically to the individual funds will be required for developing an actual funding application. However, the development of such documents is beyond the scope of this paper and is therefore not addressed. Summary tables of greenhouse gas projects reported in 10 initial national communications Table 1. Barbados General information Year of national communication Project descriptions Very brief descriptions were provided for 12 potential projects, some of which mentioned a specific location. Sectors The 12 potential projects were categorized into the energy (8), industry (2), buildings (1) and transport (1) sectors. Relevant government regulations and policies Summarized in a separate section of the national communication. Barbados does not have specific climate change legislation, but several environmental, land-use and buildings policies have a bearing on climate change mitigation and adaptation issues. Fewer than 30 per cent of those policies have been enacted after 1992. The national communication recommends options for the enactment of more appropriate legislation, including a specific climate change act, an environmental management act and a disaster management act. Project ownership or management structure No information was provided on state versus private ownership of projects. Stakeholder information Public awareness-raising was noted as a priority, but specific stakeholder groups were not identified. Project timing The required information could not be identified. Greenhouse gas emissions Estimated GHG reductions Project baseline emissions estimate Baseline emissions were provided at the sector and sub-sector level, but not for individual projects. Alternative project mitigation scenarios Financial summary Project cost; cost - benefit; rate of return; financial assumptions; cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation; market analysis; co-financing availability Table 2. Ecuador Descriptions were provided for 24 potential projects. Each description is a brief one-paragraph summary including a specific project location. The 24 potential projects were categorized into the energy (13), forestry (8) and agriculture (3) sectors. Summarized in a separate section of the national communication describing current government development and poverty priorities. There is a short section on how environmental priorities interrelate with development priorities. Specific government regulations pertaining to climate change issues were not mentioned. Target project construction dates were provided, but the overall life of the project was not. Potential reductions were estimated for each project proposed in the national communication. No supporting calculations were provided. Project baseline emissions estimate; alternative project mitigation scenarios Estimated project costs were provided. Supporting calculations were not provided, nor are references to other documents that might contain the supporting calculations. Cost - benefit Cost - benefit ratios were provided for each project, but were not documented. The internal rate of return was provided for each project, but without supporting documentation. Financial assumptions; cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation; market analysis; co-financing availability Table 3. Ethiopia A total of 20 projects were identified in the national communication. A detailed project description was provided for a single landfill methane capture project in Addis Ababa. Less detailed descriptions were provided for a domestic energy and a transportation project. Brief outlines were also provided for 17 potential projects in the land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and agriculture sectors. The potential projects were categorized into the energy (13), LULUCF (8), agriculture (3) and waste (1) sectors, with some projects falling into more than one category. The national communication contains an entire chapter on government policies which notes that: "Although Ethiopia has not yet developed specific climate change policies, programs and measures, there are a number of environmentally oriented policies, strategies and action plans already in place that can directly or indirectly contribute to the objectives of the Climate Convention. Support for the implementation of these policies, strategies and action plans in the form of funding, technical assistance, training and technology transfer through the Convention mechanisms is extremely essential." Estimates for project construction dates and overall life of the project were not provided. Estimates of GHG reductions were provided for the landfill project, the domestic energy project and the transportation project. Reduction estimates were not provided for the other potential projects mentioned. Provided for the landfill project. For the domestic energy and transportation project, potential reduction percentages from a baseline were provided. Alternative mitigation scenarios were provided for the landfill project only. Estimated project costs were provided in terms of USD/tonne reduction for the domestic energy and transportation project. Supporting calculations were not provided, but references to other documents that contain supporting calculations were given. Cost - benefit; rate of return; financial assumptions; cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation; market analysis; co-financing availability Table 4. Georgia Project descriptions were provided for 16 potential projects in the country. Each description was very brief but with specified locations for the projects. The potential projects were categorized into the energy (10), forestry (4), industry (1) and buildings (1) sectors. Summarized in a separate section of the national communication. Georgia adopted an environmental protection law in 1996 that includes provisions on climate change, including the principles of limiting climate change impacts, `polluter pays' and enhancing public awareness. Overall lifetimes of the projects were provided. Estimated for each project proposed in the national communication. No supporting calculations were provided. Estimated total project costs were provided. Supporting calculations were not provided nor were references to other documents that might contain the supporting calculations. Cost - benefit; rate of return; financial assumptions; cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation; market analysis Co-financing availability One project provided co-financing organizations. Table 5. Jordan Twenty projects were proposed in a table format. Eight of the 20 were described in greater detail, including background information and projected input and outcomes of the project. All 20 projects were categorized into the energy sector. The institutional framework and regulatory aspects of the energy sector were summarized in a separate section of the national communication. No information was given on state versus private ownership of projects. Estimated project lives were provided for five of the eight projects that were described in some detail. Greenhouse gas reductions were estimated for two projects. The cost of each project was estimated in a table. A breakdown of costs was provided for five projects. Internal rate of returns was provided for two projects. Financial assumptions Cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation Cash flow summaries were provided for three of the projects, and economic aspects such as savings and maintenance costs were provided for two of the projects. Market analysis Co-financing information was provided for one project. Table 6. Lebanon Project descriptions were provided for 10 potential projects. Descriptions ranged from brief to very detailed summaries. The projects did not mention specific locations. The 10 projects were categorized into the energy (1), buildings (2), industry (3) and waste and agriculture (4) sectors. Government policies were not outlined or summarized in the national communications. Specific stakeholder groups were not identified. Estimated project lifetimes were given for the three industry sector projects. Estimates for GHG reductions were provided for the three industry sector projects and the four waste sector projects. Estimates were not provided for the other potential projects mentioned. Mitigation scenarios other than the proposed project were not provided. Proposed costs were given for the three industry sector projects and the four waste sector projects. For the industry sector projects, costs were given for different economic growth scenarios, and justification was provided in the text. For the waste sector projects, costs were broken down but not justified. Cost estimates were not provided for the other potential projects. Cost - benefit ratios were provided for the three industry sector projects for different economic growth scenarios with supporting documentation. Economic growth scenarios were provided for the three industry sector projects. Cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation; market analysis; co-financing availability Table 7. Nigeria Nigeria's national communication provided descriptions of 14 potential projects. The potential projects were exclusively focused on government-led studies. No information was provided on potential projects that directly create GHG reductions; however, several of the proposed studies could eventually lead to specific GHG reduction projects. The national communication devoted a chapter to sustainable development and integrated planning in the climate change context and described a number of relevant policies. Public awareness-raising efforts and stakeholder groups were not mentioned. A time frame for each of the proposed projects was provided. Estimated GHG reductions; project baseline emissions estimate; alternative project mitigation scenarios Detailed project descriptions were provided for four renewable energy projects. Brief concept descriptions were also provided for nine potential projects involving capacity-building, institutional strengthening, public awareness and education, and adaptation studies and technologies. The four projects with detailed information are all in the energy sector and mostly relate to renewable energy use. One of the project descriptions also includes energy efficiency. The rest of the concept descriptions do not directly pertain to GHG reductions. The national communication has a chapter on government policies pertaining to climate change, the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. The chapter notes a number of constraints which inhibit implementation of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. A separate section of the national communication covers the country's climate change mitigation and energy policies. The four detailed project descriptions indicated that the government will develop the renewable energy projects. No information was provided on the potential for private ownership of projects. Project cost; cost - benefit; rate of return; financial assumptions; cash flow summaries, other supporting documentation; market analysis; The Global Environment Facility was noted as a potential source of co-financing. Table 9. Sri Lanka Project descriptions were provided for 17 potential projects in the country. Each description was a one- or two-sentence summary. Projects did not mention a specific location. The 17 potential projects were categorized into the energy (5), industry (4), transport (4), agriculture (3) and forestry (1) sectors. Summarized in a separate section of the national communication. Climate change is not addressed directly in existing regulations, but there are several environmental and agricultural policies that have a direct bearing on climate change mitigation and adaptation. Public awareness and training were noted as priorities, but specific stakeholder groups are not identified. No project lifetimes were provided. Financial Summary Table 10. Viet Nam The annex to Viet Nam's national communication provided detailed descriptions of 12 potential projects. Nine of the 12 projects are energy-sector related, two are in the forestry sector and one in the agriculture sector. The national communication provided very little information on government policies on climate change, the environment in general, or energy. Estimates for project construction dates were provided for each project. Overall life of the project was provided for projects where relevant - e.g., forestry and agriculture sector projects. Estimates of the potential GHG reductions were provided for just two projects - biogas use and rice field methane reduction. Project costs were provided, but not supported with documentation. The Global Environment Facility was listed as a potential co-financing option for one of the projects. 