%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|MIDDLE EAST|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|ISRAEL|

First session Vienna, 30 April-11 May 2007 Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East Report submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran In accordance with subparagraph 7 of paragraph 16 (regional issues) of the section of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference concerning article VII of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which deals with steps to promote the achievement of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and the realization of the goals and objectives of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East, the Islamic Republic of Iran reports the following: 1. Iran first initiated the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone as an important disarmament measure in the region of the Middle East in 1974, followed by the resolution of the General Assembly. Since 1980, the General Assembly has annually adopted, by consensus, a resolution on this issue. Continuous adoption of this resolution at the General Assembly is the manifestation of the global support for the promotion of peace, security and stability in the Middle East through the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. 2. As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Islamic Republic of Iran is fully committed to its international undertakings and believes that this international instrument is the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Universal adherence to this Treaty, in particular in the region of the Middle East, would effectively ensure the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. Currently, the Zionist Regime is the only non-party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in the region. Despite repeated calls by the international community demonstrated in the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, related resolutions of the General Assembly as well as of the IAEA and the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the Zionist Regime, confident of the political and military support of the United States, has neither acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, nor placed its unwarranted nuclear facilities under IAEA full-scope safeguards. It has not even declared its intention to accede to the Treaty. This Regime's clandestine nuclear activities, with the support of the United States, seriously threaten both regional and international peace and security, and endanger the non-proliferation regime. 3. The 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of nuclear weapons reaffirmed the importance of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East. Owing to the significant provisions of that resolution, the Islamic Republic of Iran and other States in the region truly expect that the resolution should be swiftly implemented, especially by its sponsors, the Russian Federation, the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as depositories of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 4. The 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons reaffirmed "the importance of Israel's accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, in realizing the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty in the Middle East." Unconditional adherence by the Zionist Regime to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and conclusion of a full-scope safeguards agreement with the IAEA would, undoubtedly, lead to the early realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Neglecting the commitments undertaken by States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, with the adoption of this important resolution can only embolden that Regime to continue to remain a source of threat and instability in the Middle East by flouting the aspirations of the international community and remaining outside of the fold of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the full-scope safeguards regime. In this context, we believe that national reports do not address the negative implications of the Zionist Regime's intransigence to join the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and are not as effective as they ought to be with regard to the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East. 5. The Islamic Republic of Iran, in implementing its obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and specifically articles II and III of the Treaty, reaffirms that all its nuclear facilities are devoted to peaceful purposes and are under the full-scope safeguards of the IAEA. Furthermore, contributing to the realization of a world free from weapons of mass destruction, particularly in the Middle East, Iran has signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as well as ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention, Biological Weapons Convention and the 1925 Geneva Protocol. Iran's high record of accession, among the Middle East countries, to the non-proliferation and disarmament instruments is not only a clear manifestation of our firm commitment to the cause of disarmament and non-proliferation, but also is evidence of our dedicated efforts towards the noble goal of the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 6. The Islamic Republic of Iran, in its bilateral and multilateral disarmament dialogues with other States parties to the Treaty, in particular with some nuclear-weapon States and members of the European Union, has always urged their active contribution towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East. 7. The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the firm belief that an agreed plan of action and timetable for the universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons especially in the Middle East, should be a top priority on the agenda of all parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in particular nuclear-weapon States. There should be greater pressure on the Zionist Regime to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, promptly and without conditions, and to place all of its nuclear facilities under the IAEA full-scope safeguards to pave the way for the long-sought goal of the establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 8. Unfortunately, the inaction imposed upon the Security Council over the past several decades in addressing the well-documented illicit nuclear weapons programme implemented by the Zionist Regime, has given the audacity to this regime to explicitly acknowledge possession of nuclear weapons, as has been divulged by its Prime Minister in an interview on television German on 12 December 2006, in contradiction to the long-sought idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Moreover, this Regime's clandestine development and possession of nuclear weapons not only violate basic principles of international law, the Charter of the United Nations, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as well as numerous General Assembly, Security Council and IAEA General Conference resolutions, but also clearly defy the demands and concerns of the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the United Nations and constantly and obstinately disregard the international community, which has, time and again, called on this regime to renounce nuclear weapons and accede to the NPT. Over and above, the Non-Aligned Movement in New York in its statement dated 5 February 2007, expressed its great concern over the acquisition of nuclear capability by the Zionist Regime, which poses a serious and continuing threat to the security of neighbouring and other States, and condemned that Regime on its action and the said statement in this regard, and for continuing to develop and stockpile nuclear arsenals. The Security Council should fulfil its Charter-based responsibility to address such a clear and serious threat to international peace and security and take prompt and appropriate actions accordingly. The Zionist Regime is the only obstacle for the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East. Peace and stability can not be achieved in the Middle East while the massive nuclear arsenal of this Regime continues to threaten the region and beyond. It is a matter of regret that while no practical measure is taken to contain the threat of such Regime as the real source of nuclear danger in the Middle East, the Islamic Republic of Iran as a member of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the initiator of the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East is under tremendous pressure to renounce its inalienable right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 9. The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the opinion that, pending the realization of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, no country of the region must develop, produce, test or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or permit the stationing, on its territories or on territories under their control, of nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices, and they should refrain from action that runs counter to both the letter and the spirit of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and other international resolutions and documents relating to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 10. The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons have a significant role in the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. The Review Conference of 2010 should establish a subsidiary body under Main Committee II to consider this issue and make concrete recommendations on urgent and practical steps for the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, as well as the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference. The Review Conference should also make recommendations on the measures to force the Zionist Regime to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and place its unwarranted nuclear facilities under the full-scope IAEA safeguards to pave the way for the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East region. 