%%%NUCLEAR ENERGY|NUCLEAR SAFETY|

First session Vienna, 30 April-11 May 2007 Peaceful uses of nuclear energy Working paper submitted by the members of the Group of NonAligned States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 1. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty emphasizes once more that nothing in the Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination as stipulated in article IV of the Treaty, and in conformity with its articles I, II and III and their right to technical cooperation among themselves or other international organizations keeping in view the needs of the developing areas of the world. 2. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty stresses that this right constitutes one of the fundamental objectives of the Treaty. The Group expresses its rejection of any attempts by any State Party to use the IAEA technical cooperation programme as a tool for political purposes, which is in violation of the statute of IAEA. The Group reaffirms that each country's choices and decision in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected without jeopardizing its policies or international cooperation agreements and arrangements for peaceful uses of nuclear energy and its fuel-cycle policies. The Group stresses the responsibility of developed countries to facilitate and assist the legitimate development of nuclear energy of the developing countries by allowing them to participate to the fullest in possible transfer of nuclear equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes with a view to achieving the maximum benefits and applying pertinent elements of sustainable development in their activities. 3. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty recognizes the major and important role of IAEA in assisting, in particular, developing States Parties to the Treaty in planning for and the use of nuclear science and technology for various peaceful purposes, especially in the context of accelerating socio-economic development, including sustainable transfer of such technology and knowledge towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 4. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty stresses particularly the responsibility of developed countries to promote the legitimate need of nuclear energy of the developing countries, by allowing them to participate to the fullest possible to transfer of nuclear equipment, materials, scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes with a view to achieving the largest benefits and applying pertinent elements of sustainable development in their activities. 5. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty recalls that the statute of IAEA stipulated Member States' right to use atomic energy for peaceful purposes, to promote socio-economic development by way of technical cooperation and the production of electric power with due consideration for the needs of developing countries. To ensure the realization of these goals, all States Parties, developed ones in particular, shall extend their assistance, as requested by States Parties which are States members of IAEA, in the provision of equipment, material and technology for peaceful purposes. 6. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty, recalling that IAEA and its Director General, Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, have been awarded the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize, expresses the Group's full confidence in the impartiality and professionalism of the Agency. 7. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty continues to note with concern that undue restrictions on exports to developing countries of material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes persist. In this regard, the Group stresses that any undue restrictions or limitations on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, incompatible with the provisions of the Treaty, should be removed. The Group emphasizes that proliferation concerns are best addressed through multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory agreements. The Group further emphasizes that non-proliferation control arrangements should be transparent and open to participation by all States and should ensure that they do not impose restrictions on access to material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes required by developing countries for continued development. Furthermore, such arrangements must pursue and implement, without exception, the condition of adherence to IAEA comprehensive safeguards and to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a condition for supply to or cooperation with States not parties to the Treaty. 8. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty remains concerned about the ability of certain States not Parties to the Treaty to obtain, in particular from some nuclear-weapon States, nuclear materials, technology and know-how to develop nuclear weapons. The Group calls for the total and complete prohibition of the transfer of all nuclear-related equipment, information, material and facilities, resources or devices and the extension of assistance in the nuclear, scientific or technological fields to States non-parties to the Treaty without exception. 9. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty underscores that IAEA, under its statutory obligations, pursues the goals of technical cooperation in peaceful applications of nuclear energy as one of the three pillars of its activities. In order to meet the objectives of technical cooperation for peaceful purposes as enshrined in the statute of IAEA and in the Treaty, IAEA has to maintain the balance between the technical cooperation and other activities. The Group believes that all States Parties to the Treaty that are States members of IAEA have to ensure that the technical cooperation programme remains firm and sustainable through adequate financial and human resources in an assured and predictable manner. In this regard, the efficacy of the technical cooperation programme can best be ensured by formulation of the programme and the strategies strictly in accordance with the needs and the requests of the developing countries. 10. The Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty affirms the need to strengthen the radiological safety and protection systems at facilities utilizing radioactive materials as well as at radioactive waste management facilities, including the safe transportation of these materials. The Group reaffirms the need to strengthen existing international regulations relating to safety and security of transportation of such materials. While reiterating the need to take appropriate measures to prevent any dumping of nuclear or radioactive wastes, the Group calls for effective implementation of the Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste of IAEA as a means of enhancing the protection of all States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories. 