%%%ELECTIONS|PEACEBUILDING|SIERRA LEONE|POLITICAL PARTICIPATION|

First session Sierra Leone configuration 22 June 2007 Chair's declaration adopted by the Peacebuilding Commission, in its Sierra Leone configuration, on the Presidential and Parliamentary elections to be held in Sierra Leone on 11 August 2007 At the meeting of its Sierra Leone configuration held on 22 June 2007, the Peacebuilding Commission discussed preparations for the Presidential and Parliamentary elections to be held in Sierra Leone on 11 August 2007. Representatives of the Government of Sierra Leone, the international community and civil society participated in the discussion. Throughout its work with Sierra Leone, the Commission has recognized that elections are a critical milestone for the consolidation of peace and democracy. At the meeting on 22 June, Commission members welcomed and commended the efforts of the Government of Sierra Leone, the National Electoral Commission, the Political Parties Registration Commission, the United Nations system and national and international partners in preparing for the upcoming elections and the progress achieved. Commission members advised that, in order for peacebuilding to go forward in Sierra Leone, there was a need for all stakeholders to make every effort to ensure that the elections were conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner, in accordance with international standards for democratic elections. It would be important for the political parties, their supporters and media representatives to remain committed to the Political Parties Code of Conduct and the Media Code of Conduct. It was recalled that the Peacebuilding Commission had emphasized the full participation of women and youth in decision-making as an important component of the peacebuilding process. Members stressed that the participation of women and youth in the Sierra Leone election, both as voters and as candidates, would be critical. It was noted that the Government of Sierra Leone needed to mobilize through its own work additional practical support for national electoral efforts, particularly those of the National Electoral Commission. It was also recognized that international support for the electoral process was important to enable the elections to go ahead smoothly. Members of the Commission called for pledges of support for the electoral process to be fulfilled. The meeting concluded with the understanding that the Commission in its Sierra Leone configuration, would continue to pay close attention to developments in that country and would provide advice to the Security Council and other stakeholders, as necessary. 