%%%PEACEBUILDING|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|GOVERNANCE|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|SIERRA LEONE|DEMOCRATIZATION|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|YOUTH EMPLOYMENT|EMPOWERMENT|POVERTY MITIGATION|BASIC SERVICES|ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE|INTERNAL SECURITY|CAPACITY BUILDING|ELECTRIC POWER DISTRIBUTION|ENERGY SECURITY|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|

Second session Sierra Leone configuration 12 December 2007 Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework 3 December 2007 Contents Paragraphs Page Principles for cooperation Context Analysis of priorities, challenges and risks for peacebuilding Youth employment and empowerment Justice and security sector reform Consolidation of democracy and good governance Capacity-building Energy sector Subregional dimensions of peacebuilding Mutual commitments Commitments of the Government of Sierra Leone Commitments of the Peacebuilding Commission Roles and responsibilities of the United Nations in support of the Framework Roles and responsibilities of bilateral and multilateral partners in support of the Framework Roles and responsibilities of the States in the West African region in support of the Framework Review and tracking of progress Annex Matrix for review of progress in the implementation of commitments I. Principles for cooperation 1. The Republic of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission, In accordance with the mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission, inter alia, to bring together all relevant actors to marshal resources and advice on and propose integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery, Determined to strengthen the partnership and cooperation between Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission, Recognizing the progress made in Sierra Leone's stabilization, recovery and peacebuilding since the signing of the Lomé Peace Agreement (1999), Mindful that lasting peace and sustainable development in Sierra Leone would require addressing the remaining threats to stability and the root causes of the conflict, Stressing the need to build on existing achievements, strategies and commitments for peace and development and to continue their implementation, Noting the strong partnership and coordination structures in Sierra Leone between the national authorities and the international community, Recognizing that peace consolidation in Sierra Leone requires full national ownership and the participation of all relevant stakeholders, such as the central and local governments, civil society, the private sector and international partners, Further recognizing the need for continued engagement of the international community in the process of peace consolidation until the objectives of sustainable peace are met, Have developed the present Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework based on the following principles: (a) National ownership: the primary responsibility and ownership for peace consolidation and the development of a prosperous and democratic Sierra Leone rests with the Government and the people of Sierra Leone; (b) Mutual accountability: sustainable peacebuilding requires a strong partnership on the basis of mutual respect and accountability between the Government and the people of Sierra Leone and their international partners; (c) Sustained engagement: peacebuilding is a long-term process requiring sustained and predictable engagement from all stakeholders. II. Context 2. Since the signing of the Lomé Peace Agreement in 1999, the Government of Sierra Leone and its people, with the support of the international community, have made tremendous progress in rebuilding the country and securing peace. Among key achievements are the peaceful and democratic national elections held in 2002 and 2007 and the local government election held in 2004; the establishment and completion of the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission; the comprehensive reform and restructuring of national security institutions, such as the Sierra Leone Police, the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces and the Office of National Security; and the creation of a number of democratic institutions, such as the National Electoral Commission, the Political Parties Registration Commission, the Human Rights Commission and the Anti-Corruption Commission. 3. A number of national frameworks and strategies for peace and development, such as Sierra Leone Vision 2025, the Sierra Leone Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, the Peace Consolidation Strategy, the Improved Governance and Accountability Pact and the report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission have contributed to the achievements made thus far and continue to guide the process for recovery and stabilization. 4. Notwithstanding the significant progress made, peace and stability in Sierra Leone remain fragile. The root causes of the conflict -- widespread corruption, marginalization and disempowerment of the rural and some sectors of urban communities, lack of economic opportunities and inadequate State capacity to deliver basic services -- remain largely unaddressed. The unemployment and marginalization of youth in particular present a serious threat to stability and peace. 5. Sierra Leone's engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission is aimed at ensuring sustained attention of the international community in providing additional political, financial and technical support to the country's peace consolidation efforts. The present Framework is a medium-term document for partnership and mutual accountability, with specific actions that the Government of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission commit themselves to undertake to address the challenges and threats most critical to sustaining and consolidating peace. It will guide the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Government of Sierra Leone by highlighting key peacebuilding gaps in existing national strategies and commitments and ensuring their timely and effective implementation. The Peacebuilding Commission will also use the Framework to enhance dialogue and strengthen the partnerships between Sierra Leone and its international partners. 6. The commitments in the present Framework are identified based on three main criteria: they are critical to avoiding relapse into conflict, they are short-to-medium-term in duration, and they require mutual action from the Government and other national stakeholders and Sierra Leone's international partners. The focus on these elements should not be seen as replacing the commitments in other existing frameworks and bilateral and multilateral cooperation agreements. 7. The present Framework is a flexible document which can be modified jointly by the Government of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission in response to developments in the peace consolidation process in Sierra Leone. It has been developed through a consultative process in Sierra Leone and the deliberations of the Peacebuilding Commission. III. Analysis of priorities, challenges and risks for peacebuilding 8. Consistent with existing national strategies, the present Framework highlights critical and inter-dependent priorities for risk reduction and peace consolidation in Sierra Leone. It also identifies constraints in the implementation of existing strategies and identifies mutual commitments in response to these. Primary challenges in the implementation of many of the existing strategies and commitments are related to political will, limited financial and human capacity of the Government, civil society organizations and the Parliament, as well as constraints in coordination mechanisms and arrangements with international partners. These challenges are further compounded by the poor state of basic infrastructure, such as electricity, water and roads. The Government of Sierra Leone has also stressed the need to ensure harmonization of benchmarks and monitoring requirements for its international commitments to ensure effective implementation of existing priorities. 9. The priority areas contained in the Framework were identified by the Government of Sierra Leone in country-specific meetings of the Peacebuilding Commission and subsequent consultations with all relevant stakeholders. These include: youth employment and empowerment, consolidation of democracy and good governance, justice and security sector reform, capacity-building, and energy-sector development. In addition, the subregional dimensions of peacebuilding and cross-cutting issues of gender equality and human rights are considered in the analysis of priorities for peacebuilding and the selection of commitments. A. Youth employment and empowerment 10. The marginalization and political exclusion of youth was identified by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission as one of the root causes of the civil war and is widely perceived to be a threat to peace consolidation today. The Government defines youth as persons between 15 and 35 years, who are estimated to represent approximately two million people out of a total population of about five million. Close to two thirds of those young people are considered to be unemployed or underemployed. Young people also tend to have less paid employment and fewer opportunities in the public and formal sectors. They face a number of employment constraints, such as low levels of education, limited access to land, social capital and credit. Ex-combatants, urban slum youth, poor and socially excluded youth in rural areas and youth in squatter settlements in border areas of Sierra Leone comprise key sections of marginalized young men and women requiring special measures to address their needs. The challenge of youth marginalization, however, goes beyond the issue of economic opportunities and employment. It is also necessary to ensure the full participation of young men and women in the political process and protection of their rights. Ensuring equal participation of women, especially young women, within the political process constitutes a specific challenge and requires targeted interventions, such as legislative reform and sustained capacity-building. 11. A few short- and medium-term initiatives are under way to address youth unemployment, such as the Youth Employment Scheme launched by the Government in 2006 with the aim of generating up to 135,000 short-term jobs for young people. The Government of Sierra Leone has also developed a National Youth Policy and is setting up a National Youth Commission to promote youth empowerment and greater participation in decision-making. The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund has also provided support for the Government's Youth Enterprise Development Programme. The World Bank and the Government of Sierra Leone have produced a comprehensive study on youth employment, noting the need to develop both medium- and long-term solutions to the problem. 12. The challenge of addressing youth unemployment is closely linked to the creation of long-term economic growth, reviving agricultural production and marketing, and creating an enabling environment for private-sector development and domestic, diaspora and foreign investment. A number of preconditions, such as improved availability of electricity, water and other basic infrastructure and support for entrepreneurs and the self-employed, would need to be addressed in that context. Although the importance of long-term economic growth in the context of peace consolidation is recognized as part of the present Framework, specific activities under this sector fall within the purview of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Within this Framework, a more targeted and medium-term focus on addressing youth unemployment will be prioritized, in particular in the areas of policy reform and youth empowerment through the implementation of the National Youth Policy, strengthening of the National Youth Council, District Youth Committees and the expansion of the Government's Youth Employment Scheme. B. Justice and security sector reform 13. Despite some progress made in the re-establishing of judicial institutions throughout the country, lack of access to justice for the majority of the population, coupled with lack of capacity in the justice system, are serious concerns for peace and stability. The justice system is plagued with outdated laws, inadequate personnel and logistical problems. Almost 80 per cent of the population relies on the traditional (chieftaincy-based) system of justice, which lacks the capacity to effectively dispense justice and is seen as biased against women and young people and lacking in transparency and accountability. 14. A number of initiatives are under way to rebuild the institutions of justice in Sierra Leone. With the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, considerable progress has been made in the reduction of the backlog of cases and providing urgently needed capacity-building support to the judiciary and the justice sector as a whole. However, addressing the longstanding challenges facing the justice sector, in particular improving access to justice, requires a holistic approach. To that end, the Government of Sierra Leone, with the support of international partners, in particular the United Kingdom Department for International Development, has launched a Justice Sector Development Programme, a Justice Sector National Policy Framework and a Justice Sector Reform Strategy for 2008-2010. Legal and constitutional review and reform programmes are also under way, through a Law Reform Commission and a Constitutional Review Commission. 15. These efforts need to be closely coordinated and further measures are needed to raise the population's confidence in the justice system and to ensure timely and equal access to justice. In that regard, the implementation of the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, support for the continued work of the Special Court, support for the newly established National Human Rights Commission and support for the efforts enhancing traditional dispute mechanisms and community-based mediation and "peace-monitoring" initiatives will be critical. 16. Since the end of the conflict, successful security sector reform initiatives have been undertaken to transform and restructure security institutions to effectively respond to threats to the State and citizenry of Sierra Leone. Further consolidation of those reforms is needed, with a focus on making the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces effective and affordable. The Conditions and Terms of Service of the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces also need to be reviewed and updated. There is also a need for further training to improve police and community relations, and the expansion and strengthening of the Family Support Units. Recognizing that poor coordination among the security institutions was a contributing factor to the conflict, further support is needed for the Government's strategy to strengthen coordination among security institutions through the Office of National Security, including in strengthening the conflict prevention and early-warning capacity of the District and Provincial Security Committees and promoting policy dialogue between the Office of National Security and civil society organizations. C. Consolidation of democracy and good governance 17. Democratic governance and the establishing and strengthening of national institutions are indispensable for durable peace, economic and social progress and promotion of human rights and the rule of law. One of the key strategies of the Government of Sierra Leone in the consolidation of democracy and the establishment of an accountable Government has been the expansion of State authority and service provision to all parts of the country. That strategy is based on the recognition that the marginalization from the political process of a significant portion of the population and the unequal access to economic opportunities were contributing factors to the civil war and continue to remain risk factors for peace consolidation. Additional efforts are needed in the lead-up to the 2008 local council elections to strengthen institutions of local governance and ensure effective decentralization in accordance with the Local Government Act (2004) and in particular to clarify the division of roles and responsibilities between local councils and the traditional chiefdom authorities. Adequate resources and technical support need to be mobilized in the lead-up to the local council elections. 18. Further support is also needed to enhance the capacity of national institutions such as the Parliament, the National Electoral Commission, the Political Parties Registration Commission, the Anti-Corruption Commission, the National Commission for Democracy and the Human Rights Commission. Efforts in support of governance institutions need to be complemented through enhanced dialogue among political parties and the reconciliation and full participation of all segments of the population in decision-making. In that context, enhancing the role and participation of civil society, including youth and women's groups, in political transformation is critical and requires urgent attention and support through capacity-building activities and the strengthening of coordination mechanisms. 19. Many efforts have been taken to address corruption, such as the adoption of Anti-Corruption Act (2000) and the creation of the Anti-Corruption Commission. However, corruption remains a major challenge and a threat to the country's stability and socio-economic progress. Additional concrete measures and political commitment are critical to combat corruption. Such measures would require, among other things, strengthening of the Anti-Corruption Commission, revision of the Anti-Corruption Act and strategy and capacity-building of law enforcement institutions and the civil service as a whole. Further efforts are also needed to strengthen the capacity of the Government of Sierra Leone, in accordance with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, for the management and governance of natural resources for the benefit of the people of Sierra Leone. Initiatives such as the Improved Governance and Accountability Pact signed by the Government and the four donors who provide direct budgetary support in July 2006 provide important measures for strengthening mutual accountability and good governance in Sierra Leone. D. Capacity-building 20. Progress on the identified peacebuilding priorities cannot be separated from capacity-building in its broadest sense and at all levels. After many years of neglect and as a result of the civil war, Government institutions and other national stakeholders have limited capacity to deliver services, implement reforms and ensure adequate economic and financial management. This is also manifested at the provincial and district levels, where State institutions in many instances remain weak or non-existent, hindering the process of decentralization. In addition, capacity limitations undermine the oversight roles of the national Parliament, civil society organizations and the media. 21. A number of public-sector initiatives and accountability measures have been implemented, including through the Institutional Reform and Capacity-building Programme. However, further progress is needed, in particular in the area of civil service reform. A comprehensive and sustainable civil service reform strategy needs to be developed to ensure opportunities for merit-based recruitment, stronger performance and accountability and to address urgent capacity gaps, including the low percentage of women in the civil service. A comprehensive capacity review of Ministries, Departments and Agencies is also needed to identify and address the short-to-mid-term challenges and capacity gaps. To ensure the long-term sustainability of peacebuilding efforts, all programmes and activities must incorporate capacity-building as a key element. Furthermore, international agencies operating in Sierra Leone should assess their own capacities to effectively support the country's peacebuilding and development efforts. E. Energy sector 22. Sierra Leone's energy sector, particularly its electricity subsector, is in a state of crisis. The country's energy crisis is one of the main challenges to its economic growth and recovery and it impedes continued progress on peace consolidation. The current electricity needs of the country stand at 250 MW, with current production at 10 MW. The shortcomings in the supply of electricity constitute a critical and overarching challenge affecting all peacebuilding priorities identified in the present Framework. Addressing the energy crisis will have a significant positive impact on employment generation, public revenue generation, poverty reduction and the overall recovery of the country. It will also deliver a critical and long-awaited peace dividend to the population five years after the end of conflict. 23. While many of the challenges in the energy sector are of a long-term nature, the present Framework will prioritize and address short-term emergency issues, such as the generation, distribution and management of electricity supply to Freetown and its surrounding areas. F. Subregional dimensions of peacebuilding 24. Long-term peace consolidation in Sierra Leone is closely linked to developments in the wider subregion, in particular the Mano River Basin, comprising Guinea, Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone. For decades, instability in one country has spilled over to its neighbours and border areas have in many instances served as safe havens for armed militias. There is a continued need to enhance dialogue between the countries in the subregion and promote conflict prevention, resolution and mediation capacities. The cooperation within the Mano River Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the African Union and other regional and subregional organizations constitute key platforms for such dialogue and need to be enhanced through a more proactive political leadership and increased resource allocation. The Mano River Union secretariat should also be strengthened to ensure effective coordination among the member States of the Union. Peace consolidation efforts at the national and international levels must also be supplemented by confidence-building measures between border communities, through specific dispute resolution mechanisms and strengthened trade relations. IV. Mutual commitments A. Commitments of the Government of Sierra Leone 25. Recognizing that responsible and democratic leadership, effective management of resources and adequate capacity are the prerequisites for peace consolidation in Sierra Leone, the Government of Sierra Leone will fulfil the following commitments: (a) Develop and implement targeted programmes for youth employment and empowerment, including through literacy, vocational training programmes, and civic education programmes; (b) Promote efforts to strengthen youth organizations and increase the participation of youth in decision-making, paying particular attention to the needs of young women and girls; (c) Revise and implement the National Youth Policy; (d) Review and revise the Youth Employment Scheme in order to benefit from the most effective programmes for youth employment generation and empowerment; (e) Support the participation of young men and women as candidates and voters in the 2008 local council elections; (f) Develop a plan for, and embark on, timely implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission; (g) Ensure inclusive, participatory and transparent legislative and constitutional reform processes, including through support for the efforts of the Law Reform Commission and the Constitutional Review Commission; (h) Provide additional support to the Family Support Units of the police to adequately address sexual and gender-based violence and other crimes against women and children; (i) Establish an Independent Police Complaints Review Board aimed at preventing police excesses or misbehaviour and improve accountability, professional standards and police-community relations; (j) Ensure timely and full implementation of the laws on the Registration of Customary Marriages and Divorce, Domestic Violence and the Devolution of Estates; (k) Provide additional support for the work of the Human Rights Commission; (l) Implement the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces Core Review Programme, including on the size and the terms and conditions of service, to ensure that the armed forces are affordable and effective; (m) Ensure adequate preparations for the local council elections in 2008 through increased political dialogue, support to the National Electoral Commission and the Political Parties Registration Commission; (n) Consolidate democratic governance by strengthening governance institutions, especially local governance institutions; (o) Ensure and support greater participation of women in national decision-making and political processes, especially in the 2008 local elections; (p) Review the Local Governance Act of 2004 and clarify the roles and responsibilities of local councils and traditional authorities; (q) Develop and support programmes for civic education and participation and greater information-sharing between the Government and the people; (r) Review the Anti-Corruption Strategy (2000) and develop a holistic strategy which gives the Anti-Corruption Commission independent powers to prosecute and takes into account the need for capacity-building efforts; (s) Separate the positions of the Attorney General and the Minister of Justice; (t) Review the Core Minerals Policy and related regulations to improve the Governance and management of natural resources, including on current contracts and revenue collection, to prevent smuggling and illicit trade, and to ensure participation at the local and community levels; (u) Review civil service reform proposals and undertake a comprehensive reform of the service, including the Senior Executive Service, ensuring greater participation of and enhanced career opportunities for women and young people; (v) Accelerate the capacity-building of Local Councils so that they can take responsibility for the devolved functions from line ministries; (w) Facilitate and support capacity-building initiatives for the private sector and civil society, especially women's and youth organizations, which contribute to peace consolidation, reconciliation and community-based socio-economic recovery and reconstruction; (x) Develop a strategy for holistic support to the Sierra Leone Parliament; (y) Develop and implement an emergency plan for improving electricity generation and distribution in Freetown and Western Area; (z) Elaborate a short-to-medium-term comprehensive energy sector-wide strategy; (aa) Fully participate in and support initiatives of the Mano River Union and other organizations for subregional peace consolidation, with a special focus on initiatives aimed at building confidence and cooperation among border communities and generating youth employment; (bb) Support the capacity-building of the Mano River Union secretariat; Support for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (cc) Utilize existing coordination mechanisms to support implementation of the present Framework and raise awareness for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission; (dd) Encourage and facilitate documentation and sharing of the lessons learned from Sierra Leone's experience in restoring and building peace with other post-conflict countries. B. Commitments of the Peacebuilding Commission 26. Recognizing the primary responsibility of the people and the Government of Sierra Leone for peace consolidation and development in their country, the Peacebuilding Commission, in accordance with its mandate as defined in General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, and the discussions at its country-specific meetings on Sierra Leone, will: (a) Maintain its engagement with Sierra Leone for a period of three years and jointly review continued engagement after 2010; (b) Support the efforts of the Government and the people of Sierra Leone for peace consolidation consistent with the present Framework; (c) Support the implementation of the present Framework within the context of the governing bodies of international institutions; (d) Advocate for a sustained partnership and an enhanced dialogue between the Government of Sierra Leone and its international partners, including through efforts to increase the number of international partners supporting peace consolidation efforts in Sierra Leone; (e) Support the development of a Sierra Leone National Aid Policy to ensure effective and timely implementation of aid effectiveness policies and good practices, such as the Paris Declaration; (f) Galvanize attention and sustained levels of financial resources and technical assistance to support the implementation of the present Framework. This may include the development of multi-donor sector-wide funding mechanisms, such as multi-donor trust funds; (g) Support the efforts of the Government and the people of Sierra Leone, taking into account existing instruments, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberley Process, by advocating for appropriate action in the engagement of the relevant stakeholders, in ensuring national ownership for effective, transparent and sustainable exploitation and management of Sierra Leone's natural resources; (h) Encourage effective coordination of United Nations and other actors on peace consolidation issues consistent with the present Framework; (i) Integrate a subregional dimension in its engagement with Sierra Leone, notably through enhanced partnerships with the countries in the subregion and support for the Mano River Union and its secretariat; (j) Support national research and learning institutions to conduct research, collect and share, at the national, regional and international levels, lessons learned and best experiences related to peacebuilding; (k) Encourage tangible contributions to support Sierra Leone in its peacebuilding efforts and implementation of the present Framework through individual and collective actions by all relevant stakeholders for, inter alia: (l) Support capacity-building of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports to ensure mainstreaming of youth concerns; (m) Support the Government's efforts for the generation of youth employment; (n) Support the upscaling of existing vocational, literacy training and civic education programmes; (o) Support the implementation of the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in addressing the root causes of conflict; (p) Support the work of the Sierra Leone Special Court; (q) Support capacity-building initiatives for the armed forces and the police, in particular to enhance Sierra Leone's participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations; (r) Broaden donor support for the Justice Sector Development Programme; (s) Support additional management training and capacity-building for midlevel management of the Sierra Leone Police; (t) Provide technical assistance in support of Sierra Leone courts and in support of the capacity-building of traditional courts; (u) Support Sierra Leone's efforts to promote accountable democratic governance and the rule of law; (v) Support the work of the Human Rights Commission, the National Electoral Commission, the Political Parties Registration Commission, the National Commission for Democracy and other national institutions; (w) Support the Government's programmes to address the immediate socio-economic needs of the population, in accordance with the Sierra Leone Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and the Millennium Development Goals, and the development of basic services and infrastructure, including water, electricity and roads, as essential conditions for peacebuilding; (x) Support capacity-building of the Sierra Leone Parliament; (y) Support capacity-building for civil service reform, including the Senior Executive Service; (z) Support capacity-building to enhance the Government's efforts in the management of natural resources, in particular the Ministries of Marine and Mineral Resources; (aa) Support capacity-building initiatives for the private sector and civil society, especially women's and youth organizations, which contribute to peace consolidation, reconciliation and community-based socio-economic recovery and reconstruction; (bb) Support the efforts of the Government of Sierra Leone in the area of gender mainstreaming; Energy (cc) Marshall support for the implementation of the short-term emergency plan of the Government of Sierra Leone for electricity generation and distribution, including the restructuring of the National Power Authority and other public institutions in that sector; (dd) Marshall support for the enhancement and rehabilitation of the electricity generation capacity, distribution networks and transmission lines; (ee) Provide additional technical and financial support for the revitalization of the Mano River Union, especially in fostering cross-border confidence-building and addressing common peacebuilding challenges, including at the community level; (ff) Provide assistance to the Mano River Union and Economic Community of West African States in addressing cross-border issues, such as the illicit trade in small arms. C. Roles and responsibilities of the United Nations in support of the Framework 27. In the light of Security Council resolution 1620 (2005) of 31 August 2005, which defines the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone, Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 on women, peace and security and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 2008-2010, the United Nations system is encouraged to: (a) Support the implementation of the present Framework and the work of the Peacebuilding Commission; (b) Take into account the priorities of the present Framework in reviewing the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and related United Nations programmes and activities in the country; (c) Enhance coordination within the United Nations system on peacebuilding priority issues; (d) Ensure coordination among all actors and programmes in peacebuilding to ensure coherence and avoid duplication of efforts; (e) Develop and implement a peacebuilding sensitive approach to United Nations activities and programming; (f) Provide continued support to initiatives and programmes promoting greater subregional cooperation and development, including through the programmes undertaken by the Economic Commission for Africa. D. Roles and responsibilities of bilateral and multilateral partners in support of the Framework 28. Within the framework of their respective cooperation programmes and taking into account the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the commitments in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, bilateral and multilateral partners are encouraged to: (b) Integrate the priorities of the present Framework into their cooperation programmes; (c) Support the implementation of Government of Sierra Leone priorities as reflected in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (2008-2010); (d) Join with the Peacebuilding Commission in advocacy on behalf of Sierra Leone, including in galvanization of additional resources; (e) Fulfil the commitments made at the 2005 and 2006 Consultative Group meetings; (f) Ensure the coordination of programmes and interventions to avoid the duplication of peacebuilding efforts; (g) Develop and implement a peacebuilding-sensitive approach to activities and programmes. E. Roles and responsibilities of the States in the West African region in support of the Framework 29. The States in the subregion are encouraged to: (a) Contribute to peacebuilding in Sierra Leone by supporting the work of various subregional organizations, including through the revitalization of the Mano River Union; (b) Contribute to, and cooperate on, joint subregional projects aimed at cross-border confidence-building; (c) Commit to the peaceful and diplomatic resolution of outstanding disputes and promote enhanced cooperation for conflict prevention and early warning; (d) Contribute to a comprehensive approach to addressing economic and social challenges, including in the development and implementation of subregional energy-sector cooperation strategies. V. Review and tracking of progress 30. The Government of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission will review, through semi-annual country-specific meetings and regular consultations with all relevant stakeholders in Sierra Leone, progress on the implementation of the present Framework. Key stakeholders in the peacebuilding process of the country will be invited to attend at least one of the semi-annual meetings. The purpose of the formal meetings will be: (a) to review progress in achieving the objectives and commitments of the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework and the overall engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission with Sierra Leone; (b) to focus the attention of the international community on key peacebuilding issues requiring additional action; (c) to ensure that the Government of Sierra Leone, the Peacebuilding Commission and all other relevant stakeholders honour their commitments under the present Framework; (d) to draw lessons and good practices; and (e) to update the present Framework, as appropriate. The meetings will result in advice and recommendations on how relevant stakeholders might achieve their commitments contained in the present Framework. 31. The semi-annual review process will be based on progress reports comprising several key elements, such as: (a) a trend analysis describing important developments under each peacebuilding priority issue and cross-cutting area; (b) review of progress in the implementation of mutual commitments; and (c) recommendations for follow-up actions. The progress reports will be developed by the Government of Sierra Leone, with critical inputs from the Development Assistance Coordination Office and civil society organizations and the support of the United Nations in Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Support Office. The account of progress on the commitments of the Peacebuilding Commission will be prepared by the Peacebuilding Support Office, in consultation with the Peacebuilding Commission. To the extent possible, the analysis in the periodic reports will be based on existing indicators and benchmarks contained in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, the Multi-Donor Budget Support Framework, and the Improved Governance and Accountability Pact. 32. The Government of Sierra Leone, with support from the international community, will allocate sufficient resources to existing aid coordination mechanisms to support the review and implementation of the present Framework. In addition, the Government of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission will also develop a monitoring tool or "matrix" to facilitate the effective implementation of the present Framework and its review process. The matrix will have specific benchmarks and indicators, will include existing peacebuilding efforts and will identify additional support required for the implementation of the commitments listed in the present Framework (for matrix template, see annex). 33. Informal civil society briefings, with the participation of both international and local civil society organizations, will precede the formal meetings of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. Civil society groups will play an important role in raising awareness about the partnership of the Government of Sierra Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission and will contribute to the review and monitoring of the present Framework, including in the further development of the matrix for the review of progress and the implementation of commitments. 34. The calendar of formal meetings of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission will be established in consultation with the Government of Sierra Leone and its partners so as to minimize additional administrative requirements. Those formal meetings will be complemented by additional meetings or briefings and an annual visit of the member States of the Peacebuilding Commission to Sierra Leone, as appropriate. Such additional meetings and field visits will result in advice and recommendations from the Peacebuilding Commission to the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other relevant institutions. [Note: This matrix will be a "living document", continuously updated following the adoption of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework. It will provide the basis for the generation of the six-monthly periodic reviews of the implementation of the Framework for consideration by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Government of Sierra Leone.] Commitments Benchmarks and indicators Ongoing international support Status of implementation Additional requirements 