%%%TREATY COMPLIANCE|PEACE TREATIES|DARFUR (SUDAN)|SUDAN|

Letter dated 2 May 2007 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General With reference to your latest report on Darfur (S/2007/104), dated 23 February 2007, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith Presidential Decree No. 8 for the year 2007 establishing the Darfur Assessment and Evaluation Commission in order to promote the full and timely implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem Mohamad Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic] In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate Office of the President of the Republic Presidential Decree No. 8 of 2007 establishing the Darfur Assessment and Evaluation Commission The President of the Republic, Pursuant to article 33, paragraph 511, of the Darfur Peace Agreement, Issues the decree whose text follows: Name of the decree and effective date 1. (a) This decree shall be known as "Presidential Decree No. 8 of 2007 establishing the Darfur Assessment and Evaluation Commission" and shall enter into force as from the date of its signature; (b) The Commission shall be independent in its actions with a view to the full implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement and to ensuring timeliness. Composition 2. The independent Darfur Assessment and Evaluation Commission shall be composed as follows: (a) Representative of the African Union Chairman (b) Three representatives of the Government of the Sudan, including the Adviser to the President on Darfur Affairs Members (c) Three representatives of the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army and the Justice and Equality Movement Members (d) A representative of the United Nations Member (e) A representative of the European Union Member (f) A representative of the League of Arab States Member (g) A representative of Libya Member (h) A representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt Member (i) A representative of Nigeria Member (j) A representative of Eritrea Member (k) A representative of the United States of America Member Terms of reference of the Commission 3. The terms of reference of the Darfur Assessment and Evaluation Commission shall be as follows: (a) Continuously monitoring the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement; (b) Assessing difficulties arising during implementation and facilitating the overcoming of those difficulties at the appropriate time; (c) Conducting, whenever necessary, consultations and coordination with other monitoring bodies or implementation mechanisms provided for in the Darfur Peace Agreement; (d) Staying in close contact with the parties with a view to promoting full compliance with all the provisions of the Agreement and facilitating the efforts of the parties towards that end; (e) Coordinating and consulting, whenever necessary, with the international and regional organizations and agencies concerned with the implementation of the Agreement; (f) Encouraging full cooperation between the parties and the international and regional organizations and agencies participating in the implementation of the Agreement; (g) Assessing and encouraging the honouring of commitments and international support for the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement; (h) Submitting periodic reports to the African Union, the Government of the Sudan and the signatory parties; (i) Soliciting direct international financial support to facilitate its work. Decisions of the Commission 4. The Commission shall adopt its decisions by consensus. Headquarters 5. The Commission shall have its principal headquarters in Khartoum and may hold its meetings in any other place, as agreed by the parties. Rules of procedure 6. (i) The Assessment and Evaluation Commission shall establish its own rules of procedure; (ii) Without prejudice to the general principles set out above, the rules of procedure may include the terms of service of persons working with the Commission. Budget 7. The Assessment and Evaluation Commission shall establish a budget to facilitate its work, to be adopted by the Ministry of Finance and National Economy. Issued under my signature this fifth day of the month of Rabi` I in the year A.H. 1428, corresponding to the twenty-fourth day of the month of March of the year 2007. (Signed) Field Marshal Omer Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir President of the Republic of the Sudan 