%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|NORD-KIVU (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO)|SUD-KIVU (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO)|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO SITUATION|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|HUMAN RIGHTS|MILITARY REFORM|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS|

Letter dated 5 July 2007 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to convey to you, as an annex to this letter, the plan to promote security in North and South Kivu proposed by The Honourable Vital Kamerhe, President of the National Assembly of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This plan was given to the members of the United Nations Security Council mission that visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 19 and 20 June 2007. My Government takes this opportunity to reaffirm its full support for a primarily political and diplomatic solution to the deplorable situation which continues to exist in the eastern part of the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Government requests you to circulate this letter and its annex as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Ileka Atoki Ambassador Plan to promote security in North and South Kivu which The Honourable Vital Kamerhe, President of the National Assembly, proposed to the members of the United Nations Security Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo Problem North and South Kivu are experiencing growing insecurity owing to the presence of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe, who kill, steal and rape. In particular, there are elements of Laurent Nkunda's forces in North Kivu, while the so-called group of 47, composed of troops from the former branch of the Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie who refused integration, is present in South Kivu. To put an end to this situation, we have devised a plan with five parts: 1. Humanitarian and human rights Reactivation of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement process Establish transit camps to receive the ex-FAR and Interahamwe so that they can be repatriated to their country of origin; the camps would be protected by the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the inmates would be disarmed and their families would be placed in the charge of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Repatriation to Rwanda taking into account existing facilities there. Establish an international committee to monitor the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement process. It was the heavy involvement of the international community in the form of Operation Artemis that finally enabled the Ituri to rediscover the road to peace. Take all appropriate measures for the protection of the civilian populations against the violent acts and massive human rights violations of armed groups, militias and elements of the armed forces. Expedite the reform of the judicial system and guarantee the independence of the judiciary in order to put an end to impunity. Assist affected populations and displaced persons in North and South Kivu. 2. Military The elements that refuse to enter the transit camps will be subjected to armed pursuit. For this purpose, it will be necessary to prepare élite Congolese elements that benefit from logistics and information provided by the international community, especially the European Union, and support from the Southern African Development Community. There will, of course, have to be major reforms within the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the dismantling of the network responsible for misappropriating soldiers' pay; this will mean separating the military chain of command from the mechanism in charge of payroll and the management of daily expenses. The presence of MONUC in the east will also have to be strengthened through an additional one-year mandate after evaluation of the progress made. MONUC must be given missions that are clear-cut, as in Ituri previously. 3. Economic Since the ex-FAR and Interahamwe are able to resupply by selling cassiterite, coltan and gold, suspension of the mining of these ores is called for. Economic operators from this and adjacent countries are responsible for selling the ores on the international market. The Congolese economic operators must be made aware of their duty to their native regions. 4. Political Meeting: the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, the Prime Minister and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must meet to settle on one of two options: political-diplomatic or military. I prefer the first, the political-diplomatic option. The key sectors and the leaders of North and South Kivu must meet within the framework of a provincial conference to discuss the peace, security and development of their provinces, with a view to their involvement in the search for a lasting solution to the crisis in the east. The participants must not be allowed to engage in rhetoric that would exacerbate the crisis. They must, on this occasion, find a way of communicating that avoids portraying all Hutus and all Tutsis as in collusion with the armed groups. This tactic has a double advantage: isolating the outlaws and reassuring the Hutus and Tutsis who want to live in peace with the other communities. Prevail on Rwanda and on all who have influence over Laurent Nkunda to persuade him to agree to live in exile, followed by the integration of his soldiers in the national army, where they will be entitled to be assigned grades and functions on a par with their colleagues. Also secure the integration in the national army of the elements of the group of 47 in South Kivu; we realize that, at this level, war is not an appropriate solution, unless we are forced into it. 5. Diplomatic Make some preliminary overtures towards re-establishing diplomatic relations with Rwanda, which will lead to the opening of our respective Embassies. Initially, a Chargé d'affaires will be appointed, followed by an Ambassador. The advantage of this appointment will be to have someone to relay our messages to the Government of Rwanda and to work for the improvement of our bilateral relations. In this way, we can expect the misunderstandings that arise because of the absence of communication to be quickly dissipated. However, opening an embassy in Rwanda while Laurent Nkunda continues to sow desolation and death among the population would be taken amiss by national opinion. This explains the necessity of involving Rwanda in the search for solutions to the crisis in North and South Kivu. Consider the possibility of the resumption of activities by the Community of Great Lakes Countries, expanded to include other countries in the Great Lakes region, such as Uganda, Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania. Lifting of the embargo on the purchase of arms decreed and maintained against the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Obtain from the international community funds for the Stability, Security and Development Pact in the Great Lakes region. Secure financing for a plan to restore the environment in the east, which was destroyed, first, by the massive flow of Rwandan refugees and, second, by warfare. Done at Kinshasa, on 20 June 2007 Vital Kamerhe 