%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|RECONCILIATION|SOMALIA|MILITARY PERSONNEL|UGANDA|SOMALIA SITUATION|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|INTERNAL SECURITY|INTERIM GOVERNMENTS|INSTITUTION BUILDING|NEGOTIATION|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|CIVILIAN PERSONS|SPECIAL MISSIONS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|RELIEF PERSONNEL|

Letter dated 18 July 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council In my capacity as the representative of the current Chairman of the African Union, I have the honour to transmit herewith the communiqué issued by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its 80th meeting, held on 18 July 2007, in Addis Ababa, concerning the situation in Somalia (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Leslie Kojo Christian Ambassador Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United Nations Representative of the current Chairman of the African Union [Original: English and French] Communiqué on the situation in Somalia issued by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its 80th meeting The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 80th meeting held on 18 July 2007, adopted the following decision on the situation in Somalia: Council, 1. Takes note of the report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the situation in Somalia [PSC/PR/2(LXXX)]; 2. Strongly condemns the threats and/or acts of violence and terrorism perpetrated by those elements seeking to undermine the political process. Council calls on all member States and partners of the African Union to stand firm on the side of Somalia's legitimate institutions in their efforts to fight violence and other acts aimed at undermining the political process. Council calls on all member States and the larger international community to cease immediately any further support for extremist elements or those who seek to block progress by violent means, and to support the ongoing efforts towards inclusive political dialogue; 3. Condemns, in the strongest terms, the attacks against the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and recalls that the Mission has no other objective than to support Somalia and its people in their efforts to achieve lasting peace and reconciliation; 4. Appeals to all the Somalis, both in the country and in the diaspora, to reject violence and to actively and constructively participate in the reconciliation process; 5. Welcomes the opening of the National Reconciliation Congress on 15 July 2007, in Mogadishu, as a significant step towards an all-inclusive and genuine reconciliation process, within the framework of the Transitional Federal Charter. In this respect, Council requests all the representatives of the Somali people participating in the Congress to bear their responsibilities and engage constructively in the process, and to seek peaceful solutions to the problems facing Somalia, within the framework of the Transitional Federal Charter; 6. Urges the Transitional Federal Institutions, in keeping with the objective of the National Reconciliation Congress, to spare no effort to reach out to all sections of the Somali population, with a view to facilitating the reconciliation process; 7. Encourages the Chairperson of the Commission, working closely with all stakeholders, including the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the League of Arab States, the United Nations and other African Union partners, to continue and intensify his efforts in support of the reconciliation process in Somalia; 8. Appeals to the member States and the larger international community to urgently provide the assistance needed to enhance the capacity of the Transitional Federal Institutions to enable them to effectively assume their responsibilities; 9. Expresses its appreciation for the steps taken by the Commission for the deployment of AMISOM, following the decision adopted at its 69th meeting held on 19 January 2007, Council pays tribute to the Ugandan troops for their efforts and the sacrifices made, as well as to the Ugandan Government for its commitment to the restoration of a lasting peace and reconciliation in Somalia; 10. Expresses its gratitude to the African Union member States and partners that have provided assistance for the deployment of AMISOM and its sustenance on the ground; 11. Notes with concern that the lack of adequate financial and logistical support has seriously affected the deployment of the troops pledged by member States for AMISOM, as well as the operations of the Mission on the ground. Council reiterates its urgent call to the African Union member States and partners to provide the necessary financial, logistical and technical support to make it possible for AMISOM to rapidly attain the authorized strength and to continue its operations in Somalia. Council also urgently calls on all member States to contribute troops and other personnel required for AMISOM; 12. Stresses, once again, the need for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia that will take over AMISOM and support the long-term stabilization and post-conflict reconstruction of Somalia, and reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Security Council, which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, to urgently take the necessary steps for the deployment of such an operation; 13. Calls on the United Nations, pending a decision by the Security Council authorizing the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, to put in place, in consultation with the Commission of the African Union, a financial, logistical and technical support package for AMISOM, within the context of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations; 14. Appeals to the international community to extend the necessary humanitarian assistance to the affected population in Somalia, and demands that all parties in Somalia facilitate the operations of the humanitarian agencies and NGOs; 15. Decides to extend the mandate of AMISOM for an additional period of six months; 16. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to follow up on the implementation of this decision and to report to it regularly on the steps taken to this effect; 17. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 