%%%GRATIS PERSONNEL|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/52/709 4 December 1997 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Fifty-second session Agenda item 114 REVIEW OF THE EFFICIENCY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE UNITED NATIONS Gratis personnel provided by Governments and other entities Report of the Secretary-General I. INTRODUCTION 1. The present report is submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 51/243 of 15 September 1997, in paragraph 6 of which the Secretary-General was requested to report on a quarterly basis on the acceptance of the gratis personnel referred to in paragraph 4 of the resolution with a view to ensuring compliance with the provisions of the resolution and to report annually on the use of gratis personnel, indicating, inter alia, their nationality, the duration of their service and the functions performed. II. QUARTERLY REPORT ON THE ACCEPTANCE OF GRATIS PERSONNEL REFERRED TO IN PARAGRAPH 4 OF RESOLUTION 51/243 2. Paragraph 6 of the resolution, in which a quarterly report is requested on the acceptance of type II gratis personnel (see A/51/688 and Corr.1, paras. 24-40), specifies that the purpose of the report is to ensure compliance with the provisions of the resolution. Since the resolution was adopted on 15 September 1997, the period covered in this first quarterly report starts on 16 September 1997 and ends on 30 September 1997, the date through which data on gratis personnel is available. 3. Two new type II gratis personnel started their service during that period, as shown in the table below: English Page Department/Office Country of nationality Date on which service began Functions Expiration date of engagement Department of Economic and Social Affairs Republic of Korea 16 September 1997 Assists in monitoring the economic situation in Asia and prepares a report on the reform of the financial sector and current financial problems for the World Economic and Social Survey in 1998 28 February 1998 Department of Humanitarian Affairs Fiji 28 September 1997 Participates in work of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination teams in the South Pacific In the first case, the individual began his service after the resolution was adopted on the basis of an agreement finalized on 2 September 1997. In the second case, the individual was retained to provide operational and technical advice to the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination teams in the South Pacific, as required by the circumstances in that region. Both provide expert advice and assistance not available within the Organization. III. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE USE OF GRATIS PERSONNEL 4. In paragraph 12 of its resolution 51/243, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to report annually on the use of gratis personnel, indicating, inter alia, their nationality, the duration of their service and the functions performed. Type I gratis personnel 5. Annex I to the present report provides data on type I gratis personnel who serve under an established regime, including interns, associate experts, technical cooperation experts obtained by non-reimbursable loan and gratis personnel serving with the United Nations Special Commission (see A/51/688/Add.2, para. 4, and S/51/688/Add.3, para. 3). The total for each category as at 30 September 1997 is compared with the total as at 30 October 1996, which was shown in the first report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly on gratis personnel (A/51/688 and Corr.1). 6. The numbers are fairly constant for the various categories except for interns, whose number increased in offices away from Headquarters as more offices took advantage of the arrangement, which is mutually beneficial to the interns and to the Organization. Type II gratis personnel 7. Annex II provides information on type II gratis personnel in service as at 30 September 1997, by department or office, nationality, and duration of service. 8. Annex III shows the evolution of the numbers of type II gratis personnel by department during the reporting period. The total number of gratis personnel as at 30 September 1997 (289) shows a marked decrease overall when compared with the totals as at 31 October 1996 (330) and 31 March 1997 (334). The number of receiving departments decreased from 15 on 31 October 1996, to 8 on 30 September 1997. The increased number of gratis personnel in humanitarian affairs was a result of the increased needs of the United Nations Disaster Assessment Coordination programme. 9. Annex IV shows the distribution of type II gratis personnel by nationality. 10. Annex V provides information on the nature of the functions performed by type II gratis personnel in service as at 30 September 1997 in each department or office, except for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, for which information is provided in annex VI. ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE ANNEXES DESA Department of Economic and Social Affairs DDSMS Department of Development Support and Management Services DESIPA Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis DHA Department of Humanitarian Affairs DM Department of Management DPA Department of Political Affairs DPCSD Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development DPKO Department of Peacekeeping Operations ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ESCWA Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia OIOS Office of Internal Oversight Services UNCHS United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) UNDCP United Nations International Drug Control Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNOV United Nations Office at Vienna UNSCOM Security Council Special Commission established pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of resolution 687 (1991) ANNEX I Interns Associate experts (200 series) Technical cooperation experts (ST/AI/231/Rev.1) UNSCOM (S/22508) 31 October 1996 30 September 1997 Increase/(decrease) ANNEX II Gratis personnel type II, by department, nationality and duration of service (as at 30 September 1997) Country of nationality Count Under 1 year 1 to 2 years 2 years or more France X Total Australia Austria Canada Colombia Costa Rica Denmark Ecuador Egypt Finland Germany Guatemala Japan Netherlands Norway New Zealand Peru Papua New Guinea Russian Federation Samoa Solomon Islands Sweden Switzerland Tonga United Kingdom Vanuatu Venezuela Department of Management Ireland Spain United States of America Department of Peacekeeping Operations Argentina Belgium Brazil Czech Republic Ghana Israel Italy Malaysia Namibia South Africa Singapore Turkmenistan Turkey International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia China Nigeria Rwanda International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda United Nations Environment Programme United Nations Office at Vienna Grand total ANNEX III Evolution of the numbers of Type II gratis personnel by department over the reporting period Department/office 31 October 1996a 31 March 1997b DDSMS DESIPA DHA DM DPA DPCSD DPKO ECLAC ESCAP ESCWA OIOS UNCHS (Habitat) UNDCP UNEP UNOV a A/51/688, annex III. b A/51/688/Add.2, annex II. ANNEX IV Gratis personnel, type II, by nationality ANNEX V Functions discharged by gratis personnel in service as at 30 September 1997 Department of Economic and Social Affairs (5) 1. Gratis personnel provide expert advice in the areas of national accounts and related statistics; development of a strategy for the implementation of the 1993 System of National Accounts and of the United Nations Economic and Social Information System; national statistical data; implementation of human resources accounting country projects and work on the Handbook on Household Sector Accounts and Human Resources; monitoring the Asian economic situation; and preparing a study on the reform of the financial sector and current financial problems for the World Economic and Social Survey, 1998. Department of Humanitarian Affairs (84) 2. Three gratis personnel provided expert advice on military and civil defence assets, on complex emergencies and on humanitarian law and sanctions. Eighty-one gratis personnel were accepted to provide assistance in projects administered by the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination. Department of Management (5) 3. Procurement functions include purchasing and contracting, e.g., charter of aircraft and vessels, rations, petroleum, etc. Department of Peacekeeping Operations (133) 4. See annex VI. International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (52) and International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (8) 5. Investigators are responsible for the planning, organization and conduct of sensitive field service investigations, utilizing all appropriate and available investigative techniques and resources in accordance with applicable laws, policies and procedures. 6. Legal advisers to the Prosecutor assist in the prosecution of persons, especially those in positions of authority and leadership, who were responsible for the most serious violations of international humanitarian law or mass killings. 7. Legal officers provide legal advice and direction to the target development unit regarding criminal law and procedure, the application of international humanitarian law and prosecutorial strategy. 8. Legal assistants assist judges and prosecutors in research and drafting on legal matters. 9. In addition, at the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, four gratis personnel discharge the following functions: (a) Court Deputy: manages judicial preparations for trial proceedings on behalf of the Registrar, attends trials and handles court documentation; (b) Detention Guard: assists the Commanding Officer of the Detention Unit in providing security services for detained persons; (c) Forensic Investigator (Forensic Crime Scene Examiner): examines scenes of crimes to obtain corroboration for alleged offences, including the identification of victims and perpetrators, the manner in which crimes were committed, taking measurements, fingerprints, blood samples and other physical evidence; (d) Video Analyst: views, indexes and analyses video tapes of material broadcast in the former Yugoslavia during the conflict, to enable investigation and prosecution teams to identify relevant evidence. United Nations Environment Programme (1) 10. Functions include providing expert advice and technical assistance to UNEP Water Branch, specifically to Regional Seas Programme activities implemented by the Eastern African Action Plan Regional Coordinating Unit. United Nations Office at Vienna (1) 11. Expert advice and substantive input is provided in the development of model training courses for police, mutual police assistance in developing countries at the regional level, development and reinforcement of links between national police systems and the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division. ANNEX VI at 30 September 1997 in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Number Total Office of the Under-Secretary-General Military Adviser's Office 11 Information Systems Officer 1 Military Assistant 1 Military Personnel Policy 1 Military Personnel Managers 2 Military Personnel Officers 2 Personnel Administration 1 Personnel Planning and Allocation 1 Special Affairs Officer 1 Chief, Military Personnel Administration Unit 1 Situation Centre 16 Chief Clerk 1 Duty Officers 9 Human Resources Officer 1 Informatics Officer 1 Information and Research Officers 3 Information and Research Assistant 1 Office of Operations 5 Military Mission Officers 5 Office of Planning and Support Assistant to the Assistant Secretary-General 1 1 Field Administration and Logistics Division Finance Management and Support Service 19 Finance Officers 3 Claims Officers 15 Information Analyst 1 Logistics and Communications Service 33 Air Operations Officers 4 Communications Officers 2 Engineering Officers 7 Logistics Officers 6 MovCon Officers 3 Planning Officers 2 Sea Lift Officer 1 Supply Officers 5 Transport Officers 3 Personnel Management and Support Services Personnel Officer 1 1 Planning Division Civilian Police Unit 5 Deputy Civilian Police 1 Desk Officers 4 Demining Unit 6 Programme Officer 1 Senior Humanitarian Officer 1 Demining Officers and Technical Advisers 4 Medical Support Unit 5 Medical Adviser 1 Deputy Medical Adviser 1 Medical Support Officers 2 Medical Supply Officer 1 Mission Planning Service 15 Chief of Service 1 Planning Officers 8 Stand-by Arrangements, Assistant 1 Stand-by Arrangements, Officers 2 Stand-by Arrangements, Head 1 Generic Planning, Head 1 Training Unit 6 Research/Evaluation Officer 1 Training Adviser 1 Training Officers 4 United Nations Logistics Base (Brindisi) 2 Assistant in logistics-related functions 2 United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium 8 Officers assigned to the Office of the Transitional Administrator 7 Special adviser on education and culture 1 ___ Total 133 