%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|INTERNAL SECURITY|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|SERBIA|

Letter dated 5 November 2007 from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering the period from 1 to 30 September 2007 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Ban Ki-moon Letter dated 30 October 2007 from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General In accordance with paragraph 20 of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I attach a report on the operations of the Kosovo Force covering the period from 1 to 30 September 2007. I would appreciate your making this report available to the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the Kosovo Force 1. This report covers the period from 1 to 30 September 2007. 2. As at 30 September 2007, the total number of troops in theatre was 15,314. This includes 2,389 troops from non-NATO countries. Political situation 3. After meeting separately with the parties in London on 18 and 19 September, the European Union-United States-Russian Federation Troika held the first round of face-to-face talks between Belgrade and Pristina in New York on 28 September. The direct negotiations took place the day after the meeting of the Contact Group Ministers, also in New York on the sidelines of the General Assembly. No major breakthrough has been achieved so far in the negotiations. Security situation 4. In spite of the uncertainty surrounding the status process and its outcome, the month of September has been relatively calm. The incidents reported include two firearms attacks against Kosovo Serb property with only material damage, and an explosion in a bar in Pristina which resulted in two persons killed and nine injured. The latter incident was of a criminal nature. The owner of the bar was allegedly involved in the killing of a Kosovo Police Service officer last month. 5. No incidents against the Kosovo Force (KFOR) were recorded in September. The threat level against KFOR is low. 6. A total of 308 incidents related to drugs (23), counterfeit currency (25), smuggling (8), explosions (3), miscellaneous criminal acts (105), illegal weapons possession (69), weapons and ammunitions seizure (23) and unexploded ordnance (52) were reported during this period. The total number of incidents is significantly lower than in August (416). KFOR operations 7. The operation tempo remained steady. KFOR continues to maintain a safe and secure environment and to guarantee freedom of movement through the conduct of framework operations and intelligence-driven operations. KFOR is updating its contingency planning for possible incidents occurring in Kosovo throughout the negotiation period and immediately thereafter. In this respect, KFOR remains prepared to react to potential disturbances Kosovo-wide. Compliance 8. The disciplinary board of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) met on 18 September and decided to dismiss three KPC members for unauthorized absence, to confirm the suspension without pay of two KPC members pending criminal and disciplinary investigation, and to reinstate two KPC members suspended without pay since January 2007. Kosovo Protection Corps 9. There was no recruitment campaign in September 2007. 10. The current active personnel establishment is 2,913. There are 194 (6.83 per cent) active ethnic minority members (170 male, 24 female). The total number of ethnic minorities remains the same as last month. The percentage of minorities within KPC remains short of the goal set by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. There are 113 open posts left in the active personnel establishment list. The reserve list includes 2,000 positions, with 1,892 filled (including 48 ethnic minority members, which equates to 2.45 per cent). Moreover, two of the above-mentioned KPC members dismissed by the disciplinary board are members of a minority (one Croat and one Serb), which leads to a continuous decrease in minority members within KPC as long as no recruitment campaign is foreseen. 11. Training of KPC members continues according to plan. The Officer basic course ending in November (12 members) and the career course ending in January 2008 (18 members) have started. KPC has 16 new members in the university, bringing the total of KPC members attending university to 37. 12. During the month of September, there were eight ceremonies involving 163 KPC members. No incidents were reported. Conclusion 13. The situation on the ground remains calm but the political uncertainty relating to the future status talks continues to be a source of tension, particularly among the students and within KPC. KFOR remains fully prepared to deal with unrest and would respond forcefully to any attempt to disrupt the political process, regardless of where it comes from. 