%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|WESTERN SAHARA|WESTERN SAHARA QUESTION|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|

Letter dated 12 December 2007 from the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to enclose herewith the letter addressed to you by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Morocco concerning the situation in the area of the Moroccan Sahara to the east of the berm (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council and have it circulated as a document of the Council. (Signed) El Mostafa Sahel Ambassador Permanent Representative 12 December 2007 The Kingdom of Morocco has continued in recent years to alert the United Nations to the dangerous activities of the Frente POLISARIO, with the support of Algeria, in the strip established to the east of the berm. In his letter of 6 December 2007 (S/2007/714), the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations had already drawn your attention to the serious violation of the ceasefire that these parties were about to commit in the buffer strip by holding a so-called congress in Tifarati from 14 to 18 December. The Kingdom of Morocco had called upon you to take the necessary measures to deal with those dangerous and provocative activities that threaten peace and stability in the region. Moreover, such activities are not conducive to fostering the atmosphere of mutual trust and calm that must prevail at this crucial juncture in the efforts to find a negotiated solution to this regional dispute. Today, I feel compelled to write to you even as the other parties are stepping up their military incursions into the strip from Algerian territory, without any reaction from the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which is supposed to ensure that the ceasefire declared on 6 September 1991 is observed. Moreover, these acts perpetrated by armed elements are accompanied by public statements which are not only bellicose but also contain such serious claims as "liberated territories" or "sovereign area". Yet, as you are aware, the area east of the berm, which is an integral part of the Moroccan Sahara, had been deliberately established in order to avert any new clashes, including with the Algerian army, and help to consolidate the ceasefire. This fresh, deliberate violation of the ceasefire, the negative and aggressive statements used in perpetrating it, coupled with the passive attitude of MINURSO, have sparked a sense of outrage and deep concern among Moroccans from all walks of life. Today, the two houses of the Moroccan Parliament held a joint plenary emergency and extraordinary session devoted exclusively to this regrettable development. The session concluded with the adoption of a communiqué unanimously rejecting and strongly condemning this latest tactic of the other parties. MINURSO cannot remain passive in the face of such acts. Frente POLISARIO and Algeria interpret this lack of response as an incitement and encouragement of their acts. The other parties take full responsibility for this escalation and its adverse consequences on the efforts being undertaken under your auspices by your Personal Envoy to find a definitive political solution to this dispute. I wish to recall, in this regard, Security Council resolution 1783 (2007) adopted last October which called on the parties to create an atmosphere propitious to dialogue and to the success of negotiations. This recent development seriously undermines the calm climate essential for continuing the negotiations and seriously jeopardizes the chances of success of the third round of talks to which you officially invited the parties last week. The Government of the Kingdom of Morocco hopes that it can count on your authority to involve MINURSO in an effort to rectify this situation. The Kingdom of Morocco reserves the right to take such action as it may deem necessary to react to this regrettable development that the Moroccan people as a whole rejects and condemns. (Signed) Taïb Fassi Fihri 