%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|AFRICA|AMERICAS|ASIA|EUROPE|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PEACEBUILDING|SANCTIONS|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|NEGOTIATION|WOMEN IN ARMED CONFLICTS|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|

Letter dated 17 December 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Please find attached the assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Ghana for the month of October 2007 (see annex). This assessment has been prepared under my own responsibility, following consultations with the other members of the Council. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Leslie K. Christian Ambassador, Permanent Representative Annex to the letter dated 17 December 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Ghana (October 2007) Introduction Under the presidency of Ghana in October 2007, the Security Council held 24 meetings, including one open debate, five debates, one briefing and four meetings with troop-contributing countries. The Council also held consultations of the whole on 16 occasions. Five resolutions and seven presidential statements were adopted. The President also made one press statement on behalf of the Council. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Cooperation and the New Partnership for Africa's Development of Ghana, Akwesi Osei-Adjei, presided over an open debate on women and peace and security on 23 October. Africa Côte d'Ivoire On 22 October, the Council held a debate, followed by consultations, on the situation in Côte d'Ivoire, during which the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI), Abou Moussa, briefed the Council on the latest developments in that country, including the status of implementation of key steps in the peace process. The Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso, Djibrill Yipènè Bassolé, in his capacity as the representative of the Facilitator of the Ouagadougou Agreement, and the Permanent Representative of Côte d'Ivoire to the United Nations, Ilahiri Djédjé, participated in the debate. During the discussions, Council members noted that although some level of progress had been achieved in the implementation of the peace process, none of the benchmarks set for consideration of an adjustment of the mandate and troop level of UNOCI, namely, the dismantling and disarmament of the militias, the disarmament of combatants and the redeployment of State administration throughout the country, had been fully met. Immediately following the meeting, the President of the Council read a statement to the press in which members reaffirmed their full support for the Ouagadougou political Agreement and paid tribute to the Facilitator, President Compaoré of Burkina Faso, for his continued efforts in facilitating the peace process. Council members also welcomed the initial measures taken in the implementation of some elements of the Agreement, including the deployment of six mixed units, which had made it possible to lift the zone of confidence and to replace it with a number of UNOCI observation points on the green line. Council members, however, expressed concern at the delay in the implementation of the key tasks of the Agreement, and urged the parties to meet their commitments fully and in good faith, including by taking without delay some specific measures to make progress in the identification and registration of voters, the disarmament and dismantling of militias, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, the restoration of State authority throughout the country, the unification and restructuring of the defence and security forces and ensuring respect for human rights. On 25 October, during consultations of the whole, Ambassador Johan Verbeke, Permanent Representative of Belgium and Chairperson of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire, briefed the Council on the status of the sanctions regime, discussions in the Committee and the latest findings of the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire. In its report, the Group indicated that, while it had not detected any violations of the arms embargo during its mandate, it had not been able to ascertain accurately the amount of equipment in the possession of the defence and security forces of Côte d'Ivoire and the defence and security forces of the Forces nouvelles, mainly owing to lack of cooperation by the Ivorian authorities with the Group in several areas related to their mandate. The Group of Experts concluded that it was important to ensure broad awareness in Côte d'Ivoire and neighbouring countries of the scope of Council decisions relating to the sanctions regime applicable to Côte d'Ivoire, which would help to reduce misunderstandings and diverging interpretations. On 29 October, the Council adopted resolution 1782 (2007), renewing until 31 October 2008 the bans on arms and rough diamonds imposed on Côte d'Ivoire, as well as targeted measures, such as travel restrictions and the freezing of funds, against certain individuals. Guinea-Bissau On 3 October, during consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau, Shola Omoregie, on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country, as set out in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/576). He indicated that, while there had been some progress in Guinea-Bissau in the previous three months, especially in the areas of improved relations between State institutions, public finance and cooperation with international financial institutions, the country still faced enormous challenges. The Representative mentioned the critical lack of energy and infrastructure, the high levels of social, political and military tension due to the upcoming elections and the alarming threat of drug trafficking and organized crime. On 19 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/38) in which it noted with deep concern the threat posed by drug and human trafficking which could undermine the important gains made with respect to the rule of law and democratic and transparent governance. The Council also took note of the letter from the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau requesting that Guinea-Bissau be placed on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission and expressed its intent to consider the request as a matter of priority. Somalia On 3 October, during consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, on the situation in that country. Council members expressed concern about the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in Somalia. They recalled resolution 1772 (2007) and, in particular, renewed their calls for logistical, financial and technical support as well as progress in the political process in order to facilitate the full deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia and the withdrawal of foreign forces from Somalia. Council members also called on all the relevant Somali parties to engage in political dialogue and called on the Transitional Federal Government to reach out to all factions and clans to ensure an all-inclusive political and reconciliation process. Council members also considered the possibility of relocating the United Nations Political Office for Somalia from Nairobi to Mogadishu, under the protection of a multinational force. Several members urged the Secretariat to undertake contingency planning for a possible United Nations peacekeeping operation, in accordance with relevant Council resolutions. On 24 October, during consultations of the whole, Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South Africa and Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia, briefed the Council on the work of the Committee in accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution 1772 (2007), in which the Council requested the Committee to report on possible measures that might be taken to strengthen the effectiveness of the arms embargo and how they might be implemented. In his briefing, he indicated that while the members of the Committee were in agreement on the need to strengthen the effectiveness of the arms embargo, there were differing views on how best to achieve that objective. He further stated that the Committee would continue its consideration of the important matter of possible measures to strengthen the effectiveness and the implementation of the arms embargo, drawing as necessary on the technical advice of the Monitoring Group, which had recently been re-established by the Secretary-General. The Chairman of the Committee indicated his intention to submit a report to the Council on the outcome of that process in due course. Sudan On 1 October, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guehénno, briefed the Council on the attacks carried out by heavily armed elements against peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in the Sudan at their base in Haskanita in Southern Darfur on 29 and 30 September. The Under-Secretary-General stated that, as at the time of his briefing, investigations had been initiated to establish the facts surrounding the attacks, including the identity of the perpetrators. Council members expressed their outrage at the incident and lamented the loss of life and property resulting from the violence. They were also concerned that the timing of the attack could have an adverse impact of the Darfur peace talks scheduled for 27 October. On 2 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/35) condemning the attack, reportedly by a rebel group, and demanding that no effort be spared to identify the perpetrators and bring them to justice. The statement also called for an immediate cessation of hostilities and the full cooperation of all parties with the deployment of the three-phased United Nations-African Union peacekeeping operation in Darfur. On 24 October, shortly before the commencement of the Darfur peace talks in Tripoli, the Secretary-General briefed the Council during consultations on the situation in the Sudan, focusing on the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Darfur peace talks and the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Secretary-General highlighted, among others issues, the impediments to the full and effective implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as well as the resulting tensions between the parties. He stressed that the full implementation of the Agreement was central to the achievement of lasting peace, stability and prosperity in the Sudan. In further comments, he noted that the humanitarian situation in Darfur had deteriorated, and emphasized the need for the timely deployment of UNAMID. He also expressed the hope that all the rebel groups would participate in the Darfur peace talks to ensure that it was successful and decisive. Members of the Council shared the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General and echoed his call for the full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as well as the timely deployment of UNAMID. They also called on those rebel groups that were threatening to boycott the peace talks in Tripoli to show flexibility and attend the meeting in order to make their case. Also, on 24 October, the Security Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/41), in which it welcomed and expressed full support for the Darfur peace talks to be held on 27 October in Sirte, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, led by the United Nations Special Envoy, Jan Eliasson, and the African Union Special Envoy, Salim Ahmed Salim. In the statement, the Council called on all parties to attend the meeting and to engage fully and constructively in the talks. Further, the Council stressed that it was willing to take action against any party that sought to undermine the peace process, including by impeding the talks, peacekeeping or humanitarian aid. In its statement the Council also recognized that due process must take its course. On 29 October, a private meeting of the Council with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) was held, following which the Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the situation in the Sudan and the activities of the Mission. Council members deliberated on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/624), in which he provided an overall assessment of the overall situation in the Sudan, including efforts by UNMIS to promote peace and security. They commended the Mission on its activities and expressed support for it. Also present at the meeting was the newly appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of Mission, Ashraf Jehangir Qazi. On 31 October, the Council adopted resolution 1784 (2007), by which it extended the mandate of UNMIS as set out in previous resolutions until 30 April 2008. Western Sahara On 26 October, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Peter van Walsum, briefed the Council during consultations of the whole on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/619) on the situation concerning Western Sahara. He highlighted the status of implementation of resolution 1754 (2007), which called for direct negotiations between the parties. Council members generally expressed satisfaction with the two rounds of meetings held between the parties at the Greentree Estate in Manhasset, New York, in June and August 2007, but noted that little progress had been made on substantive questions during those two rounds. Council members thus urged the parties to resume direct negotiations as soon as possible and to make an extra effort to engage in more substantive discussions on the relevant issues during the next round of negotiations. On 31 October, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1783 (2007), which was sponsored by the Group of Friends of Western Sahara, made up of France, the Russian Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. In the resolution, the Council called on the parties to continue to show political will and work in an atmosphere propitious for dialogue in order to engage in substantive negotiations, thus ensuring the implementation of resolution 1754 (2007) and the success of negotiations. It further called on the parties to continue negotiations under the auspices of the Secretary-General without preconditions and in good faith, taking into account the efforts made since 2006 and developments of the last months, with a view to achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements consistent with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, and noted the role and responsibilities of the parties in this respect. In its resolution 1783 (2007), the Council also decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara until 30 April 2008, as recommended by the Secretary-General. Americas Haiti On 10 October, a private meeting of the Council with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) was held. Subsequently, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of Mission, Hédi Annabi, provided an update to the Council on the situation in Haiti and the activities of the Mission. Council members also discussed issues raised in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/503), including, among others, security, law and order, border management, institutional reform and the challenges facing the country's economy. Council members acknowledged the crucial role MINUSTAH was playing and expressed support for the Mission. On 15 October, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1780 (2007), sponsored by Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Ecuador, France, Guatemala, Italy, Panama, Peru, Spain, the United States of America and Uruguay, by which it extended the mandate of MINUSTAH until 15 October 2008 with a reduction in the troop level to 7,060 and an increase in the police component to 2,091. Asia Afghanistan On 15 October, the Council held a debate on the situation in Afghanistan during which the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Tom Koenigs, provided an assessment of the situation in the country. Among the developments he highlighted were the rise in the number of violent incidents in the country, which had resulted in a significant number of Afghan civilian casualties, the adverse impact of the narcotics trade and the need for close cooperation among the countries in the region. He also underlined the critical support being given by the International Security Assistance Force and Operation Enduring Freedom with regard to the issue of security, including the protection of civilians. Council members and other participants in the debate echoed the concerns expressed by the Special Representative, in particular regarding the increase in the number of violent and terrorist acts carried out by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and called for sustained international engagement in Afghanistan as the country endeavours to overcome its numerous problems. The Council also expressed support for the Mission. Iraq On 19 October, Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, Permanent Representative of the United States of America, briefed the Council, on behalf of the multinational force in Iraq, on the activities of the force. The Council was also briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, who introduced the updated report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007) (S/2007/608), related to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Ambassador Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent Representative of Iraq, participated in the meeting. In his report, the Secretary-General assessed the progress made towards the construction of a new United Nations integrated compound to enhance the security of United Nations personnel and called for further support from Member States to enable UNAMI to discharge its expanded mandate in addressing the political and reconciliation processes and the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Council members urged the Government of Iraq and the parties, and called on neighbouring countries as well as the international community as a whole, to do more to promote peace and stability and improve the security situation in Iraq. Council members also commended UNAMI personnel for their effort and sacrifice, as well as the outgoing Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, who had completed his tenure as Head of Mission for his work. Myanmar On 5 October, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Myanmar, Ibrahim Gambari, briefed the Council on his mission to the country from 29 September to 2 October in the wake of the use of violence against recent protests involving monks and other civil society groups. The Special Adviser was requested by the Secretary-General, in exercise of his good offices, to visit Myanmar in order to (a) assess the situation on the ground following the demonstrations; (b) deliver clear messages from the Secretary-General to the Myanmar authorities; and (c) promote dialogue between the Government and the opposition aimed at ending the crisis and achieving national reconciliation. The Special Adviser emphasized that the Secretary-General's good offices were a process, not a one-time event, and that, ultimately, it was up to the Government and people of Myanmar, albeit with international support, to find a way out of the crisis. Council members commended both the Secretary-General and the Special Adviser for their efforts and denounced the excessive force used to suppress the demonstrations. They emphasized the importance of the early release of all political prisoners and of an all-inclusive dialogue aimed at bringing about democratic change in Myanmar. On 11 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/37) in which it stressed the need for dialogue between all concerned parties and called on the Government to address the political, economic, humanitarian and human rights issues of concern to the people of Myanmar. The statement also welcomed the commitment of the Government to work with the United Nations and the appointment of an officer to liaise with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Nepal On 9 October, Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, briefed the Council on recent developments in Nepal culminating in the decision of the interim Government of Nepal to postpone the Constituent Assembly election, which had been scheduled for 22 November. It was noted that in the current circumstances elections could not realistically be held before the middle of 2008. The Assistant Secretary-General dwelled on the underlying causes of the rising tensions in Nepal, including demands by the Maoist rebels that the country be immediately declared a republic and that the principle of proportionality in the electoral system be adopted. Another cause was the prolonged cantonment of the rebel forces in poor barrack conditions. Council members expressed disappointment over the postponement of the elections and urged the parties to endeavour to abide by their commitments under the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, including the preservation of the Seven-Party Alliance. Following the consultations, the President of the Council read a statement to the press conveying the views and sentiments of Council members, emphasizing the need for holding the Constituent Assembly elections as soon as possible. On 25 October, the Council was again briefed on the situation in Nepal, by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), Ian Martin. He provided an in-depth assessment of the challenges facing the Nepalese people and described how UNMIN had conducted its mandate in assisting in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The Special Representative observed that there was growing mistrust among the parties to the Agreement. He also noted that it would help if the future of the armed personnel currently confined to the barracks could be clarified. Council members were largely in agreement with the assessment provided by the Special Representative. They were also favourably disposed to extending the mandate of the Mission if such a request were to be made by the Nepalese authorities. The Situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question On 24 October, the Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. This was followed by informal consultations. The Under-Secretary-General informed the Council that the reporting period had seen both the Israeli-Palestinian political dialogue and international engagement with the Middle East peace process reach their most intensive levels in years. However, there had also been several developments of concern on the ground in the West Bank and a further serious deterioration of the situation in Gaza. Council members expressed support for the efforts of the Prime Minister of Israel, Ehud Olmert, and the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, and those of the Quartet, including the work of the Quartet representative, Tony Blair. Council members also expressed support for the international meeting on the Middle East to be held in Annapolis in November under the auspices of the United States of America. Council members further commended regional efforts, including the Arab Peace Initiative, and urged all parties to refrain from the use of violence and help ease the humanitarian situation in the occupied territories. On Lebanon, the Under-Secretary-General informed the Council that an attempt by the Speaker of Parliament to convene Parliament on 25 September to elect a new President had failed, owing to the lack of a quorum, and that the election had been postponed until 23 October. However, on 22 October, the Speaker had rescheduled the session to 12 November. Council members shared the sentiments of the Secretary-General about the vital importance of electing a new President in accordance with the constitutional framework and procedures and without any foreign interference. Further, they emphasized the fact that electing a new President was an essential milestone in consolidating and reasserting the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon. Europe Georgia On 11 October, a private meeting of Council with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) was convened, following which the Council held consultations on a draft resolution relating to the extension of the Mission's mandate. On 15 October, the Council adopted resolution 1781 (2007), by which it extended the mandate of UNOMIG until 15 April 2008. The Council called on both sides to resume dialogue, making full use of all mechanisms, to comply fully with previous agreements regarding a ceasefire and non-use of violence and to finalize without delay agreements on the non-use of violence and on the return of refugees and internally displaced persons. The Council stressed the important stabilizing role of UNOMIG and the peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent States in the conflict zone. The Council further endorsed proposals for confidence-building measures and urged both parties to engage immediately in implementing those measures without conditions, with the assistance of UNOMIG and international partners. The Council strongly urged the parties to consider and address seriously each other's legitimate security concerns and to refrain from any acts of violence or provocation, including political action or rhetoric. The Council also called on the parties to cooperate fully with UNOMIG in the implementation of its mandate and emphasized the urgent need to alleviate the plight of refugees and internally displaced persons, including respecting their right of return. Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999) On 9 October, during informal consultations, the Council considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of Mission, Joachim Rücker, on the latest developments. Council members commended the Mission for its efforts and reiterated the need for broad participation in the November elections. Council members also expressed their hopes for a negotiated settlement on the future status of Kosovo. Thematic issues Women and peace and security On 23 October, the Council held an open debate on women and peace and security on the basis of the annual report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2007/567), which reviewed the United Nations System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the previous year. The Secretary-General made a statement in which he noted that since the adoption of the landmark resolution, women had increasingly participated at all levels of peacemaking and peacebuilding, and peace processes had increasingly empowered women and advanced gender equality. He encouraged countries in conflict and post-conflict countries to establish their own national action plans and take ownership of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). He underlined the importance of strengthening collective and individual responses to violence against women and called on the Council to establish a mechanism dedicated to monitoring violence against women and girls. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations briefed the Council on the significant advances in the contribution of women to the prevention and resolution of conflicts and to peacebuilding, particularly in countries where peacekeeping operations were deployed, such as Haiti and Liberia. He spoke about the increase in the number of women in senior civilian positions, including the recent appointment of Ellen Margrethe Løj as Special Representative of the Secretary-General to lead the United Nations Mission in Liberia. He also spoke about the efforts made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to implement resolution 1325 (2000), including the adoption of a policy directive on gender equality. The Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Rachel N. Mayanja, introduced the report of the Secretary-General, which contained the results of the second implementation review of the 2005-2007 System-wide Action Plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and an update of the Action Plan for 2008-2009. Underlining the fact that national Governments shaped peacemaking and rebuilding efforts, the Special Adviser urged the United Nations system, other multilateral institutions and international partners to support nationally owned plans and strategies. The Ad Interim Executive Director of the United Nations Development Fund for Women, Joanne Sandler, stated that women's access to peace processes had been very uneven and that rampant violence reported against women in conflict situations persisted. The global response must be stepped up by expanding services to the survivors of such violence, including services focusing on transitional justice, and by ensuring that peacekeeping operations make life safe for women and girls. During the ensuing debate, several speakers highlighted the need to combat sexual and gender-based violence and to ensure that violations of women's rights, including the use of rape as a weapon of war, are viewed as a security issue, and emphasized the need for the Council to take up, in particular, the issues of remedial measures, judicial response and prevention. In a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/40) adopted after the debate, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Council expressed deep concern about acts of violence against civilians, particularly women and children, committed by parties to armed conflicts, including as a result of deliberate targeting and indiscriminate and excessive use of force. The Council also addressed the issue of women's participation in peace processes and their role in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in peacebuilding. It further expressed deep concern about the pervasiveness of gender-based violence in situations of conflict and stressed the need to end impunity, including through respect for international law applicable to the rights and protection of women and girls. The Council reiterated its call on the international community to provide financial and technical support for national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including the rapid development of national action plans, and emphasized the importance of promoting regional approaches towards implementation. The Secretary-General was requested to include information on violence against women in his reporting to the Council on situations of armed conflict. The Secretary-General was also requested to include in his follow-up report information on the impact of armed conflicts on women and girls, their protection and the enhancement of their role in peace processes in situations that are on the agenda of the Council, and he may be requested to give an oral briefing on the progress of the report prior to its submission in October 2008. Other issues Post-conflict peacebuilding On 17 October, the Council held a debate on the annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its first session (A/62/137-S/2007/458). The Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Yukio Takasu, introduced the report of the Commission to the Council. The Council also heard statements by the Ambassadors of Norway and the Netherlands, Chairpersons of the country-specific meetings on, respectively, Burundi and Sierra Leone, as well as by the Ambassador of El Salvador, Chairperson of the Working Group on Lessons Learned. Council members in general commended the Commission's pioneering team, led by Ambassador Gaspar Martins of Angola, for its efforts in establishing the Commission in its first year, and also commended the Peacebuilding Support Office for the support that it had extended to the Commission. Council members also called for further improvements in the working methods of the Peacebuilding Commission to facilitate its consideration of the countries currently on its agenda, namely, Sierra Leone and Burundi. Council members in general also expressed the need for the Commission to consider adding new countries to its agenda and stressed the need for early consideration of the request of Guinea-Bissau that it be placed on the agenda of the Commission. Council members emphasized the need to deepen the relationship between the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and other United Nations organs concerning issues relating to the work of the Commission, including referrals of new countries to its agenda. Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts On 5 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/36) in which it condemned the 3 October attack in Baghdad against the Polish Ambassador to Iraq, which had resulted in the wounding of the Ambassador, the killing of one member of his personal security detachment team and injuries to two others. The Council further underlined the need to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of that act to justice and urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate with the Governments of Poland and Iraq in that regard. It called on the international community to support the Government of Iraq in exercising its responsibility in providing protection to the diplomatic community in Iraq, United Nations staff and other foreign civilian personnel working in Iraq. The Council reaffirmed the need to combat by all means, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts, and reminded States that they must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law. On 22 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/39) in which it condemned the bomb attacks that occurred in Karachi, Pakistan, on 18 October, causing numerous deaths and injuries. The Council underlined the need to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of that reprehensible act of terrorism to justice. It urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with resolution 1624 (2005), to cooperate actively with the Pakistani authorities in that regard. The Council reiterated its determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations. Resolution 1718 (2006) (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) On 8 October, during consultations of the whole, Ambassador Marcello Spatafora, Permanent Representative of Italy and Chairperson of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), briefed the Council on discussions in the Committee and presented the Committee's fourth 90day report, covering the period from 11 July to 8 October 2007, in accordance with operative paragraph 12 (g) of resolution 1718 (2006). He indicated that since 11 July, no information relevant to the implementation of its mandate had been brought to the attention of the Committee. He further stated that, as at 8 October, the Committee had received replies from 72 countries and one organization (the European Union) to its note verbale of 1 November 2006 concerning the implementation of resolution 1718 (2006). Resolution 1373 (2001) (Counter-Terrorism Committee) On 10 October, during consultations of the whole, Ambassador Ricardo Alberto Arias, Permanent Representative of Panama and Chairperson of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, briefed the Council on discussions in the Committee of the document entitled "Survey of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)", prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in the context of the comprehensive review of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and in connection with the preliminary implementation assessments and the status of implementation by all States of resolution 1373 (2001). Draft report of the Security Council to the General Assembly On 25 October, the Council adopted its annual report to the General Assembly for the period from 1 August 2006 to 31 July 2007, in accordance with Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations. The President of the Council stated that the introduction of the draft report had been prepared by the delegation of China, while the factual information in the report had been prepared by the Secretariat in line with the revised format agreed upon by the Council in 2002, as set out in the note by the President of the Council of 22 May 2002 (S/2002/199) and incorporated in the note by the President of 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507). The representative of Slovakia and current Chairman of the Security Council Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and the representative of China made brief statements, after which the report was adopted without a vote. 