%%%SANCTIONS|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|UZBEKISTAN|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) Note verbale dated 26 July 2007 from the Permanent Mission of Uzbekistan to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Committee The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and has the honour to submit herewith the national report of the Republic of Uzbekistan on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007) (see annex). [Original: Russian] National report of the Republic of Uzbekistan on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007) In the context of multilateral and bilateral agreements, the Republic of Uzbekistan fulfils the obligations it has assumed to prevent the illicit movement through its territory of nuclear and radioactive materials and equipment containing them. Uzbekistan uses radioactive materials exclusively for peaceful purposes and fully adheres to the requirements of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which entered into force for the Republic of Uzbekistan in 1993. After joining the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Republic of Uzbekistan signed the Agreement of 8 October 1994 Between the Republic of Uzbekistan and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in Connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Ongoing inspections are conducted at the facilities in the Republic of Uzbekistan which use and extract nuclear materials by national supervisory bodies and by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspectors. On completion of those inspections, IAEA receives regular accounts of the nuclear materials present and of their movement transfer within the country. In order to strengthen the monitoring and supervision of the use of atomic energy, the Republic of Uzbekistan has signed an Additional Protocol to its safeguards agreement, pursuant to which it provides wider access for international inspections of facilities of significance to IAEA. In accordance with the commitment assumed by Uzbekistan, a number of additional inspections, conducted jointly with IAEA inspectors, have been undertaken at oil, gas and chemical installations and at facilities of the Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences which use nuclear and radioactive materials. The Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material entered into force for Uzbekistan in 1998, and Uzbekistan signed the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources in January 2004. In accordance with the Convention and the Code, Uzbekistan has the obligation to establish a system of physical protection to prevent illegal access to nuclear facilities and materials by unauthorized persons. In that connection, the United States Government has sponsored physical protection programmes for all facilities which have significant quantities of nuclear and radioactive material and which present a degree of concern. In compliance with the Act on the licensing of particular types of activities, the Act on radiation safety and the Act on export control of the Republic of Uzbekistan, checks are carried out on the use, security and movement of nuclear and radioactive materials. Export controls are imposed on goods, equipment, scientific and technological information, work and services and the results of intellectual activity (appearing on the lists of targets of export controls) which, because of their inherent properties and nature, could contribute significantly to the production of weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical and biological weapons), of their means of delivery (missiles and other technical means of delivering weapons of mass destruction) or of other forms of weaponry or military technology. Counter-terrorism cooperation between the Republic of Uzbekistan and other States, their law-enforcement agencies and special services and international organizations is conducted in accordance with the international agreements of the Republic of Uzbekistan. The special services of the Republic of Uzbekistan are responsible for coordinating the activities of State bodies involved in counter-terrorism and ensuring that they cooperate to prevent, expose and halt terrorist activity and minimize its consequences. As a primary measure to prevent nuclear contraband from crossing the territory of Uzbekistan, it was decided to provide some of the major crossing points with modern radiation detection apparatus. These are mainly on the borders with Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan, which has a border with Iran. Vehicle radiation monitors have been set up on the border between Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan (at the Gisht-Kuprik customs checkpoint) and are scanning 100 per cent of the vehicles. The entry point with Turkmenistan (the Alat customs checkpoint) also has equipment to screen passenger and goods vehicles for radiation. Account has also been taken of the possibility that radioactive and fissile materials could be transported by air, so radiation monitors are also used to screen departing flights at Tashkent international airport. The Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan is taking a number of measures to implement paragraphs 3-8, 10, 12 and 17 of Security Council resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Security Council resolution 1747 (2007) in order to strengthen the system of supervision and control of the export, import and transit of various kinds of goods, equipment and technology. 