%%%DEVELOPMENT|AFRICA|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|AID COORDINATION|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|WORK PROGRAMME|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE|ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE|

98-12497 (e) 270598 United Nations E/1998/21 Economic and Social Council Distr.: General 4 May 1998 Original: English Substantive session of 1998 New York, 6-31 July 1998 * E/1998/100. Item 7 (a) of the provisional agenda* Coordination, programme and other questions: reports of coordination bodies Annual overview report of the Administrative Committee on Coordination for 1997 Summary The present report provides an overview of coordination issues addressed by the Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) in 1997, which are being brought to the attention of intergovernmental bodies. Part one of the report highlights the issue of reform, which was a major feature of the experience of many organizations of the United Nations system during the year and which has had significant implications for the work of ACC. The actions taken by ACC to promote the coordinated follow-up to major global conferences by the United Nations system, including an assessment of the work of the three task forces set up for that purpose, as well as the inter-agency work undertaken in relation to the special session of the General Assembly to review the implementation of Agenda 21, are also covered in part one. A number of other issues on which there was significant collaborating among the organizations of the United Nations system are also addressed. Part two contains a brief outline of the programme of work of ACC for 1998. E/1998/21 Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Part one. Coordination issues addressed by ACC in 1997 brought to the attention of intergovernmental bodies I. Reform and strengthening of the United Nations system II. Integrated and coordinated implementation and follow-up to international conferences and summits A. The inter-agency task forces B. Universal access to basic communication and information services C. Preparations for and follow-up to the special session of the General Assembly to review the implementation of Agenda 21 D. Preparations for the observance of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the five-year review of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action III. Relations between organizations of the United Nations system and civil society, including the private sector IV. Peace-building in crisis situations V. African economic recovery and development VI. Operational activities for development VII. Assistance to countries invoking Article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations VIII. Other matters A. Follow-up to the Graça Machel study on the impact of armed conflict on children B. Joint and Co-sponsored United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) IX. Administrative questions A. Security of the United Nations system staff B. Conditions of service and application of the Noblemaire principle Part two. Elements of the programme of work of ACC for 1998 Annexes I. Excerpt from the statement by the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council on 6 February 1998 II. Statement by the Administrative Committee on Coordination on universal access to basic communication and information services III. Statement by the Administrative Committee on Coordination to the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session IV. Statement by the Administrative Committee on Coordination on staff security V. Statement by the Administrative Committee on Coordination on conditions of service and the application of the Noblemaire principle 1. 1997 has been a year of transition and reform for many organizations of the United Nations system. The assumption of office by the present Secretary-General at the beginning of the year brought new leadership to the Administrative Committee on Coordination. Also during the year, new Executive Heads were elected in five United Nations agencies and organizations, namely, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the United Nations International Drug Control Programme. 2. Reform continued to be a major feature of the experience of many organizations. At the United Nations, the reform process initiated by the Secretary-General involved two phases. The first phase (track I), in March, identified initial measures that could be carried out within the Secretary-General’s own authority. A more comprehensive package of reforms (track II) was then issued in July. These reform measures, as acted on by the General Assembly (resolutions 52/12 A and B), are already reshaping, in a major way, the manner in which business is carried out within the Organization and the way the United Nations relates to the rest of the system. 3. The reforms that the United Nations is undergoing, together with reform processes under way in the organizations of the system, have significant implications for the work of ACC, which, in turn, is undertaking a renewed effort to bring about increased collaboration and greater unity of purpose and coherence of action within the system, thus enabling it to be a more effective instrument for addressing and responding to the challenges arising from the rapidly changing global environment. 4. These developments and their implications for the system as a whole are dealt with in part one of the present report. Part one also provides a broad overview of other issues addressed by the Committee during the year: its review of progress achieved in the integrated and coordinated follow-up to global conferences; universal access to basic communications and information services; preparations for and follow-up to the special session of the General Assembly to review the implementation of Agenda 21; inter-agency preparations for the observance of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the five-year review of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action; the relationship of the United Nations system with civil society; peace-building in crisis situations; and progress in the implementation of the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa. 5. In addition, part one of the report covers inter-agency preparations for the forthcoming triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system, and updates information on measures undertaken by the system to assist countries invoking article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations. It also covers the follow-up to the Graça Machel study on the impact of armed conflict on children and the response of the United Nations system to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. 6. With respect to administrative questions, part one covers the actions taken by ACC to promote the safety and security of United Nations system staff in the field, and its recommendations relating to the conditions of service in the United Nations system. 7. Part two of the report provides a brief outline of the main areas of the programme of work of the Committee for 1998. 8. In a statement to the Economic and Social Council on 6 February 1998, the Secretary-General provided an overview of the work of ACC during 1997 and his assessment of the evolving role of ACC and of relationships with the Economic and Social Council. That statement could be viewed as a foreword by the Secretary-General to the present report. Relevant excerpts are reproduced in annex I below. 9. During 1997, the Secretary-General undertook a major initiative to reconfigure the Organization to enable it to meet more effectively the growing challenges and demands being placed on it and to prepare it for the twenty-first century. A key component of this process was the putting in place of new leadership and management structures for the Organization as a whole, including its programmes and funds, thus enhancing its contribution to the overall effort to promote greater unity of purpose within the wider United Nations system. This initiative provided the framework within which ACC pursued during the year its consideration of issues relating to the strengthening and reform of the United Nations system, guided by the joint statement on reform, adopted by ACC in November 1996 (E/1997/54, annex I). 10. Special attention was given by ACC to the implications for the system of the establishment within the United Nations itself, at the secretariat level, of Executive Committees in the four core areas of peace and security, economic and social affairs, development cooperation, and humanitarian affairs, with human rights being approached as a fifth core area, as well as a cross-cutting issue. This was viewed as an important contribution to the coherence of action of the system as a whole. Another important measure from this point of view was the consolidation of the economic and social functions of the Secretariat in a single department, which took place in parallel with the consolidation of technical secretariat servicing facilities for United Nations intergovernmental bodies. Other relevant measures included the reorientation of public information activities, the streamlining and consolidation of United Nations administrative, financial, personnel, procurement and other services and reductions in the level of documentation, accompanied by a reduction in the Organization’s overall budget and staffing levels. 11. The second phase of United Nations reform addressed an even wider range of issues, many of which required intergovernmental action and were embodied in a comprehensive report of the Secretary-General entitled “Renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform” (A/51/950 and Add. 1-7), which led to the adoption by the Assembly of resolutions 52/12 A and B. ACC noted with appreciation that, in formulating a reform programme for the United Nations itself, the Secretary-General had been guided by a clear concept of the role of the Organization within the broader United Nations system, and had approached the future of the Organization within a larger vision of the future of the system as a whole. 12. Other organizations within the system have also continued to pursue far-reaching reforms, which are bringing about the reorientation of programmes, increased efficiency in operations, and significant changes and improvements in their functioning. 13. In reviewing these processes, ACC considered that a new phase of system-wide reform was under way and that these processes were having an increasingly significant impact on the overall relevance of the system and its responsiveness to changing international requirements, as well as on the image of the system as a whole. ACC recognized the importance of sharing plans and information on these processes on a continuing basis. The objective, at the managerial and strategic level, is to ensure that such processes are mutually supportive, that implications for other organizations are identified and taken into account, and that best practices are institutionalized and drawn upon system-wide. This objective is especially crucial in relation to actions under way to review mission statements and reorient policies and programme priorities. 14. ACC agreed that approaches to inter-agency coordination and cooperation should be based on a renewed effort to elaborate common policy objectives and pursue all opportunities for programme cooperation, and on the effective pooling of capabilities and resources throughout the system, at both the headquarters and field levels. A new and more comprehensive approach to the concept of security, fully encompassing its economic and social components, should underlie that effort. Within that concept, a clear sense of the contribution and capacities of each organization should be established as the basis for further rationalizing the division of labour within the system and enhancing its overall impact. 15. Other cross-organizational issues identified by ACC as requiring common attention in pursuing these reform processes included the issue of linkages with civil society, and the sharing of experience at the inter-agency level on cooperation with the private sector; managerial improvements within the United Nations common system, in particular in relation to existing rigidities in personnel policies and practices; and the need to ensure that new programmes are matched by adequate resources. 16. As part of the effort to improve the exchange and dissemination of information system-wide, a publication will be issued under the aegis of ACC in 1998 outlining common themes underlying the reform processes under way in the system. 17. Over the past two years, ACC has sought to develop a coordinated approach to the follow-up to global conferences held during the 1990s, The World Summit for Children (1990), the World Conference on Education for All (1990), the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries (1990), the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992), the International Conference on Nutrition (1992), the World Conference on Human Rights (1993), the International Conference on Population and Development (1994), the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (1994), the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction (1994), the World Summit for Social Development (1995), the Fourth World Conference on Women (1995), the resumed fiftieth session of the General Assembly to consider public administration and development (1996), the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) (1996), the World Food Summit (1996) and the ninth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (1996). with a view to promoting sustained and integrated implementation, at the country level, of the policy recommendations emanating from these conferences. To this end, and drawing on the experience of the inter-agency task force set up for the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, three thematic ad hoc task forces were established by ACC in October 1995. The Inter-Agency Task Force on Basic Social Services for All, chaired by the United Nations Population Fund; the Inter-Agency Task Force on Full Employment and Sustainable Livelihoods, chaired by the International Labour Organization; and the Inter-Agency Task Force on an Enabling Environment for Social and Economic Development, chaired by the World Bank. In addition, the Inter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality was established by ACC in 1996 with the objective of addressing all aspects of the implementation of the Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women, as well as gender-related recommendations emanating from other international conferences. 18. With regard to human rights, ACC has paid particular attention since 1994 to the system-wide follow-up and implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action. In line with the provisions of that Programme, it has provided guidance and identified steps to promote the incorporation of human rights into all relevant strategies and programmes, including those at the country level, and has called for close collaboration between the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the organizations of the system. To this end, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights organized during the year inter-agency consultations focusing on the preparations for the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration on Human Rights and the five-year review of the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action in 1998 (see paras. 40 and 41 below), and is actively participating in the Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions (CCPOQ). As cross-cutting issues, human rights concerns were integrated in the work of all three ACC inter-agency task forces. 19. Regarding arrangements for the follow-up to the World Food Summit, ACC has endorsed specific networking arrangements on rural development and food security (which replace the former ACC Subcommittee on Rural Development), with a view to ensuring maximum cost-effectiveness, country-level focus, flexibility and efficiency. The network consists of a two-tiered, informal coordination mechanism that is composed, at the country level, of thematic groups for rural development and food security within the resident coordinator system and, at the headquarters level, a network of interested organizations, including non-United Nations actors, in particular civil society organizations, to backstop these country-level groups and promote common approaches. Similar approaches are being developed with regard to the follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II). 20. ACC has also reiterated the importance of inter-agency collaboration in the follow-up to the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction and the implementation of the Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action. 21. Upon the completion of their assigned tasks, the task forces, as ad hoc, time-bound mechanisms, were discontinued and their work has been assessed by ACC. In undertaking that review, ACC sought to ensure that the work of the task forces would be actively followed up at the country level, as well as within the ACC machinery, and also to maximize the support it would provide to the Economic and Social Council’s review, at a session in May 1998, of the integrated and coordinated implementation and follow-up of global conferences and summits. 22. The inter-agency work pursued by ACC through the task forces has constituted an unprecedented system-wide effort in providing integrated, coordinated and productive support to Governments in the follow-up to the global agenda derived from recent global conferences. In developing an effective framework for promoting integrated follow-up action, the task forces have used a number of innovative methods in their work, such as the designation of lead agencies, the use of country reviews, the elaboration of information materials and guidance notes, the identification of best practices for dissemination at the country level, and the organization of country seminars. As such, they have proved to be efficient instruments for improving the interaction between inter-agency efforts at the headquarters level and coordination at the country level. 23. The effectiveness of the work of the task forces will ultimately be measured by the extent to which the system is able to pursue and step up collaborative activities and enhance its impact in assisting countries to implement in a sustained and comprehensive way the policy commitments made at these global conferences. The contribution made by the task forces in this regard goes beyond the specific outputs they have generated. 24. The strong sense of commitment and cooperation developed among the organizations of the United Nations system participating in the task forces has led to a greater awareness of the need for continued dialogue among the United Nations agencies concerned, as well as between the organizations of the United Nations system and national Governments, in order to achieve the objectives of the conferences. The recommendations made by the task forces for future action as well as the lessons learned from their experience provide a solid basis for continued efforts to mobilize United Nations system support for the coordinated follow-up to conferences. 25. The Bretton Woods institutions were key participants in the work of the task forces. They contributed actively to the development of common approaches to translating the normative recommendations of conferences into operational guidance, with a focusing on the country level. Their participation in this process also contributed to achieving a better overall understanding between these institutions and other organizations of the United Nations system of the requirements for supporting effectively the development agenda at the country level. 26. ACC agreed that the effort to promote integrated and coordinated follow-up to United Nations conferences should be actively pursued and approached in the broader context of United Nations system reform and of the system’s effort to enhance its capacity to advance the global agenda in a coherent and effective way. In the same context, ACC emphasized the important role of civil society in furthering the objectives of conferences at the national and international levels and the need for the organizations of the United Nations system to draw fully on the strengths, advocacy role and resources of civil society. 27. In the immediate future, the challenge for each organization, as well as the system as a whole, will be to maintain, in cooperation with Governments, the momentum created by the work of the task forces with a view to providing sustained support to countries, including through the resident coordinator system, in translating conference outcomes into concrete national policies and programmes. In this context, ACC reiterated that sustainable development provides a broad framework to guide the ongoing work of the system, and underlined the importance of mainstreaming human rights, environmental, gender, population and children-related questions, and of making optimum use of information and communication technologies. The Committee also stressed that the goal of poverty eradication, as reaffirmed by all the recent global conferences, remains a fundamental commitment of the system. 28. ACC called upon the organizations of the United Nations system to utilize fully national-level mechanisms and frameworks that are in place or are currently being developed with countries (for example, the country strategy note and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework), including the coordination of these mechanisms and frameworks with individual initiatives of agencies of the United Nations system that are not covered under such frameworks, to support the development of national strategies and action plans, based on national priorities, for implementing conference outcomes in an integrated manner. In so doing, ACC recommended that maximum advantage should be taken of the results of the work of the three inter-agency task forces, including lessons learned, as well as of the Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development (IACSD) and Inter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality (IACWGE) in their respective areas of responsibility. 29. Within the ACC machinery itself, CCPOQ, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Group and the United Nations Staff College, organized an inter-agency workshop on field level follow-up to global conferences at the International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization (ILO) at Turin, Italy. The workshop brought together key participants from field offices, the agencies leading the task forces, and substantive secretariats of the Economic and Social Council and the functional commissions responsible for conference follow-up. At the workshop, further guidance was developed for coordinated follow-up to global conferences at the field level, in particular for the resident coordinator system. The workshop identified follow-up actions concerning the strengthening of dialogue among organizations of the United Nations system and with Governments at the country level, the elaboration of common frameworks for United Nations system programmes, mainstreaming of gender issues and human rights, building of alliances with civil society, and improved and more integrated reporting, analytical frameworks, statistics and indicators. The outputs of the workshop, following review by CCPOQ, have been transmitted to the resident coordinators and country representatives of all the organizations of the system. 30. ACC has directed its subsidiary machinery, in particular IACSD, CCPOQ and IACWGE, to adjust their methods of work, building on the experience of the work of the task forces, and to review their work programmes so as to give priority to promoting, particularly at the country level, the effective implementation of the recommendations of the task forces and, in so doing, to develop further collaboration and strengthen dialogue and interaction among them. In the same context, the Committee emphasized the need to reinforce the normative, policy, and programme development work of the system, which can underpin and support implementation of the goals of global conferences. 31. As part of the efforts of ACC to promote coordinated follow-up to United Nations global conferences, an inter-agency project on universal access to basic communication and information services was launched in 1996, with the International Telecommunication Union designated as lead agency. The project was designed to support the work of the inter-agency task forces engaged in the promotion of integrated follow-up to conferences, as well as other system-wide initiatives such as the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa. 32. Following the completion of the inter-agency project on universal access to basic communication and information services, ACC adopted a statement (see annex II below), which formed the basis for a strategic and systematic approach to information and communication technologies and information management among the organizations of the system. The Secretary-General brought the statement to the attention of the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, which took note of it (decision 52/451). Other executive heads of United Nations organizations have submitted, or are in the process of submitting, the ACC statement to their respective governing bodies. This is an area in which support at the intergovernmental level will be extremely valuable in seeking to accelerate progress, given the significant potential that access by Governments to basic communication and information services can have for meaningful and sustainable development. 33. The organizations of the United Nations system most directly concerned have agreed to collaborate with the International Telecommunication Union in the implementation of pilot projects in the areas identified in the ACC statement, as well as to pursue together work on the emerging concept, highlighted in the statement, of a right to communicate in the context of universal access to basic communication and information services. 34. At its nineteenth special session, the General Assembly reviewed the progress being achieved in the implementation of Agenda 21 and other commitments made at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. ACC transmitted a statement to the special session, in which it stressed that sustainable development provides an over-arching framework for the activities of the United Nations system in the economic, social and environmental fields (see annex III below). 35. With regard to the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, the Assembly concluded that while significant achievements had been made at both the national and international levels, a great deal more remained to be accomplished. The Assembly called for the mobilization of greater political will to expedite progress towards achieving sustainable development worldwide. The adoption by the Assembly of the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21(resolution S-19/2) helped advance international agreement on policy directions to be followed to achieve those ends. 36. As regards issues directly linked to inter-agency cooperation, the General Assembly called for better policy coordination at the intergovernmental level, as well as for continued and more concerted efforts to enhance collaboration among the secretariats of the relevant decision-making bodies. The Assembly stressed the need to strengthen IACSD and its system of task managers, with a view to further enhancing system-wide intersectoral cooperation and coordination for the implementation of Agenda 21 and contributing to the promotion of coordinated follow-up to the major United Nations conferences in the area of sustainable development. 37. Furthermore, the Assembly underscored that all organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, within their respective areas of expertise and mandates, should strengthen, individually and jointly, their support for national efforts to implement Agenda 21 and make these efforts and actions consistent with national plans, policies and priorities of member States. 38. A main challenge ahead for the ACC subsidiary machinery, particularly IACSD and its task manager system, will be to orient inter-agency collaboration so as to ensure a stronger focus on practical implementation, particularly at the country level, of Agenda 21. This renewed effort should take fully into account the outcome of the special session of the General Assembly and be based on common strategic approaches in all key areas of sustainable development. Current initiatives for the further implementation of Agenda 21, such as the preparation of sustainable development guidelines and the organization of sustainable development workshops, are grounded in such system-wide approaches and should, at the same time, contribute to their enrichment. 39. ACC, through its Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development, remains fully committed to strengthening inter-agency collaboration in the area of sustainable development, and to supporting efforts for the implementation of Agenda 21 and the Programme adopted at the nineteenth special session of the General Assembly, in 1997. 40. During 1997, ACC undertook special preparations for commemorating in 1998 two important events: the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the five-year review of the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights reviewed with ACC the steps being undertaken to strengthen linkages between human rights issues and other relevant programmes of the organizations of the system, and to stimulate and coordinate activities related to human rights throughout the system. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is working closely with other organizations to promote a sense of shared values and help broaden and develop further a rights-based approach to addressing economic, social and humanitarian problems, particularly with respect to children, women and refugees. 41. Intensive inter-agency consultations were held in 1997 to prepare a coordinated plan for the five-year review of the Vienna Conference and the observance of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. ACC welcomed the growing interest of all partners in the international community – Governments, academic institutions and other components of civil society – to sponsor or contribute to relevant activities at the national and international levels. Specific programmes, publications and other activities by the organizations of the system, with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights continuing to facilitate inter-agency cooperation, were reviewed and actively promoted. ACC expects these activities to contribute to the overall effort to include human rights as a key and integral component of the coordinated follow-up to global conferences at the country, regional and global levels. 42. Recognizing the increasingly important role played by non-State actors in advancing the global development agenda, and the need to develop effective partnerships with such actors, ACC gave special attention, during 1997, to the relationships between the United Nations system and civil society, including the private sector. These relationships are a central concern in the reform effort, and an important dimension of many of the policy issues with which the system is confronted, ranging from the adaptation of the system to the changes that are taking place in the national and international environment, to resource flows for development and the strengthening of public support for the system. 43. ACC noted that experience within the system in developing partnerships with civil society and the private sector varies considerably from sector to sector, but covers, in different degrees, the whole spectrum of the activities and concerns of the system. While recognizing that the association of several United Nations organizations with civil society is both wide-ranging and long-standing, ACC concluded that the pattern of such relationships should be further deepened and made more systematic and mutually reinforcing across the system. ACC considered it especially important that the energies of civil society should be fully tapped to build advocacy and resource mobilization constituencies for addressing global concerns and in support of operations at the country level. With regard to the latter, the need was especially emphasized to develop further modalities of collaboration with community-based organizations, which represent an increasingly important part of support structures for social cohesion and development work, in particular in conflict situations where the more formal political and institutional infrastructure may have eroded. 44. ACC encouraged greater exchange of information among the organizations of the system on the policies, directives and practices of cooperation with civil society partners so as to identify and build on best practices, and agreed to give further consideration in this context to the feasibility of establishing an inter-agency enterprise liaison service to serve as a common clearing-house mechanism for cooperation with the business community. ACC also recommended that further consideration be given by all organizations of the system to issues related to accountability, representation, and criteria for assessing competence, as well as to ways of promoting, where necessary, capacity-building of civil society groups at the national and local levels in support of national development, humanitarian assistance and peace-building. 45. ACC encouraged more systematic consultation with relevant non-State actors in the preparation of substantive as well as coordination reports, particularly on follow-up to recent global conferences. It also agreed that the United Nations Staff College should be encouraged to develop specific programmes that would help to enhance staff capacity for working more closely with civil society. 46. Preventing conflict situations or, when that does not prove possible, ensuring their resolution on a lasting basis, is one of the key aims of the United Nations. During 1997, ACC considered under a broad agenda item on peace-building in crisis situations, ways of drawing maximum advantage of the range of capacities available in the United Nations system – its capabilities for political mediation and humanitarian action, its analytical resources to address the basic factors that lie at the root of existing or potential conflicts, and its experience in development cooperation – to build and sustain peace. 47. The Committee agreed that peace-building, as a broad-based approach to crisis prevention and resolution, requires integrated and coordinated actions aimed at addressing any combination of political, military, humanitarian, human rights, environmental, economic, social, cultural and demographic factors to ensure the prevention of conflict or its resolution on a lasting basis. It reiterated the importance, in such situations, of ensuring that support for long-term, sustainable development is not interrupted, or is resumed as expeditiously as possible. 48. In addressing the resource implications of providing such comprehensive support to countries threatened by or emerging from conflicts, ACC called for a stronger commitment by bilateral and other donors to peace-building requirements, and stressed the need to harmonize resource mobilization efforts in order to ensure adequate funding not only for immediate rehabilitation, but also for longer-term recovery and development activities. To this end, the importance of supporting and assisting affected countries to enhance their absorptive capacity was also generally acknowledged. 49. In the same context, ACC considered ways of reinforcing the system’s overall capacity for early warning, to enable it to alert the international community in a timely manner to potential crisis situations, and act early to avert such crises. Existing arrangements for this purpose should be built on and strengthened through more regular and systematic information exchanges, leading to integrated assessments of trends. To the same end, linkages between the system’s analytical capacities and its operations in the political, humanitarian and development fields needed to be established more systematically. 50. ACC agreed that, in country situations in which, in addition to ongoing humanitarian and development activities, the United Nations operates mandated political programmes with the primary purpose of preventing, controlling and/or finding resolutions to conflicts, the achievement of those political objectives and the consolidation of peace needed to be supported by an integrated effort by the entire United Nations system. It recognized the importance, in such situations, of achieving a clear and common understanding of the respective roles that the various actors within the United Nations system, both at headquarters and in the field, are called upon to play to address the various factors underlying the conflict situation. 51. ACC, in the light of the above considerations, endorsed the recommendations of its Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions for the elaboration of a strategic framework for response to and recovery from crisis, to be developed in consultation with the authorities concerned, and called for its testing in selected countries, in consultation with the authorities concerned and with the active participation of multilateral and bilateral donors and interested non-governmental organizations. 52. In the same context, the importance of incorporating a gender perspective in all activities undertaken by the United Nations system in the areas of peacekeeping, peace-building, reconciliation, reconstruction, rehabilitation and development was reaffirmed. 53. African economic recovery and development continued to be a priority concern on the agenda of ACC during 1997. The Committee kept under review progress being made through the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa in achieving a greater impact of the system’s programmes at the country level, and the effectiveness, in that context, of the Special Initiative as the implementation arm of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s. The contribution of the Special Initiative to promoting or reinforcing development programmes in a number of countries in such areas as health, education, governance and communications for peace-building, was reviewed and the lessons learned analysed. Country retreats being held by United Nations resident coordinators and United Nations country teams, with the participation of representatives of the Bretton Woods institutions, as part of the Special Initiative, were proving instrumental in sustaining commitment to the Special Initiative and furthering inter-agency cooperation in support of its priority objectives. 54. In the same context, ACC addressed ways of strengthening linkages between the Special Initiative and other international development cooperation undertakings, such as the Tokyo International Conference on African Development, the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative, and the Alliance for Africa’s Industrialization. 55. CCPOQ, on behalf of ACC, reviewed preparations for the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system, scheduled to take place in 1998. 56. ACC considered that the triennial review should examine linkages between development and emergency and humanitarian activities; facilitate the mapping of institutional mechanisms relevant to operational activities and their coordination; and assess progress concerning the coordination of the functioning of the resident coordinator system, common premises and common services, and the development of impact indicators and impact evaluation. The report should reflect the continuing dialogue taking place at the inter-agency level to enhance the coherence and effectiveness of the system’s operational activities, but should, at the same time, be transparent in identifying problem areas being encountered in the process. 57. At its thirty-seventh session, the Committee for Programme and Coordination See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/52/16), chap. IV, sect. A. expressed support for measures undertaken by the United Nations system in assisting third countries affected by the implementation of Security Council resolutions 661 (1990) and 724 (1991) and requested that the item be kept on the agenda of ACC. Information on the measures undertaken by the United Nations system to provide assistance to affected States was first contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the question of special economic problems of States as a result of sanctions imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations (A/48/573-S/26705), and in the annual overview reports of ACC (E/1993/81, E/1994/19, E/1995/21, E/1996/18 and Add.1, E/1997/54 and Corr.1). 58. The General Assembly, in its resolution 52/169 H, took note of the report of the Secretary-General on economic assistance to States affected by the implementation of the Security Council resolutions imposing sanctions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (A/52/535) and renewed its invitation to all States and the relevant international organizations, both within and outside the United Nations system, in particular the international financial institutions, to continue to take into account the special needs of the affected States in providing assistance to them during the transition period following the lifting of the sanctions. It also requested the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the implementation of the resolution. 59. Further, the General Assembly, in its resolution 52/162, endorsed the proposal of the Secretary-General, contained in his report on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (A/52/308), that an ad hoc expert group meeting be convened in the first half of 1998 with a view to developing a possible methodology for assessing the consequences actually incurred by third States as a result of preventive or enforcement measures. The Assembly endorsed the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the expert group explore innovative and practical measures of assistance that could be provided by the relevant organizations, both within and outside the United Nations system, to the affected third States. It also invited the organizations of the United Nations system, international financial institutions, other international organizations, regional organizations and Member States to address more specifically and directly, where appropriate, special economic problems of affected third States, and for this purpose, to consider improving procedures for consultations to maintain a dialogue with such States, including through regular and frequent meetings as well as, where appropriate, special meetings between the affected third States and the donor community, with the participation of United Nations agencies and other international organizations. The Secretary-General will submit to the General Assembly, at its fifty-third session, a report on the implementation of Assembly resolution 52/162. 60. ACC’s review of the Graça Machel study on the situation of children affected by armed conflict (A/51/306 and Add.1) provided an opportunity for the organizations of the United Nations system to review their contribution to furthering the rights of the child and to give special attention to the coordination of actions and the achievement of concrete results at the country level, in line with the relevant recommendations contained in General Assembly resolution 51/77. 61. ACC requested CCPOQ to develop ways to link child-related rehabilitation and development activities with relief and recovery and to ensure that relevant operational guidelines, appeals and strategy proposals reflected the specific needs of children affected by war. It further requested that the relevant recommendations of the study be integrated, to the extent possible, into ongoing activities related to the coordinated follow-up to recent United Nations global conferences, and pursued as part of the peace-building, conflict-resolution and national reconciliation activities of the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa. 62. The members of ACC also pledged to give special attention to the needs and rights of street children and refugee and internally displaced children and to strengthen, within their respective work programmes, activities for the promotion and implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 63. ACC agreed that concerned organizations within the United Nations system should develop inter-agency guidelines for activities related to children affected by armed conflict. United Nations system country teams and field personnel, including the staff of humanitarian relief operations, were similarly invited to accord priority attention to the issue of children affected by armed conflict. 64. ACC reviewed progress in the work of the Joint and Co-sponsored United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), which was established in 1996 with the objective of providing a United Nations system coordinated response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic, including support to HIV/AIDS prevention activities at the country level. 65. In recognizing that there were clear indications of initial programme successes, ACC reiterated that the challenge of HIV/AIDS required a concerted system-wide response, and called for the further strengthening of inter-agency collaboration in combating the epidemic. ACC took note of the joint statement on HIV/AIDS prepared by the UNAIDS Committee of Co-sponsoring Organizations The UNAIDS Committee of Co-sponsoring Organizations comprises the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization and the World Bank. and fully supported the appeal made by the Executive Director of UNAIDS to other organizations of the United Nations system to join in a renewed effort to address the epidemic in all its dimensions. A. Security of United Nations system staff 66. During 1997, the United Nations Security Coordinator kept ACC briefed on developments concerning the security and safety of United Nations system staff and associated personnel in the field. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other executive heads reiterated their concern at the growing number of incidents and threats to the security of staff in the field, and shared information with the Committee on relevant measures being taken in their respective organizations to address the situation. 67. ACC stressed the need for Governments to be made fully aware of system-wide security policies in order to enlist their support, at the highest political level, for the implementation of those policies. The key role to be played by United Nations resident coordinator and designated security officials was emphasized. 68. ACC adopted a statement on staff security (see annex IV below) and urged that its implementation be given urgent attention by its subsidiary bodies concerned and within the system as a whole. It agreed to continue to give priority consideration, in the course of 1998, to measures required to further enhance the coordination and effective management of staff security arrangements in crisis situations. 69. On the basis of the analyses and recommendations of its Consultative Committee on Administrative Questions (CCAQ), ACC adopted a statement on conditions of service and the application of the Noblemaire principle (see annex V below), One executive head indicated that he could not concur with the statement. reflecting its continuing concern regarding the need for urgent measures to restore the competitiveness of United Nations common system conditions of service, including the remuneration of the Professional and higher categories of staff of the organizations of the system. The General Assembly, at its fifty-second session, took note of the statement (resolution 52/216). 70. ACC will continue to address, during 1998, key policy issues requiring a system-wide response. The comprehensive review of the integrated and coordinated implementation and follow-up of global conferences and summits being undertaken by ACC will be completed early in 1998, and will be reflected in the report of the Secretary-General prepared for a session of the Economic and Social Council in May 1998. In the same context, in response to an initiative by the Secretary-General, ACC members agreed to give renewed attention to elaborating the elements of a common framework for action by the system in the fight against poverty. Pursuant to ACC’s review, CCPOQ, IACSD and IACWGE will be responsible for operationalizing such a common framework, as part of the effort to maintain the momentum for national and international action to follow up recent global conferences, and to give renewed impetus to collaborative actions by organizations of the system at the country level. 71. ACC is also expected to continue the effort, initiated in 1997, to develop strategic frameworks for peace-building in crisis situations. It will also continue to monitor progress in the implementation of the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa, including the work of its Steering Committee, as well as the role of the Initiative in the implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s. Intergovernmental action on the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa (A/52/871-S/1998/318) is expected to provide new impetus to inter-agency collaboration in support of African development. 72. The contribution of ACC to the overall process of reform and strengthening of the United Nations system is expected to be further deepened in 1998. It will include the initiation of an in-depth review of new policy and programme orientations being introduced by individual organizations of the system, as part of ongoing reform processes, and an assessment of their implications for other parts of the system, as well as of their impact on the overall coherence and effectiveness of the system as a whole. 73. Continuing attention will be given by ACC, in the same context, to the development of partnerships between the organizations of the system and non-State actors – non-governmental organizations as well as the business community – and the sharing of experiences and best practices in this area. 74. The implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions will remain part of the work of ACC. 75. ACC will continue to address the issue of the security and safety of United Nations staff and associated personnel on an urgent basis, in particular the coordinated and follow- up to the implementation of the recommendations contained in the ACC statement on staff security. This will include follow-up on the recommendations of the high-level CCAQ and the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Meeting on Security. 76. As part of a continuing effort to improve its own functioning and that of its subsidiary machinery, ACC is developing a number of initiatives designed, through the use of communication and information technologies, to intensify the policy dialogue among executive heads of member organizations and facilitate consultations among them on a continuing basis. ACC will also continue to introduce improved and more cost-effective methods of work for its subsidiary machinery. Under the guidance of ACC, the Information Systems Coordination Committee will continue to give priority attention to enhancing the use of information technology to improve access to United Nations system information and ensure its wider dissemination. 