%%%SANCTIONS|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|LATVIA|EXPORT RESTRICTIONS|ARMS TRANSFERS|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) Letter dated 24 May 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Latvia to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Committee Referring to your letter of 20 April 2007 asking that a report be submitted on the steps taken with a view to implementing effectively Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007) on Iran, the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Latvia to the United Nations has the honour to convey to the Committee the following (see annex). (Signed) Solveiga Silkalna Ambassador Permanent Representative of Latvia to the United Nations As a member of the European Union, the Republic of Latvia implements United Nations sanctions within the framework of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) by virtue of EU Common Positions and EC Regulations. EC Regulations are binding in their entirety and directly applicable within all member States of the EU and, accordingly, impose an obligation for member States to apply them. EC Regulations in combination with Common Positions create the legal basis for full implementation of sanctions imposed by Security Council resolutions. On 27 February 2007 the Council of the European Union adopted Council Common Position 2007/140/CFSP concerning restrictive measures against Iran. In line with Security Council resolution 1737 (2006), Common Position 2007/140/CFSP provides for certain restrictive measures against Iran. The said Common Position implements Security Council resolution 1737 (2006) by including restrictions on exports and imports of goods and technology which could contribute to Iran's enrichment-related, reprocessing, or heavy water-related activities, or to the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems, a ban on the provision of related services, a ban on investment related to such goods and technology, and a ban on procurement of relevant goods and technology from Iran, as well as the freezing of funds and economic resources of persons, entities and bodies engaged in, directly associated with or providing support for such activities or development. As these measures fall within the scope of the Treaty, establishing the European Community and Community legislation is necessary for uniform application of the said restrictive measures, Council Regulation (EC) No. 432/2007 was adopted on 19 April 2007. Furthermore, a Council Common Position 2007/246/CFSP was adopted on 23 April 2007 amending Common Position 2007/140/CFSP, referred to above, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1747 (2007). Namely, prohibiting procurement of arms and related materiel from Iran, prohibiting the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of all arms and related materiel, as well as the provision of related assistance, investment and services, extending financial and travel sanctions imposed by Security Council resolution 1737 (2006) to additional persons and entities engaged in, directly associated with or providing support for Iran's proliferation sensitive nuclear activities or for the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems, as well as refraining from entering into new commitments for grants, financial assistance and concessional loans to the Government of Iran, except for humanitarian and developmental purposes. Moreover, additional persons and entities have been listed in the Annex II of Council Common Position 2007/140/CFSP. In addition, the member States of the European Union must determine proportionate, effective and dissuasive penalties applicable to infringements of the provisions of Council Regulations. Thereby section 84 of the Criminal Law of 17 June 1998 criminalizes the violation of sanctions imposed by international organizations. Namely, for a person who commits intentional violation of regulatory enactments regulating implementation of sanctions determined by the United Nations Security Council, European Union or other international organizations in the Republic of Latvia, the applicable sentence is deprivation of liberty for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding one hundred times the minimum monthly wage. For a person who commits the same acts, if commission thereof is repeated, or by a group of persons pursuant to prior agreement, or by a State official, the applicable sentence is deprivation of liberty for a term not exceeding eight years, with or without confiscation of property. 