%%%SENEGAL|APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|

Seventeenth Meeting New York, 14 and 18-22 June 2007 Item 15 of the provisional agenda* Report on the establishment of a staff pension committee within the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (SPLOS/155) Letter dated 27 March 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations addressed to the Secretariat I refer to my correspondence of 2 November 2006 and 30 January 2007 regarding the appointment of members to the staff pension committee of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (see annexes). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annexes could be circulated as a document of the Meeting of States Parties. * SPLOS/L.50. (Signed) Raymond O. Wolfe Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations Letter dated 2 November 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations addressed to the Registrar of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea I am writing in my capacity as President of the sixteenth Meeting of States Parties of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea regarding the decision of the Meeting that I should conduct intersessional consultations in order to select a member and an alternate member of the staff pension committee of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. Pursuant to this decision, I have had wide consultations and as a result, I wish to convey to you the nomination of Senegal for membership of the staff pension committee. Although we need to have two nominations, I thought it prudent for States parties to be advised of the nomination of Senegal, in view of the time that has elapsed. It is my hope that a second nomination can be confirmed shortly. Letter dated 30 January 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations addressed to the Registrar of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea I am in receipt of your letter dated 24 January 2007 regarding the appointment of members to the staff pension committee, pursuant to the decision of the sixteenth Meeting of States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. In accordance with this decision, the necessary consultations were conducted with States parties and up to the present time, only Senegal has expressed an interest. On the basis of the mandate of the Meeting, the obligation to conduct consultations has been met. However, in view of the fact that there has been no nomination for an alternate member of the staff pension committee as yet, I am still in contact with States parties with the hope that a submission will be received prior to the next Meeting of States Parties. 