%%%RULES AND REGULATIONS|PROJECT PERSONNEL|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|

United Nations ST/SGB/2007/1 Secretariat 1 January 2007 Secretary-General's bulletin Amendments to the 100 Series of the Staff Rules (ST/SGB/2002/1) The Secretary-General, pursuant to staff regulations 12.2, 12.3 and 12.4 and staff rule 112.2 (a), hereby promulgates the text of the amendments to the 100 Series of the Staff Rules promulgated in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2002/1. The text of the amendments is attached to the present bulletin. Section 1 Purpose 1.1 The text of the Staff Rules listed below is amended for the reasons set out below in relation to each rule. Please note that the following amendments to the rules, which were promulgated by ST/SGB/2006/11, effective 1 January 2007, will be provisional until reported to the General Assembly: (a) Rule 105.3 (d) (iii), Home leave, is amended to provide that staff should be able to travel to a different country than the country of their nationality for home leave if staff have close family or personal ties in that country; (b) Rule 107.13, Terminal expenses, is amended to indicate that terminal expenses will be paid at rates and under conditions established by the Secretary-General; (c) Rule 107.19 (ii) and (v), Miscellaneous travel expenses, is amended to update the list of expenses for which advance authorization is required; (d) Rule 107.21 (b) and (g), Excess baggage and unaccompanied shipments, is amended to allow for one bag in addition to the free baggage allowance or up to 25 kilograms per traveller, and to allow for the combination into one shipment of baggage entitlements for onward and outward journeys; (e) Rule 107.23, Travel advances, is amended to include the possibility of a 100 per cent travel advance to staff members on official travel status for travel subsistence allowance and terminal expenses. 1.2 Attached for insertion in the printed copy of ST/SGB/2002/1 are the new pages containing the provisional amendments to the Staff Rules and the revised salary scales. 07-30525 (E) 150507 Section 2 Final provisions Unless otherwise indicated, the amendments introduced in the present bulletin shall enter into force on 1 January 2007. (Signed) Ban Ki-moon Secretary-General CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS Provisions relating to service of the staff Article 8 The United Nations shall place no restrictions on the eligibility of men and women to participate in any capacity and under conditions of equality in its principal and subsidiary organs. Article 97 The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary-General and such staff as the Organization may require. The Secretary-General shall be appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council. He shall be the chief administrative officer of the Organization. Article 100 1. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall not seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect on their position as international officials responsible only to the Organization. 2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities. Article 101 1. The staff shall be appointed by the Secretary-General under regulations established by the General Assembly. 2. Appropriate staff shall be permanently assigned to the Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, and, as required, to other organs of the United Nations. These staffs shall form a part of the Secretariat. 3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. - v - 1. The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the fulfilment of its purposes. 2. Representatives of the Members of the United Nations and officials of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization. 3. The General Assembly may make recommendations with a view to determining the details of the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or may propose conventions to the Members of the United Nations for this purpose. The General Assembly established the Staff Regulations of the United Nations according to Article 101 of the Charter by resolution 590 (VI) of 2 February 1952 and amended them thereafter by resolutions 781 (VIII) and 782 (VIII) of 9 December 1953, resolution 882 (IX) of 14 December 1954, resolution 887 (IX) of 17 December 1954, resolution 974 (X) of 15 December 1955, resolution 1095 (XI) of 27 February 1957, resolutions 1225 (XII) and 1234 (XII) of 14 December 1957, resolution 1295 (XIII) of 5 December 1958, resolution 1658 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, resolution 1730 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, resolution 1929 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, resolution 2050 (XX) of 13 December 1965, resolution 2121 (XX) of 21 December 1965, resolution 2369 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, resolutions 2481 (XXIII) and 2485 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968, resolution 2742 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, resolution 2888 (XXVI) of 21 December 1971, resolution 2990 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, resolution 3008 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, resolution 3194 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, resolutions 3353 (XXIX) and 3358 B (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, resolution 31/141 B of 17 December 1976, resolution 32/200 and decision 32/450 B of 21 December 1977, resolution 33/119 of 19 December 1978, decision 33/433 of 20 December 1978, resolution 35/214 of 17 December 1980, decision 36/459 of 18 December 1981, resolution 37/126 of 17 December 1982, resolution 37/235 C of 21 December 1982, resolution 39/69 of 13 December 1984, resolutions 39/236 and 39/245 of 18 December 1984, decision 40/467 of 18 December 1985, resolutions 41/207 and 41/209 of 11 December 1986, resolutions 42/221 and 42/225 of 21 December 1987, resolution 43/226 of 21 December 1988, resolution 44/185 of 19 December 1989, resolution 44/198 of 21 December 1989, resolutions 45/241 and 45/251 of 21 December 1990, resolution 45/259 of 3 May 1991, resolution 46/191 of 20 December 1991, resolution 47/216 of 12 March 1993, resolution 47/226 of 30 April 1993, resolutions 48/224 and 48/225 of 23 December 1993, resolutions 49/222 and 49/223 of 23 December 1994, resolution 49/241 of 6 April 1995, resolution 51/216 of 18 December 1996, resolution 52/252 of 8 September 1998, resolution 53/209 of 18 December 1998, resolution 53/221 of 7 April 1999, resolution 54/238 and decision 54/460 of 23 December 1999, resolution 55/223 of 23 December 2000 and resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, resolution 56/244 of 24 December 2001, resolution 57/285 of 20 December 2002, resolution 57/307 of 15 April 2003 and resolution 57/310 of 18 June 2003; resolution 58/285 of 8 April 2004; resolution 59/268 of 23 December 2004; resolution 59/283 of 13 April 2005; resolution 60/238 and 60/248 of 23 December 2005; and resolution 61/239 of 22 December 2006. - vi - 1 January 2007 prescribed. In exceptional cases, the Secretary-General may, at his or her initiative, place a staff member on special leave with full pay if he or she considers such leave to be in the interest of the Organization; (ii) Special leave is normally without pay. In exceptional circumstances, special leave with full or partial pay may be granted; (iii) Subject to conditions established by the SecretaryGeneral, family leave may be granted as follows: a. As special leave with full pay in the case of adoption of a child; b. As special leave without pay for a period of up to two years for a staff member who is the mother or father of a newly born or adopted child, with a possibility of extension for up to an additional two years in exceptional circumstances. The right of a staff member to be re-absorbed after the end of such special leave without pay shall be fully protected; c. As special leave without pay for a reasonable period, including necessary travel time, upon the death of a member of the immediate family of the staff member or in case of serious family emergency; (iv) Special leave shall not be authorized for governmental service in a political office, in a diplomatic or other representational post or for the purpose of performing any functions that are incompatible with the staff member's continuing status as an international civil servant. In exceptional circumstances, special leave without pay may be granted to a staff member who is requested by his or her Government to render temporary services involving functions of a technical nature. (b) A staff member, other than one recruited specifically for a mission, who has completed one year of satisfactory probationary service or who has a permanent appointment and who is called upon to serve in the armed forces of the State of which the staff member is a national, whether for training or active duty, may be granted special leave without pay for the duration of such military service, in accordance with terms and conditions set forth in appendix C to these Rules. (c) The Secretary-General may authorize special leave without pay for pension purposes to protect the pension benefits of staff who are within two years of achieving age 55 years and 25 years of contributory service, or who are over that age and within two years of 25 years of contributory service. (d) Staff members shall not accrue service credits towards sick, annual and home leave, salary increment, seniority, termination indemnity and repatriation grant during periods of special leave with partial pay or without pay. Periods of less than one full month of such leave shall not affect the ordinary rates of accrual. Continuity of service shall not be considered broken by periods of special leave. Rule 105.3 Home leave (a) Staff members regarded as international recruits under rule 104.7 (a) and not excluded from home leave under rule 104.7 (c), who are residing and serving outside their home country and who are otherwise eligible, shall be entitled once in every two years of qualifying service to visit their home country at United Nations expense for the purpose of spending in that country a reasonable period of - 41 - annual leave. Leave taken for this purpose and under the terms and conditions set forth in this rule shall hereinafter be referred to as home leave. (b) A staff member shall be eligible for home leave provided the following conditions are fulfilled: (i) While performing his or her official duties: a. The staff member continues to reside in a country other than that of which he or she is a national; or b. In the case of a staff member who is a native of a nonmetropolitan territory of the country of the duty station and who maintained his or her normal residence in such nonmetropolitan territory prior to appointment, he or she continues to reside, while performing his or her official duties, outside such territory; (ii) The staff member's service is expected by the Secretary-General to continue: a. At least six months beyond the date of his or her return from any proposed home leave; and b. In the case of the first home leave, at least six months beyond the date on which the staff member will have completed two years of qualifying service; (iii) In the case of home leave following the return from a family visit travel under rule 107.1 (b), normally not less than nine months of continuous service have elapsed since departure on the family visit travel. (c) Staff members whose eligibility under paragraph (b) above is established at the time of their appointment shall begin to accrue service credit towards home leave from that date. Staff members who become eligible for home leave subsequent to appointment shall begin to accrue such service credit from the effective date of their becoming eligible. (d) The country of home leave shall be the country of the staff member's nationality, subject to the following terms, conditions and exceptions: The place of home leave of the staff member within his or her home country shall be, for purposes of travel and transportation entitlements, the place with which the staff member had the closest residential ties during the period of his or her most recent residence in the home country. In exceptional circumstances, a change in the place in the country of home leave may be authorized, under conditions established by the Secretary-General; (ii) A staff member who has served with another public international organization immediately preceding his or her appointment shall have the place of home leave determined as though his or her entire previous service with the other international organization had been with the United Nations; - 42 - 1 January 2007 (iii) The Secretary-General may authorize:* a. A country other than the country of nationality as the home country, for the purposes of this rule, in exceptional and compelling circumstances. A staff member requesting such authorization will be required to satisfy the Secretary-General that the staff member maintained normal residence in such other country for a prolonged period preceding his or her appointment, that the staff member continues to have close family and personal ties in that country and that the staff member's taking home leave there would not be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of staff regulation 5.3. b. Home leave travel to a country other than the home country, subject to conditions established by the Secretary-General. In such a case, the travel expenses borne by the United Nations shall not exceed the cost of travel to the home country. (e) (i) Except in the case of staff members serving on probationary appointment, a staff member's first home leave shall fall due in the calendar year in which the staff member completes two years of qualifying service. A staff member appointed on a probationary basis shall not be entitled to the first home leave until he or she has been granted a permanent appointment or an extension of probationary period; however, if the Secretary-General considers that it will not be possible for such a decision to be made within six months after completion of two years' service, he or she may be granted home leave subject to the other conditions of this rule. (ii) Home leave may be taken, subject to the exigencies of service and to the provisions in subparagraph (i) above in respect of probationary appointment, any time during the calendar year in which it falls due. (f) In exceptional circumstances, a staff member may be granted advanced home leave, provided that normally not less than twelve months of qualifying service have been completed or that normally not less than twelve months of qualifying service have elapsed since the date of return from his or her last home leave. The granting of advanced home leave shall not advance the calendar year in which the next home leave falls due. The granting of advanced home leave shall be subject to the conditions for the entitlement being subsequently met. If these conditions are not met, the staff member will be required to reimburse the costs paid by the Organization for the advanced travel. (g) If a staff member delays taking his or her home leave beyond the calendar year in which it falls due, such delayed leave may be taken without altering the time of his or her next and succeeding home leave entitlements, provided that normally not less than twelve months of qualifying service elapse between the date of the staff member's return from the delayed home leave and the date of his or her next home leave departure. (h) A staff member may be required to take his or her home leave in conjunction with travel on official business or change of official duty station, due regard being paid to the interests of the staff member and his or her family. * Amendment to rule 105.3 (d) (iii) is provisional until reported to the General Assembly, pursuant to regulation 12.2 of the Staff Regulations. - 43 - 1 January 2007 (i) Subject to the conditions specified in chapter VII of these Rules, a staff member shall be entitled to claim, in respect of authorized travel on home leave, travel time and expenses for himself or herself and eligible family members for the outward and return journeys between the official duty station and the place of home leave. (j) Travel of eligible family members shall be in conjunction with the approved home leave of the staff member, provided that exceptions may be granted if the exigencies of the service or other special circumstances prevent the staff member and his or her family members from travelling together. (k) If both husband and wife are staff members who are eligible for home leave, and taking into account rule 104.10 (d), each staff member shall have the choice either of exercising his or her own home leave entitlement or of accompanying the spouse. A staff member who chooses to accompany his or her spouse shall be granted travel time appropriate to the travel involved. Dependent children whose parents are staff members, each of whom is entitled to home leave, may accompany either parent. The frequency of travel shall not exceed the established periodicity of the home leave both with regard to staff members and to their dependent children, if any. (l) A staff member travelling on home leave shall be required to spend no less than seven days, exclusive of travel time, in his or her home country. The Secretary-General may request a staff member, on his or her return from home leave, to furnish satisfactory evidence that this requirement has been fully met. (m) Under the terms and conditions established by the Secretary-General, eligible staff members serving at designated duty stations having very difficult conditions of life and work shall be granted home leave once in every twelve months. Rule 107.8 Route, mode and standard of transportation (a) Official travel shall, in all instances, be by a route, mode and standard of transportation approved in advance by the Secretary-General. (b) Travel expenses or other entitlements, including travel time, shall be limited to the amount allowable for a journey by the approved route, mode and standard. Staff members who wish to make other arrangements for personal convenience must obtain permission to do so in advance and pay all additional costs. Rule 107.9 Route and mode of travel (a) The normal route for all official travel shall be the most direct and economical route. An alternative route may be approved when, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, it is in the best interest of the United Nations. (b) The normal mode of transportation for all official travel shall be by air. An alternative mode of transportation may be approved when, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, its use is in the best interest of the United Nations. (c) If a staff member or family member travels by a more economical mode of transportation than the approved mode, the United Nations shall pay only for the mode of transportation actually used. Rule 107.10 Standard of accommodation (a) For all official travel by air, staff members and their eligible family members shall be provided with economy class transportation in accordance with the least costly airfare structure regularly available or its equivalent. However, under conditions established by the Secretary-General, accommodation immediately below first class may be granted. In exceptional cases, the Secretary-General may allow first class travel. (b) The air travel accommodation under paragraph (a) above shall be provided at the most economical rate appropriate. Children under two years of age travelling by air shall be provided with a ticket giving entitlement to a seat. (c) For all official travel by sea approved under paragraph (b) of rule 107.9, staff members and their family members shall be provided with the standard of accommodation which is, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, appropriate to the circumstances of the case. (d) For all official travel by train approved under paragraph (b) of rule 107.9, staff members and their family members shall be provided with regular first class or equivalent accommodation, including sleeper and other facilities, as appropriate. (e) A higher standard of accommodation may be approved when, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, special circumstances warrant it. Rule 107.11 Travel by automobile (a) Staff members who are authorized to travel by automobile shall be reimbursed by the United Nations at rates and under conditions established by the Secretary-General on the basis of operating costs in the area in which the travel is undertaken and an appropriate minimum distance for the calculation of the daily subsistence allowance. (b) Reimbursement for travel within a radius of thirty-five miles of the official duty station shall be based on actual mileage and, for travel beyond a thirty-five-mile radius, on the mileage as shown on official road guides. Commutation between residence and place of business shall not be reimbursable. (c) The mileage rate established by the Secretary-General shall be payable to only one of two or more persons travelling together on the same trip and in the same automobile. (d) The total of mileage rate reimbursement and travel subsistence allowance which a staff member may claim in respect of a particular journey shall be limited to the maximum travel expenses to which he or she would have been entitled had the staff member and eligible family members travelled by the most economical route. Rule 107.12 Purchase of tickets (a) Unless the staff member concerned is specifically authorized to make other arrangements, all tickets for transportation involving official travel of staff members and eligible family members shall be purchased by the United Nations in advance of the actual travel or, where circumstances so require, shall be secured by the staff member. (b) When a staff member requests a standard of accommodation in excess of his or her entitlement under rule 107.10 or is authorized to travel, for reasons of personal preference or convenience, by other than the approved route or mode of transportation as provided for under rule 107.9, the staff member shall be required to reimburse the United Nations for any additional costs thus incurred before the United Nations provides him or her with the necessary tickets. Rule 107.13* Terminal expenses (a) For all official travel to or from the duty station, a staff member is entitled to payment of terminal expenses at rates and under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Terminal expenses shall be deemed to cover all expenditures for transportation and incidental charges between the airport or other point of arrival or departure and the hotel or other place of dwelling in respect of the staff member himself or herself and in respect of each family member authorized to travel at United Nations expense, except the costs provided for under rule 107.19 (iii). * Amendment to rule 107.13 is provisional until reported to the General Assembly, pursuant to regulation 12.2 of the Staff Regulations. - 56 - 1 January 2007 (b) No terminal expenses shall be paid in respect of an intermediate stop that: (i) Is not authorized; (ii) Does not involve leaving the terminal; or (iii) Is exclusively for the purpose of making an onward connection. (c) (Cancelled) Rule 107.14 Expenses while in transit (a) A staff member and his or her eligible family members authorized to travel by sea shall be entitled to a fixed amount to cover transit expenses equivalent to the amount of travel subsistence allowance that would have been payable in respect of the travel if the travel had been by air. (b) When the authorized mode of transportation is other than by sea, full travel subsistence allowance shall be payable for the time spent in transit, subject to the conditions laid down in rules 107.15 to 107.18 and provided that, in the case of travel other than on official business, a maximum of three days' travel time shall be allowed in respect of any specific journey. Rule 107.15 Travel subsistence allowance (a) Except as provided in rule 107.14 (a) and in paragraph (h) below, a staff member authorized to travel at United Nations expense shall receive an appropriate daily subsistence allowance in accordance with a schedule of rates established from time to time. Such established rates shall be subject to rule 107.16 and to reductions in cases where lodging or meals are provided free of charge by the United Nations, by a Government or by a related institution. (b) The Secretary-General may, in exceptional and compelling circumstances, authorize a reasonable increase in the travel subsistence allowance to be paid to a staff member who is required to accompany a senior official and whose official duties while in travel status require that his or her additional living expense be established at a rate substantially higher than that contemplated in setting the allowance rate for his or her level. (c) Travel subsistence allowance shall be deemed to comprise the total contribution of the United Nations towards such charges as meals, lodging, gratuities and other payments made for personal services rendered. Except as provided in rule 107.19, any expenditures incurred in excess of the allowance shall be borne by the staff member. (d) Except as provided in rule 107.14 (a) and in paragraph (h) below, when the spouse or dependent children of a staff member are authorized to travel at United Nations expense, the staff member shall be paid an additional travel subsistence allowance in respect of each of them at half the rate applicable to the staff member. (e) Except for leave taken at a rate not exceeding one and a half days for each completed month on which a staff member is in travel status on official business, travel subsistence allowance shall not be paid in respect of any period of annual or special leave. It shall not, in any event, be paid in respect of leave taken at the conclusion of active duty on an assignment but prior to the staff member's return to his or her official duty station. - 57 - 1 January 2007 (g) The appropriate travel subsistence allowance shall be paid for any days on which a staff member is required to perform official duties in connection with travel on home leave. (h) No travel subsistence allowance shall be payable in respect of travel on appointment, assignment or repatriation, and in respect of travel on home leave, family visit or education grant, provided that the allowance may be paid for stopovers actually made during such travel under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Where travel at United Nations expense is authorized for medical, safety, security or other reasons under rule 107.1 (a) (vii) or 107.2 (a) (vii), an appropriate amount of subsistence allowance may be paid at the discretion of the Secretary-General. Rule 107.16 Special rates of travel subsistence allowance In the event of staff members being assigned to conferences or for other extended periods of duty away from their official duty station, the Secretary-General may establish a special rate of subsistence allowance. Rule 107.17 (Cancelled) Rule 107.18 Computation of the travel subsistence allowance (a) Except during travel by sea, subsistence allowance shall be paid to a staff member, at the rates and under the conditions prescribed in rule 107.15 for each calendar day or fraction thereof involving an overnight stay away from his or her residence, during which the staff member or his or her family members are in official travel status, provided that for a journey of twenty-four hours or longer a full day's allowance at the appropriate rate shall be paid for the day on which travel is begun and that no allowance shall be paid for the day on which travel is ended. Where travel does not involve an overnight stay away from the residence, no allowance shall be paid for a journey of less than ten hours, and 40 per cent of the allowance shall be paid for a journey of ten hours or more. (b) Where travel is by sea, a full day's allowance at the appropriate rate shall be paid for the day of arrival at the port of disembarkation, provided that the traveller remains in official travel status for more than twelve hours thereafter. No allowance shall be paid for the day on which embarkation takes place. (c) If more than one rate should apply during the course of any one day or if the traveller completes his or her travel on the same day as he or she commenced it, the rate applicable for the area of destination shall be paid for that day, except that for the last leg of a return travel on official business the allowance shall be paid at the rate applicable to the last authorized place where the staff member spent the night. (d) When it is necessary, for the purpose of computing the amount of travel subsistence allowance payable, to specify the "hour of departure" and the "hour of arrival", these shall be considered as the time when the train, vessel or airplane used by the traveller actually leaves or arrives at its regular terminal. Rule 107.19 Miscellaneous travel expenses Necessary additional expenses incurred by a staff member in connection with the transaction of official business or in the performance of authorized travel shall be reimbursed by the United Nations after completion of travel, provided that the necessity and nature of the expenses are satisfactorily explained and supported by proper receipts, which shall normally be required for any expenditures in excess of $20.00. Such expenses, for which advance authorization shall be obtained to the extent practicable, shall normally be limited to: (i) Hire of local transportation other than that provided for under rule 107.13; (ii) Telephone or other forms of communication required for official business;* (iii) Transfer of authorized baggage by railway express or other appropriate agency; (iv) Hire of room for official use; (v) Text processing services or rental of equipment required for the preparation of official reports or correspondence;* (vi) Transportation or storage of baggage or property used on official business. * Amendment to rule 107.19 (ii) and (v) is provisional until reported to the General Assembly, pursuant to regulation 12.2 of the Staff Regulations. Rule 107.20 Installation Assignment grant (a) Except for special mission service, a staff member who travels at United Nations expense to a duty station for an assignment expected to be of at least one year's duration shall be paid an assignment grant, subject to the conditions set forth below. (b) The amount of the assignment grant shall be equivalent to: (i) Thirty days of subsistence allowance at the daily rate applicable under subparagraph (c) (i) below; and (ii) Thirty days of subsistence allowance at half such daily rate in respect of each family member for whom travel expenses have been paid by the United Nations under rules 107.2 (a) (i), (ii) or (iii) and 107.3. - 59 - 1 January 2007 The above-mentioned amounts shall be calculated on the basis of the rate prevailing on the date of arrival at the duty station of the staff member or of the staff member's family member, as appropriate. Where an assignment of less than one year, in respect of which daily subsistence allowance has been paid for six months or more under rule 103.7 (d) (ii), is extended to one year or more at the same duty station, the provisions of (i) above do not apply and only the lump sum portion under paragraph (d) will be paid. (c) (i) The Secretary-General may establish special rates of subsistence allowance for the purposes of the assignment grant for specific categories of staff at various duty stations and publish such rates by administrative instruction or other appropriate means. Where such special rates have not been established, the travel subsistence allowance rates under rule 107.15 shall be used in computing the assignment grant; (ii) Under conditions established by the Secretary-General, the limit of thirty days provided in paragraph (b) above may be extended to a maximum of ninety days. The amount of the grant during the extended period shall be up to 60 per cent of the appropriate prevailing rate. (d) In addition to any amount of grant paid under paragraph (b) above, a lump sum calculated on the basis of the staff member's net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment at the duty station of assignment may be paid under conditions established by the Secretary-General. The lump sum shall be payable at the following rates: (i) At headquarters duty stations and other designated duty stations, a lump sum equivalent to one month's net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment, provided the staff member is not entitled to removal costs under staff rule 107.27; (ii) At all other duty stations: a. Where the staff member is entitled to removal costs under rule 107.27, one month's net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment; b. Where the staff member is not entitled to removal costs under rule 107.27, one month's net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment if the assignment is for less than three years, and two months' net base salary and, where appropriate, post adjustment if the assignment is for three years or more. If an assignment for less than three years is extended to three years or more, the staff member shall be paid at that time a second one-month lump sum. (e) If a change of official duty station or a new appointment involves a return to a place at which the staff member was previously stationed, the full amount of the assignment grant shall not be payable unless the staff member has been absent from that place for at least one year. In the case of a shorter absence, the amount payable shall normally be that proportion of the full grant that the completed months of absence bear to one year. (f) Where both husband and wife are staff members who are travelling at United Nations expense to a duty station, and taking into account rule 104.10 (d), the daily subsistence allowance portion of the assignment shall be paid to each in respect of himself or herself. If they have a dependent child or children, the assignment grant in respect of such child or children shall be paid to the staff member on whom the child is recognized to be dependent. (g) If both husband and wife would otherwise qualify for the lump sum portion of the grant, such lump sum shall be paid only to the spouse whose lump sum portion yields the higher amount. (i) The Secretary-General may, in appropriate cases, authorize payment of all or part of the assignment grant where the United Nations has not been required to pay travel expenses upon the appointment of a staff member regarded as internationally recruited under rule 104.7. Rule 107.21 Excess baggage and unaccompanied shipments Excess baggage (a) For the purpose of these rules, "excess baggage" shall mean baggage in excess of accompanied baggage carried without extra charge by transportation companies. Staff members travelling by air shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of excess baggage for themselves and their eligible family members for one bag in addition to their free baggage allowance or up to 25 kilograms per traveller.* General provisions on unaccompanied shipments (c) For the purpose of these rules, "personal effects and household goods" shall mean effects and goods normally required for personal or household use, excluding animals and power-assisted vehicles. (d) Unaccompanied shipments shall normally be made in one consignment, and shall be reimbursed on the basis of the maximum entitlement provided under this rule for transportation by the most economical means, as determined by the Secretary-General, between the places of departure and destination of the authorized travel of the staff member or his or her family members. (e) The normal costs of packing, crating and lift vans, cartage, unpacking and uncrating shall be reimbursed for the unaccompanied shipments authorized under this rule, except for shipments under subparagraph (g) (i) below, for which the cost of cartage only shall be paid. Costs for the servicing, dismantling, installing or special packing of personal effects and household goods shall not be reimbursed. Storage and demurrage charges shall not be reimbursed unless, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, they are directly incidental to the transportation of the consignment. (f) The weight or volume of unaccompanied shipments of personal effects and household goods for which expenses are borne by the Organization under this rule shall include packing but exclude crating and lift vans. Unaccompanied shipments on home leave, family visit or education grant travel (g) When the authorized travel is by air or by land, charges for unaccompanied shipment of personal effects or household goods relating to travel on home leave, family visit or education grant may be reimbursed up to a maximum of:** * Amendment to rule 107.21 (b) is provisional until reported to the General Assembly, pursuant to regulation 12.2 of the Staff Regulations. ** Amendment to rule 107.21 (g) is provisional until reported to the General Assembly, pursuant to Staff Regulation 12.2. - 61 - 1 January 2007 (i) 50 kilograms, or 0.31 cubic metres, by the most economical means, per person, except as provided in subparagraph (ii) below. At the request of the staff member, this entitlement may be converted to 10 additional kilograms of accompanied excess baggage per person; 200 kilograms, or 1.24 cubic metres, by the most economical means, for travel on education grant in regard to the first outward journey to, and the final return journey from, an educational institution; For the purposes of this rule, the shipment entitlements associated with incoming and outgoing journeys may be combined and exercised in whole or in part as one shipment provided the total is within the combined entitlement. Unaccompanied shipments for staff appointed or assigned for less than one year (h) On travel on appointment or assignment for less than one year, or on separation from service of staff appointed for less than one year, charges for the shipment of personal effects and household goods by the most economical means may be reimbursed up to a maximum of 100 kilograms or 0.62 cubic metres. Where the appointment or assignment is extended for a total period of one year or longer, the staff member shall be paid expenses for an additional shipment of personal effects and household goods up to the maximum entitlement established in paragraph (i) below. Such additional shipment, however, shall not be paid for staff appointed or assigned to special missions and who receive a mission subsistence allowance under rule 103.21. Unaccompanied shipments for staff appointed or assigned for one year or longer (i) On travel on appointment or assignment for one year or longer, on transfer to another duty station or on separation from service of a staff member appointed for one year or longer, charges for the shipment of personal effects and household goods by the most economical means may be reimbursed up to a maximum of: (i) 1,000 kilograms or 6.23 cubic metres for the staff member; (ii) 500 kilograms or 3.11 cubic metres for the first family member; and (iii) 300 kilograms or 1.87 cubic metres for each additional family member authorized to travel at the expense of the Organization. Unaccompanied shipment as advance removal of personal effects and household goods - 62 - 1 January 2007 (j) On travel on appointment, assignment, transfer or separation from service of a staff member for whom removal costs will be paid under staff rule 107.27, a staff member may be reimbursed the costs of advance shipment by the most economical means up to a maximum of: (i) 450 kilograms or 2.80 cubic metres for the staff member; 300 kilograms or 1.87 cubic metres for the first family member; and 150 kilograms or 0.93 cubic metres for each additional family member authorized to travel at the expense of the Organization. The weight or volume of any shipment under this paragraph shall be deducted from the maximum weight or volume to which the staff member is entitled under paragraph (d) of rule 107.27. Additional shipment entitlements for international staff serving at designated duty stations (k) Internationally recruited staff members serving at designated duty stations having difficult conditions of life and work shall be granted, under conditions established by the Secretary-General, the following special entitlements: (i) An additional shipment entitlement once a year to the duty station by the most economical means of up to 50 kilograms or 0.31 cubic metres in respect of the staff member and each eligible family member for whom the Organization has paid travel costs to the duty station; (ii) An additional 50-kilogram shipment entitlement in connection with the birth or adoption of a child. Conversion of surface shipment to unaccompanied shipment by air (l) When the most economical means of shipment is by surface, the entitlement may be converted to unaccompanied shipment by air under conditions established by the Secretary-General. Rule 107.22 Insurance (a) Staff members shall not be reimbursed for the cost of personal accident insurance or of insurance of accompanied personal baggage. However, compensation may be paid, under arrangements in force under rule 106.5, in respect of loss or damage to such baggage determined to be directly attributable to the performance of official duties on behalf of the United Nations. (b) In the case of shipments authorized under rule 107.21, except on home leave, family visit or education grant travel, and of the shipment and storage of personal effects and household goods under rule 107.27, insurance coverage will be provided by the Organization up to a maximum amount established by the Secretary-General. (c) The United Nations shall not be responsible for the loss of or damage to unaccompanied shipments. Rule 107.23 Travel advances (a) Staff members authorized to travel shall provide themselves with sufficient funds for all current expenses by securing an advance of funds if necessary. An advance of 100 per cent of travel subsistence allowance and terminal expenses payable under these Rules may be made on the basis of the estimate and certification from the appropriate certifying officer.* (b) However, in those cases where a staff member is authorized to travel in accordance with staff rule 107.1 (a) (ii), an advance of funds at the rate of 100 per cent of the estimated travel subsistence allowance payable in accordance with staff rule 107.15 may be made. * Amendment to rule 107.23 (a) is provisional until reported to the General Assembly, pursuant to regulation 12.2 of the Staff Regulations. - 63 - 1 January 2007 Rule 107.24 Illness or accident during travel The United Nations shall pay or reimburse reasonable hospital and medical expenses, insofar as these are not covered by other arrangements, which may be incurred by staff members who become ill or are injured while in travel status on official business. Rule 107.25 Reimbursement of travel expenses The Secretary-General may reject any claim for payment or reimbursement of travel or removal expenses which are incurred by a staff member in contravention of any provision of these Rules. Rule 107.26 Transportation of decedents Upon the death of a staff member or of his or her spouse or dependent child, the United Nations shall pay the expenses of transportation of the body from the official duty station or, in the event of death having occurred while in travel status, from the place of death, to a place to which the deceased was entitled to return transportation under rule 107.1 or 107.2. These expenses shall include reasonable costs for preparation of the body. If local interment is elected, reasonable expenses incurred for the interment may be reimbursed. Rule 107.27 Removal costs Eligibility for payment of removal costs (a) An entitlement to payment of removal costs of personal effects and household goods, as defined in staff rule 107.21 (c), shall arise with respect to internationally recruited staff members, under the following circumstances and in accordance with conditions established by the Secretary-General: (i) On initial appointment to an established office for a period of two years or longer; (ii) On change of duty station to an established office, provided that the staff member is expected to serve at the new duty station for a period of two years or longer; (iii) On separation from service from an established office, provided that the staff member had an appointment for a period of two years or longer or had completed not less than two years of continuous service and: a. Had been granted removal to the duty station or to a prior duty station in the course of a period of uninterrupted service; or b. Had been recruited at the duty station from which he or she is separating and is repatriating to the place of home leave or other location, in accordance with rule 107.1 (c). - 64 - 1 January 2007 Salary scale for staff in the Professional and higher categories showing annual gross salaries and net equivalents after application of staff assessment (United States dollars) Effective 1 January 2007 S T E P S Level I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV USG Gross Net D Net S ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 P-1 D = Rate applicable to staff members with a dependent spouse or child. S = Rate applicable to staff members with no dependent spouse or child. * = The normal qualifying period for in-grade movement between consecutive steps is one year, except at those steps marked with an asterisk for which a two-year period at the preceding step is required Annex II LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT (a) The letter of appointment shall state: (i) That the appointment is subject to the provisions of the Staff Regulations and of the Staff Rules applicable to the category of appointment in question and to changes which may be duly made in such regulations and rules from time to time; (ii) The nature of the appointment; (iii) The date at which the staff member is required to enter upon his or her duties; (iv) The period of appointment, the notice required to terminate it and period of probation, if any; (v) The category, level, commencing rate of salary and, if increments are allowable, the scale of increments, and the maximum attainable; (vi) Any special conditions which may be applicable. (b) A copy of the Staff Regulations and the Staff Rules shall be transmitted to the staff member with the letter of appointment. In accepting appointment the staff member shall state that he or she has been acquainted with and accepts the conditions laid down in the Staff Regulations and in the Staff Rules. (c) The letter of appointment of a staff member on secondment from government service signed by the staff member and by or on behalf of the Secretary-General, and relevant supporting documentation of the terms and conditions of secondment agreed to by the Member State and the staff member, shall be evidence of the existence and validity of secondment from government service to the Organization for the period stated in the letter of appointment. REPATRIATION GRANT In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate and who at the time of separation are residing, by virtue of their service with the United Nations, outside their country of nationality. The repatriation grant shall not, however, be paid to a staff member who is summarily dismissed. Eligible staff members shall be entitled to a repatriation grant only upon relocation outside the country of the duty station. Detailed conditions and definitions relating to eligibility and requisite evidence of relocation shall be determined by the Secretary-General. Staff member with a spouse or dependent child at time of separation Staff member with neither a spouse nor dependent child at time of separation Professional and higher categories General Service category Years of continuous service away from home country Weeks of gross salary, less staff assessment, where applicable 12 or more APPENDICES TO THE STAFF RULES Appendix A PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR STAFF IN THE PROFESSIONAL AND HIGHER CATEGORIES AND SALARY SCALES AND PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR STAFF IN THE FIELD SERVICE CATEGORY Pensionable remuneration for staff in the Professional and higher categories Effective 1 September 2006 Under-Secretary-General Assistant Secretary-General Director Principal Officer Senior Officer First Officer Second Officer Associate Officer Assistant Officer Salary scale for staff in the Field Service category showing annual gross salaries and net equivalents after application of staff assessment FS-7 FS-6 FS-5 FS-4 FS-3 FS-2 FS-1 * = The normal qualifying period for in-grade movement between consecutive steps is one year, except at those steps marked with an asterisk, for which a two-year period at the preceding step is required. Pensionable remuneration for staff in the Field Service category Appendix B SALARY SCALES FOR STAFF IN THE GENERAL SERVICE, SECURITY SERVICE, TRADES AND CRAFTS AND PUBLIC INFORMATION ASSISTANT CATEGORIES AT HEADQUARTERS Salary scale for staff in the General Service category at Headquarters Effective 1 November 2006 (Gross) (Gross pension) (Total net) (Net pension) (NPC) Dependency allowances (US$ net per annum): Language allowances (to be included in pensionable remuneration) (US$ net per annum): Child 2 083a 2 217b First language 1 992 Second language 996 Except for the first dependent child of a single, 2 879a widowed or divorced staff member 3 246b Dependent spouse 3 336a 3 562b Secondary dependant 1 257a 1 307b 1 318c a Payable to staff who become eligible on or after 1 September 2006. b Payable to eligible staff on board and already in receipt of amount prior to 1 September 2006. c Payable to eligible staff on board and already in receipt of amount prior to 1 June 2004. Increments: salary increments within the levels shall be awarded annually on the basis of satisfactory service. * Long-service step: Step XI at levels G-3 to G-7, step X at level G-2 and step IX at level G-1 are long-service steps. The qualifying criteria for in-grade increases to the long-service step are as follows: (a) The staff member should have had at least 20 years of service within the United Nations common system and 5 years of service at the top regular step of the current grade; (b) The staff member's service should have been satisfactory. Gross: Gross salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to total net salaries. Gross salaries are established for purposes of separation payments and as the basis for calculating tax reimbursements whenever United Nations salaries are taxed. Gross pension: Gross pensionable salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to net pensionable salaries. Gross pensionable salary is the basis for determining Pension Fund contributions under article 25 of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and for determining pension benefits. Net pension: Net pensionable salary is that part of net salary which is used to derive the gross pensionable salary. Net pensionable salary is the total net salary less the non-pensionable component, i.e., 100 per cent of total net salaries. Total net: Total net remuneration is the sum of the non-pensionable component and the net pensionable salary. NPC: The non-pensionable component is that part of net salary excluded from application of staff assessment in determination of the gross pensionable salary. The non-pensionable component has been established at 0 per cent. Salary scale for staff in the Security Service category at Headquarters Dependency allowances (US$ net per annum): Language allowances (to be included in pensionable remuneration) (US$ net per annum): Step IX at levels S-4 to S-7, step XI at level S-3 and step XIII at level S-2 are long-service steps. Net pension: Net pensionable salary is that part of net salary that is used to derive the gross pensionable salary. Net pensionable salary is the total net salary less the non-pensionable component, i.e., 100 per cent of total net salaries. Salary scale for staff in the Public Information Assistant and Tour Coordinator/Supervisor category at Headquarters Tour Coordinator/Supervisor and Briefing Assistanta Public Information Assistant II and Tour Coordinator Public Information Assistant I a Includes Briefing Assistant as at 1 September 1991. Reserve guides are paid by the day in accordance with the above rates. Increments: salary increments within the levels shall be effective on the first day of the pay period in which satisfactory service requirements are completed, as follows: Public Information Assistant I 6 months Public Information Assistant II 12 months No increments shall be paid in the case of staff members whose service will cease during the month in which the increment would ordinarily have been due. Dependency allowances (US$ net per annum): 2 217b Language allowances: not entitled. NPC: The non-pensionable component is that part of net salary excluded from the application of staff assessment in determination of the gross pensionable salary. The non-pensionable component has been established at 0 per cent. VII* TC-8 TC-7 TC-6 TC-5 TC-4 TC-3 TC-2 TC-1 Appendix F SALARY SCALE FOR STAFF IN THE LANGUAGE TEACHER CATEGORY AT HEADQUARTERS XII* Language Teacher Work schedule: the yearly schedule of work consists of three terms of 13 weeks each. There is a summer recess and scheduled breaks between terms. Leave taken during the recess and the breaks in excess of the annual leave entitlement provided for in the Staff Rules is treated as special leave with pay. (a) The staff member should have had at least 20 years of service within the United Nations common system and 5 years of service at the top regular step of the current grade; The staff member's service should have been satisfactory. Gross: Gross salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to total net salaries. Gross salaries are established for purposes of separation payments and as the basis for calculating tax reimbursements whenever United Nations salaries are taxed. Gross pension: Gross pensionable salaries have been derived through the application of staff assessment to net pensionable salaries. Gross pensionable salary is the basis for determining Pension Fund contributions under article 25 of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and for determining pension benefits. Net pension: Net pensionable salary is that part of net salary which is used to derive the gross pensionable salary. Net pensionable salary is the total net salary less the non-pensionable component, i.e., 100 per cent of total net salaries. NPC: The non-pensionable component is that part of net salary excluded from application of staff assessment in determination of the gross pensionable salary. The non-pensionable component has been established at 0 per cent. Appendix G EDUCATION GRANT ENTITLEMENTS APPLICABLE IN CASES WHERE EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES ARE INCURRED IN SPECIFIED CURRENCIES AND COUNTRIES (Effective as from the school year in progress on 1 January 2007) Currency Maximum amount admissible educational expenses and maximum grant for disabled children Maximum education grant Normal flat rate when boarding not provided Additional flat rate for boarding (at designated duty stations) Maximum grant for staff members serving at designated duty stations Calculation for maximum admissible educational expenses (attendance only) Part A Euro Austria Belgium Finland Francea Germany Ireland Italy Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Spain Danish krone Japanese yen Swedish krona Swiss franc Pound sterling Part B United States dollar (in the United States of America)b Part C United States dollar (outside the United States of America)c a Except for the following schools, where the United States dollars at the United States levels will be applied: American School of Paris, American University of Paris, British School of Paris, European Management School of Lyon, International School of Paris and Marymount School of Paris. b Also applies, as a special measure, for China, Indonesia and the Russian Federation. c Includes Norway, which will no longer be tracked as a separate zone. - 119 - 1 January 2007 Where educational expenses are incurred in any of the currencies set out in the table above, the applicable amounts are set out in columns (1) to (6) against those currencies. Where educational expenses are incurred in the United States of America, the applicable amounts are set out in columns (1) to (6) against part B above. Where educational expenses are not incurred in any of the currencies set out in part A above or in the United States, the applicable amounts are set out in columns (1) to (6) against part C above. Attendance at an educational institution outside the duty station (i) Where the educational institution provides board, the amount shall be 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance and the costs of board up to the maximum indicated in column (1), with a maximum grant indicated in column (2) per year. (ii) Where the educational institution does not provide board, the amount shall be a flat sum as indicated in column (3), plus 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance up to a maximum grant as indicated in column (2) per year. Attendance at an educational institution at the duty station (iii) The amount shall be 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance up to the maximum indicated in column (1), with a maximum grant as indicated in column (2) per year. (iv) Where such an educational institution is located beyond commuting distance from the area where the staff member is serving and, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, no school in that area would be suitable for the child, the amount of the grant shall be calculated at the same rates as specified in (i) or (ii) above. Staff serving at designated duty stations with inadequate or no education facilities with attendance at an educational institution at the primary or secondary level outside the duty station (v) Where the educational institution provides board, the amount shall be: a. 100 per cent of the costs of board up to the maximum indicated in column (4); and b. 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance and of any part of the costs of board in excess of the amount indicated in column (4), with a maximum reimbursable amount as indicated in column (5). (vi) Where the educational institution does not provide board, the amount shall be: a. A flat sum for board as indicated in column (4); and b. 75 per cent of the allowable costs of attendance, with a maximum reimbursable amount as indicated in column (5). (vii) Paragraphs (v) and (vi) above are not applicable to special missions. - 120 - 1 January 2007 