%%%INTERNATIONAL TRADE|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|ADVISORY SERVICES|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|PROJECT FINANCE|

Trade and Development Board Working Party on the Medium-term Plan and the Programme Budget Forty-ninth session Geneva, 10 - 14 September 2007 Report of the Working Party on the Medium-term Plan and the Programme Budget on its forty-ninth session Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, from 10 to 14 September 2007 Contents Page I. Draft decision and agreed conclusions adopted by the Working Party at its forty-ninth session 2 II. Proceedings 7 III. Organizational matters 13 Annexes I. Provisional agenda for the fiftieth session of the Working Party 14 II. Attendance 15 A. Review of technical cooperation activities of UNCTAD and their financing Draft decision for consideration by the Trade and Development Board The Trade and Development Board 1. Takes note with appreciation of the technical cooperation activities carried out by the UNCTAD secretariat and of the reports prepared for the Working Party and expresses gratitude for the continuous support provided by bilateral and multilateral donors and reiterates the importance of submitting documents on time and encourages beneficiary countries to continue providing concrete feedback on the quality and impact of UNCTAD projects in their countries; 2. Invites all development partners to continue to work together with a view to maximizing the development impact of UNCTAD's technical assistance, and further invites donors and potential donors in a position to do so to provide adequate funding for the technical cooperation activities of UNCTAD; 3. Notes with satisfaction the increase in total resources allocated to assistance to the least developed countries, as their special needs require particular attention, and urges donors and the UNCTAD secretariat to further enhance their assistance to these countries; 4. Welcomes the 16 per cent growth in delivery and the fact that operations in support of all regions, including in LDCs, increased; 5. Reiterates the importance of ensuring an equitable distribution of resources among the developing country regions and countries with economies in transition in the overall delivery of technical cooperation; 6. Reiterates the importance of UNCTAD technical assistance responding to the specific and special needs of least developed countries, small, structurally weak, vulnerable economies, small island developing States, and landlocked and transit developing countries, in accordance with paragraph 33 of the Sao Paulo Consensus; 7. Welcomes the fact that a significant part of UNCTAD technical assistance is provided through interregional activities based on the thematic knowledge of the secretariat, and urges donors to continue their support for these activities; 8. Welcomes the new important donation from the Government of Spain to the United Nations system to help achieve the Millennium Development Goals and expresses gratitude to the Government of Spain for this generous support; in this regard urges UNDP as well as UN Resident Coordinators and the national authorities of beneficiary countries to provide support with a view to the inclusion of UNCTAD's operations into this new Spanish fund; 9. Expresses concern at the continued decrease of UNDP resources to UNCTAD technical cooperation programmes and invites UNDP and the UNCTAD secretariat, in the context of the ongoing discussions UN system-wide reform on coherence, to establish cooperation mechanisms for technical cooperation on trade-related issues, to be carried out by UNCTAD in accordance with its mandate and expertise, at the national, regional and multilateral levels; 10. Encourages UNCTAD to inform UN Resident Coordinators about its technical assistance products so that where appropriate they could encourage their inclusion in the countries' UN Development Assistance Frameworks; 11. Recognizes the importance of the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme to African Countries (JITAP) and invites donors to consider positively the launching of a third phase of that Programme in view of its successful results and the positive evaluation results of this inter-agency initiative; 12. Recognizes that UNCTAD is in a position to play an important role in the Aid for Trade initiative, in accordance with UNCTAD's mandates, expertise and development approach; 13. Recognizes the importance of the implementation of Paragraph 166 of the Bangkok Plan of Action, and calls for the continuation of the training courses on the Key Issues on the International Economic agenda in Geneva and at the regional level; 14. Calls upon the secretariat to provide member States with information regarding requests for technical assistance and their follow-up; 15. Takes note with satisfaction of the secretariat internal arrangements regarding management aspects of technical cooperation including the establishment of the Project Review Committee and requests the secretariat to continue to take measures to increase impact and efficiency of UNCTAD technical cooperation activities and keep member States updated in that regard on a regular basis; 16. Notes with interest that the establishment of the new Division for Africa, Least Developed countries and Special Programmes has led to rethinking in terms of strategic approach, consolidation and synchronization of the Division's technical cooperation activities and asks the secretariat to keep member States informed in this regard on a regular basis; 17. Takes note with interest of the proposals made by the secretariat for the implementation of recommendation 18 of the report of the Panel of Eminent Persons; in this regard, the Trade and Development Board: (a) Notes with interest the information provided on the participation of UNCTAD on the ongoing discussions on UN system-wide coherence process and asks the secretariat to continue efforts and initiatives taken to strengthen UNCTAD's presence and role in this context; (b) Welcomes the practical initiatives being taken by the secretariat, such as the establishment of an interagency thematic cluster on trade and productive sectors within the UN Chief Executives Board, the organization of inter-agencies trade-related training courses in conjunction with the UN system Staff College, and the utilization of staff mobility within the UN secretariat to disseminate UNCTAD's work: and requests the secretariat to keep the Working Party informed about the implementation and the results of these initiatives; (c) Urges both donors and beneficiaries of the UN country-based development assistance plans to provide support, including adequate financial resources, in view of the inclusion of UNCTAD's operations in the national development plans; (d) Notes the efforts made by UNCTAD to participate in the One UN reform and requests the secretariat to inform member States in this regard, taking into account the role of ongoing and future UNCTAD operations, be they country-specific, regional or interregional; (e) Requests least developed countries governments and UNCTAD to pay more attention to the interface between the United Nations country development assistance plans and the Integrated Framework, with a view to ensuring policy coherence and maximizing the impact of UNCTAD assistance; (f) Expresses concern about the limited consideration given to trade and trade-related issues in the United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks and similar national development assistance plans, as illustrated in paragraph 42 of document TD/B/WP/195 and supports UNCTAD efforts to address this concern; (g) Encourages UNCTAD to strengthen efforts in actively supporting the integration of economic and trade-related issues in UN Development Assistance Frameworks and national development strategic plans as requested; 18. Takes note with interest of the proposals made by the secretariat for the implementation of recommendation 19 of the report of the Panel of Eminent Persons; in this regard the Trade and Development Board: (a) Recalls the UNCTAD Technical Cooperation Strategy adopted in 2003 and paragraph 12 of Decision 488(LIII) adopted by the Trade and Development Board at its fifty-third session in 2006, regarding the need for more coherence and interdivisional coordination of technical assistance programmes and activities, including streamlining through thematic clusters and programmes; (b) Recalls recommendation 19 regarding the need for consolidation of projects and requests the secretariat to initiate the process, as indicated in box 5 of document TD/B/WP/195, aiming at the establishment of annual plans for thematic trust funds within and among divisions in consultation with member States to take place between October and December 2007; (c) Urges donors to provide contributions to the new thematic trust funds to be established within and among the divisions according to these consultations, taking into account the financing options mentioned in Box 5 of document TD/B/WP/195 and expects that an assessment of the implementation will be made by the secretariat in the next Working Party; this should not preclude member States from continuing to provide earmarked contributions to individual trust funds; (d) Stresses that the establishment of thematic trust funds should aim at enhancing the effectiveness and impact of UNCTAD technical cooperation activities without compromising the scope, content and manner of delivery; it should also enhance the links between operational activities and analytical work of UNCTAD and the results of intergovernmental deliberations; 19. Invites the donors and potential donors in a position to do so to make multi-year contributions to UNCTAD technical cooperation, to increase predictability in planning and implementation of relevant technical assistance programmes; 20. Urges the secretariat to enhance technical assistance projects in the area of commodities, especially in African commodity-dependent countries, in order to ensure sustained economic growth and poverty alleviation. In this regard, the secretariat is urged to improve its inter-divisional coordination on commodity-related issues and report on progress at the next meeting of the Working Party. B. In-depth evaluation of technical cooperation programmes Agreed conclusions 1. In-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's advisory services on investment The Working Party, Having considered the report, "In-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's advisory services on investment" (TD/B/WP/196), and the note prepared by the secretariat on the management response to the evaluation report (TD/B/WP(XLIX)/CRP.4), 1. Expresses appreciation to the evaluation team for its report, to the secretariat for the note as well as the support provided to the evaluation process, and to the Government of Norway for its financial support, 2. Takes note with satisfaction that overall, the investment advisory services programme has been relevant, has had an impact and was delivered efficiently and effectively, 3. Endorses the strategic and operational recommendations and observations contained in the report, welcomes the proposed management response to these recommendations and in addition request that management implements across all divisions the recommendations and observations contained in paragraph 90 of the evaluation report (TD/B/WP/196), 4. Takes note with concern of the findings of the evaluation team on the Investment Gateway programme, while recognizing the programme had successful results in one country in its four components and requests the secretariat to take appropriate management actions to redress the problems and to inform the Working Party thereon, 5. Requests the secretariat to report back on the progress made on the implementation of the recommendations and observations contained in paragraphs 89 and 90 of the evaluation report at the next session of the Working Party that deals with technical cooperation, 2. Follow-up to the previous evaluations Having considered the progress reports on the implementation of the recommendations contained in "the in-depth evaluations of UNCTAD's trade-related technical assistance and capacity building on accession to the World Trade Organization" (TD/B/WP(XLIX)/CRP.3) and "the in-depth evaluation of the courses on key issues on the international economic agenda" (TD/B/WP(XLIX)/CRP.2), 1. Takes note with satisfaction the progress made so far on the implementation of the recommendations and encourages the secretariat to continue its efforts to this end; 2. Notes with appreciation the UNCTAD integral technical assistance including post-accession assistance provided to Member States and the unique, comprehensive and high quality of technical assistance programme on accession to WTO; 3. Takes note of the views expressed by a number of beneficiary countries, and in this context reiterates its call for the implementation of recommendations (a), (b) and (f) of the evaluation on the WTO accession programme; 4. Requests the secretariat to report back on the further progress made on the WTO accession programme, 3. Evaluation process The Working Party 1. Attaches great importance to the independent evaluation process in UNCTAD, both for the beneficiary and donor countries, urges the Secretary-General to further strengthen the evaluation process in UNCTAD by improving its methodology and ensuring the provision of adequate resources for an effective evaluation process, and invites the donor community to financially support this effort, 2. Endorses the evaluation plan for 2009 as follows: 2009: In-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's commodity programme; Takes note of the evaluation plan proposed as follows: 2010: In-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's programme on science and technology for development, 2011: In-depth evaluation of the special programmes of UNCTAD. A. Opening statements The Acting Deputy Secretary-General of UNCTAD referred to the outcomes of the debates on the Mid-term Review and other recent intergovernmental debates on UNCTAD technical cooperation, and more specifically on the role of UNCTAD in the Aid for Trade initiative. In this regard, she emphasized that, according to the general consensus, the resources that will be allocated to Aid for Trade should ensure delivery of the assistance through multilateral organizations. The notion of "global public goods" has to be applied to trade-related assistance in general and to projects being implemented at the national and regional levels. She said the current review of UNCTAD technical cooperation was particularly important in the light of the recommendations contained in the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons. These aimed at improving UNCTAD's capacity to deliver technical cooperation around well-focused thematic global programmes, responding to the concerns of donors and to the needs of beneficiaries. She presented the main features of UNCTAD technical cooperation and recent trends. The links between analytical work, intergovernmental deliberations and practical initiatives to help developing countries continued to be the main strength and originality of UNCTAD technical cooperation. Programmes of assistance generated by the research work were increasing, with positive results confirmed by several evaluations, such as those on Key Issues of the International Economic Agenda (Paragraph 166), the courses on investment disputes and negotiations of investment agreements and the Programme on World Trade Organization (WTO) Accession. She added that other strengths of UNCTAD technical cooperation lay in its comprehensiveness. She underlined that the 2006 data on financial features of UNCTAD technical cooperation confirmed that UNCTAD assistance was demanded, appreciated and growing, with delivery increasing by 16 per cent compared to the previous year, reaching its highest rate ever at $35 million. She noted that delivery increased in all regions and that least developed countries (LDCs) continued to account for more than one third of total delivery. The complicated and fragmented structure of the resources constituted a concern and a weakness that needed to be addressed. In response, she highlighted the secretariat proposal to consolidate regional and interregional operations into multi-year and multi-donor thematic trust funds in each division. Annual plans for 2008 could be prepared by the divisions according to thematic areas of work. Starting in 2008, donors would have three options: (a) contribute to the new thematic trust funds; (b) continue providing earmarked contributions to individual trust funds; or (c) a combination of both. Country-based activities that could not be consolidated into multi-donor thematic projects would continue to be implemented through individual trust funds. Concerning the implications of the system-wide coherence reform and recommendation 18 of the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons, she underlined the major obstacles and challenges facing UNCTAD and the four practical measures suggested by the secretariat in this regard. With regard to agenda item 4, she noted that evaluations promote continuous learning within UNCTAD, strengthen the institution's external credibility, promote greater understanding of UNCTAD's work throughout the membership, and support institutional governance and oversight responsibilities. The involvement of the Working Party in UNCTAD evaluations, which are based on the principle of independence, was especially important in allowing the organization to better meet the needs of beneficiaries. This year, the evaluation was conducted on advisory services on investment. She thanked the members of the external evaluation team for their report, and the Government of Norway for funding the evaluation. She noted that the discussion on the in-depth evaluation would be followed by the progress report on the implementation of the recommendations from preceding years' evaluations on accession to the WTO as well as on the courses on paragraph 166. She introduced a proposed evaluation plan for the period 2008 - 2011. No in-depth evaluation is proposed for 2008, in the light of the heavy agendas of delegations during the conference period and likely programmatic and budgetary revisions that may arise from UNCTAD XII. Hence, the proposed evaluation plan is: (a) for 2009, an in-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's commodity programme; (b) for 2010, an in-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's programme on science and technology for development; and (c) for 2011, an in-depth evaluation of the special programmes of UNCTAD. She encouraged the Working Party to take this opportunity to help define UNCTAD's evaluation agenda based on the mutual interest in strengthening this institution. The representative of Honduras, speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, emphasized the importance the group attaches to UNCTAD technical cooperation strategy, whose main feature is to offer a close interface between the research and analytical work on the one hand and the design and implementation of operations on the other. UNCTAD was encouraged to increase the number of interregional projects, in particular South-South cooperation, and to reinforce its assistance to LDCs through the Integrated Framework initiative. To increase efficiency and coherence when delivering technical cooperation projects, the Group of 77 and China supported the idea of the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons (Part III of document TD/B/WP/195) to establish a number of thematic trust funds. Finally, the group stressed the importance of integrating trade and development issues in the countries national plans. In the context of United Nations-wide reform, the Group of 77 and China expressed its readiness to discuss further UNCTAD's contribution to the "One UN" pilot countries' initiative and to receive more information from the secretariat in this regard. The group appreciates the evaluations presented to the Working Party, as they allow a useful review of UNCTAD's programmes. The representative noted that evaluations both enhance a programme's accountability to donors and, more importantly, ensure the usefulness of these programmes to beneficiaries. The group expressed its support for the evaluation process. The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, speaking on behalf of the Asian Group, associated his group with the statement made by the Group of 77 and China, with a particular reference to the global conferences' objectives such as the Millennium Development Goals. He said that UNCTAD has a distinctive role in the United Nations system, especially in the area of international economy. It is the focal point for the integrated treatment of trade, development and interrelated issues in the areas of finance, technology, investment and sustainable development. He emphasized the need to mobilize more resources for UNCTAD technical assistance. The Asian Group supported the idea of integrating trade and development issues in national plans. Finally, the group asked for information on the distribution of resources from the United Nations regular programme on technical cooperation and the development account to UNCTAD technical cooperation activities in different regions. The representative welcomed the proposed evaluation plan for the period 2008 - 2011. He noted the informative and useful evaluation report on the investment advisory programme, of which countries in the Asian Group already benefit. The group looks forward to learning more about the implementation of recommendations from previous evaluations. The representative of Brazil, speaking on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, expressed his group's appreciation for the more concise and focused presentation of documentation. He said the recommendations contained in the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons refer to two crucial aspects of UNCTAD's technical cooperation: the improvement of the financial structure of extrabudgetary resources for a more effective and coherent delivery and the role of UNCTAD in the context of the reform of the United Nations and implementation of country-level operations. He looked forward to a fruitful discussion on the proposals put forward by the secretariat in this regard. With respect to recommendation 19, the proposals confirm what was agreed in the technical cooperation strategy adopted in 2003. He expressed concern at the increased fragmentation and proliferation of small projects with their own dynamic, which do not necessarily reflect the main areas of UNCTAD's expertise and mandate. Too many projects are designed to satisfy donors' agenda and not to respond specifically to a genuine demand and priority of beneficiaries, he said. A significant improvement in UNCTAD technical cooperation could be achieved by establishing an institutional mechanism that would ensure that operations implemented correspond to the priorities of both donors and beneficiaries. In this context, he said that the proposal made by the secretariat to organize consultations with all member States on the assistance that each division envisages in its main areas of work would make it possible to: Identify the real demands of both donors and beneficiaries; Assess to what extent the research work and the outcomes of the intergovernmental machinery are related to the technical cooperation activities; Increase transparency and coherence in the process of deciding how the extrabudgetary resources are allocated to UNCTAD; and Facilitate the overall monitoring, by each director, of the numerous ongoing operations in each division, as well as the interdivisional cooperation that may be required according to the topic. The representative expressed the hope that donors and beneficiaries would come to an agreement on the need to reach significant progress with regard to setting up comprehensive thematic trust funds. With respect to system-wide coherence and the implications for UNCTAD's operations at the country level, he said his group's main concern was to ensure UNCTAD's central role in the areas of trade and development issues. In this respect, he emphasized the importance of trade and development in national development strategies and the unique role of UNCTAD in this respect. He considered the proposals of the secretariat useful and realistic. UNCTAD effective country-level participation had to be considered in conjunction with the consolidation of technical cooperation around thematic areas. He called for a fair geographical distribution of resources among the regions and praised a number of activities carried out in his region of particular importance, including UNCTAD's Debt Management and Financial Analysis System, ASYCUDA, BIOTRADE, and activities carried out in the framework of the UNCTAD/ALADI agreement. He noted that the investment advisory programme has proven beneficial to developing countries, but has demonstrated operational deficiencies, especially in the Latin American and Caribbean countries, and called for the secretariat to improve its work in this area. The group supports implementation of recommendations in the report, especially that contained in paragraph 89(a). He noted that a comprehensive review and restructuring of the programme is essential. The representative expressed concern about findings regarding the Investment Gateway project, and echoed the call for a thorough review of the project, especially its budgetary affairs, in order to improve it. The representative of Angola, speaking on behalf of the African Group, recalled the importance of UNCTAD assistance to this region, since trade represents 65 per cent of the region's gross domestic product. He expressed his satisfaction with the share allocated to Africa within the total resources of UNCTAD technical cooperation. He emphasized the role of UNCTAD interregional programmes, citing as examples those dealing with transit and transport in landlocked countries. The group welcomed the reforms aimed at simplifying the financial structure of extrabudgetary resources on the condition they do not compromise the scope and manner of delivery of UNCTAD technical assistance. The group said it was importance for UNCTAD to be more active at the country level and supported UNCTAD participation in the "One UN" initiative. Finally, the group highlighted priority areas of cooperation with UNCTAD, including commodities, support to multilateral trade negotiations in the context of the Doha development agenda, trade in services, support to the launching of the second phase of the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Project, competition policy and the Biofuels initiative. Finally, the group stressed the importance of product standards and asked for UNCTAD assistance through the Secretary-General's Group of Eminent Persons on Non-Tariff Barriers. The African Group expressed its appreciation for the evaluation report on investment advisory services, as well as the benefits from this programme evidenced in Africa. The group requested the secretariat to conduct an in-depth evaluation on UNCTAD's commodities programme. The representative of Portugal, speaking on behalf of the European Union, said that the European Union, through the bilateral contributions of its member States and the European Commission, represented more than $52 million or almost 45 per cent of UNCTAD's trust fund contributions for the period 2003 - 2006, and was therefore the largest donor to UNCTAD's technical cooperation activities. He stressed the need for linkages and coherence among the three pillars of UNCTAD's work. He noted the contraction in contributions from developing countries and multilateral donors, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, and stressed the need to reflect about the reasons for this contraction. On recommendation 19 of the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons, he said the best option was to initiate the establishment of some thematic trust funds combined with the maintenance of earmarked contributions to individual trust funds. He expressed support for the practical proposals put forward regarding the "One UN" country-level reform, with the exception of the idea to establish UNCTAD representatives at regional and subregional levels, which he did not consider cost-effective. The EU considers the evaluation of activities an essential component of a good and efficient organization and asserts that UNCTAD's evaluation function needs to be supported by the necessary resources and capacities to be able to carry out its work efficiently and effectively. He said that the European Union is prepared to endorse the strategic and operational recommendations emanating from the in-depth evaluation with a view to helping UNCTAD improve its work and delivery with an integrated approach. UNCTAD's work in Investment Policy Reviews and International Investment Agreements were commended as examples of best practices, but the European Union urged improvements in the Quick Response Window and Good Governance in Investment Promotion programmes. It called for the secretariat to address concerns regarding the Investment Gateway project. The representative of Benin, speaking on behalf of Least Developed Countries, said that UNCTAD analytical work led to practical technical cooperation activities of great importance to developing countries, which relied on UNCTAD for practical responses to policy-oriented decisions. He called for a strengthening of the Integrated Framework and urged donors to increase their contributions in this regard to enable more UNCTAD involvement in this work. He said that UNCTAD should continue to address all areas related to trade and investment, including in particular issues pertaining to debt, migration and mobilization of domestic resources. The representative of Indonesia stressed the importance of UNCTAD's distinctive role in fostering development and positively appraised the technical cooperation projects carried out in 2006 and 2007. Regarding the structure of extrabudgetary resources, Indonesia recommended that UNCTAD implement the recommendations included in the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons to create a thematic trust fund to encompass the main areas of UNCTAD activity. Finally, concerning United Nations system-wide coherence, in particular "Delivering as One", Indonesia looks forward to seeing a number of initiatives where UNCTAD could play a more proactive role at the country level. The representative of Bangladesh underlined the valuable role played by UNCTAD in providing technical cooperation to developing countries. Regarding implementation of recommendation 19 of the Panel of Eminent Persons, he looked forward to a fruitful discussion in the Working Party on its implementation. He reminded the secretariat of the existence of a trust fund that was suffering from lack of funds. He supported the idea of establishing a limited number of thematic trust funds, on the understanding that no specific technical assistance would be lost or curtailed. He also stressed the importance of creating and maintaining trust funds that are effective and functional. He urged donors and the secretariat to avoid establishing trust funds that will not attract any funding. He thanked the secretariat for the valuable technical assistance provided to LDCs, and recalled UNCTAD's special position as the only mandated United Nations organ for the integrated treatment of trade and development, to provide support to LDCs in their search to integrate trade into their national development plans through Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers. In this regard, he praised the substantive work of UNCTAD in the Integrated Framework initiative. He thanked the evaluation team for its report and urged active consideration by the Working Party of the recommendations and operational observations. The representative of China expressed satisfaction at UNCTAD's technical cooperation activities in 2006, and asked the secretariat to continue to provide its assistance to developing countries and in particular to LDCs. She said the fragmented structure was detrimental to the effective use of resources. In this regard, she expressed the hope that a consensus could be reached on implementation of recommendation 19. She supported UNCTAD's participation in the "One UN" reform. Finally, she asked donors to ensure appropriate funding to UNCTAD's operations in the future. The representative of Norway expressed appreciation at the increase in resources from developing countries to UNCTAD's technical assistance, which is proof of the relevance of these activities. Activities should concentrate more in Africa and in LDCs, where there are higher challenges. She reiterated her country's support to the programme approach proposed by the secretariat, which she called a step in the right direction but not enough to address the concerns of Norwegian authorities, who continue to be approached with individual requests for funding. She said that Norway might review the level of its contributions to UNCTAD if there are no improvements on the overall management and structure of technical cooperation. Fragmentation, however, was not only a result of earmarking, but was also caused by a lack of interdivisional cooperation. She believed that UNCTAD should consolidate its technical cooperation into four or five thematic trust funds, in line with the Report of the Panel of Eminent Persons. Future thematic trust funds should be subject to interdivisional cooperation. Efforts regarding consolidation into fewer trust funds would enhance transparency and attract donors. UNCTAD should widen its donor base. She noted with appreciation the interagency thematic cluster on trade and productive sectors be led by UNCTAD. She supported the practical proposals put forward by the secretariat on the "One UN" reform with the exception of the idea to establish UNCTAD representative at the regional and subregional levels. B. Informal meetings The Working Party pursued its deliberations in an informal setting. C. Action by the Working Party At its closing plenary, on 13 September 2007, the Working Party approved a draft decision for submission to the Trade and Development Board at its fiftyfourth regular session. It also adopted agreed conclusions on in-depth evaluation of technical cooperation programmes. (For the draft decision and agreed conclusions, see chapter I above.) A. Election of officers (Agenda item 1) At its opening plenary meeting, on 10 September 2007, the Working Party elected Mr. Md Motaher Hussain (Bangladesh) as its Chairperson and Mr. Dmitry Godunov (Russian Federation) as its Vice-Chairperson-cum-Rapporteur. B. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work (Agenda item 2) At the same meeting, the Working Party adopted its provisional agenda (TD/B/WP/194). The agenda was thus as follows: 1. Election of officers 2. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 3. Review of the technical cooperation activities of UNCTAD and their financing 4. Evaluation of technical cooperation activities: In-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's advisory services on investment 5. Provisional agenda for the fiftieth session of the Working Party 6. Other business 7. Adoption of the report of the Working Party to the Trade and Development Board C. Provisional agenda for the fiftieth session of the Working Party (Agenda item 5) At its closing plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, the Working Party approved the provisional agenda for its fiftieth session (see annex I). D. Adoption of the report of the Working Party to the Trade and Development Board (Agenda item 7) At its closing plenary meeting, on 13 September 2007, the Working Party adopted its draft report as contained in document TD/B/WP/L.128, subject to amendments to the summaries of statements, and authorized the completion of the report, taking into account the proceedings of the closing plenary. Provisional agenda for the fiftieth session of the Working Party 3. Review of the UNCTAD section of the Proposed United Nations Strategic Framework for the period 2010 - 2011 4. Review of the UNCTAD Strategic Framework and Programme Budget for the biennium 2008 - 2009, in the light of the outcome of the twelfth session of the Conference 5. Provisional agenda for the fifty-first session of the Working Party Attendance Representatives from the following States members of the Working Party attended the session: Angola Argentina Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin China France Iran (Islamic Republic of) Japan Oman Peru Russian Federation Ukraine United States of America Zimbabwe Representatives from the following States members of UNCTAD but not members of the Working Party attended the session: Afghanistan Azerbaijan Bosnia and Herzegovina Bhutan Cambodia Cameroon Cape Verde Chile Colombia Côte d'Ivoire Djibouti Dominican Republic Ecuador Finland Germany Greece Haiti Honduras India Indonesia Iraq Israel Italy Madagascar Mali Mexico Mozambique Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Netherlands Poland Romania Rwanda Saudi Arabia Slovenia South Africa Spain Sudan Syrian Arab Republic Thailand Turkey Uganda Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) The following intergovernmental organization was represented at the session: European Commission The following specialized agency was represented at the session: United Nations Industrial Development Organization 