%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|MILITARY PERSONNEL|INTERNATIONAL POLICE|FIELD STAFF|

Sixty-second session Agenda item 140 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Comprehensive report on training in peacekeeping Note by the Secretary-General 1. In section I, paragraph 4, of its resolution 60/266, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to report on progress in training in peacekeeping. Furthermore, in paragraph 6 of its resolution 60/267, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide detailed information on the efficiency and effectiveness of all Department of Peacekeeping Operations training programmes to be implemented at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (UNLB), and to compare them with training programmes provided at other facilities and United Nations offices. 2. As requested by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and at the direction of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, with effect from 1 November 2005 all training elements of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters (police, military and civilian) were integrated to form the Integrated Training Service. In conjunction with the integration, it was recommended that the Training Delivery Section of the Integrated Training Service be relocated to UNLB. The rationale for the relocation was projected savings due to a reduction in travel costs made possible by placing a dedicated training team within the Department's primary training establishment. This took effect in the 2006/07 budget year. 3. The establishment of the Section at UNLB has been measured and progressive. UNLB has made office facilities available in its training facility, which have been modified to accommodate the 10 staff of the Section and has also provided transport and administrative support. The Section has been fully staffed since the first quarter of 2008. 4. Subsequently, the division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations into two Departments (the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support) in 2007 was the catalyst for a full review of the priorities and focus of the activities of the Integrated Training Service. A training strategy for the Service has been formulated and widely discussed, both within the two Departments and with Member States. It will be implemented over the next calendar year and will include a full review of the training needs of Member States, field missions and Headquarters. 5. As a result of the refocusing of the efforts of the Integrated Training Service, the Secretary-General is unable to submit a report on training in peacekeeping for consideration at the second part of the resumed sixty-second session of the General Assembly. While much work has been done to improve training for peacekeeping operations, further work is needed to finalize and implement the new Integrated Training Service strategy, conduct a comprehensive training needs analysis and validate the findings and recommendations. It is expected that the complete report on training in peacekeeping operations will be submitted for consideration by the Assembly at its resumed sixty-third session. 