%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|REIMBURSEMENT|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|COSTS|SUPPORT COST REIMBURSEMENT|

Sixty-second session Fifth Committee Agenda item 140 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment Report of the Secretary-General Summary Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 59/298, the Secretariat convened the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment from 4 to 22 February 2008 to conduct a comprehensive review of reimbursement rates and to update the major equipment, self-sustainment and medical support services categories. The 2008 Working Group comprised 359 technical, financial and medical experts from 93 Member States and successfully carried out a comprehensive review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates. In its report (A/C.5/62/26), the 2008 Working Group proposed new definitions and new reimbursement rates for the major equipment, self-sustainment and medical support services categories. The present report sets out the cost implications of implementing the recommendations of the 2008 Working Group. Should the General Assembly approve, with effect from 1 July 2008, the recommendation of the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment, additional resource requirements estimated in the total amount of $76.1 million would be reported in the context of individual peacekeeping operations' financial performance reports for the 2008/09 period, at which time additional appropriations may be sought from the General Assembly, if necessary. The action to be taken by the General Assembly is set out in section IV of the present report. Paragraphs Page Introduction Summary of proposals and recommendations Conclusion Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Annexes Recommendations of the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment and of the Secretariat Estimated financial implications of the implementation of the recommendations of the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment Decision on whether Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual data should be used as national cost data in the triennial review to be carried out by the 2011 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment List of items provided by troop/police-contributing countries under the self-sustainment subcategories "welfare" and "Internet access" 1. In its report dated 28 January 2000 (A/C.5/54/49), the Phase V Working Group on reform procedures for determining reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment recommended formats for the collection and consolidation of the national cost data from Member States for a comprehensive review, and the application of a new average index for each category based on national cost data submitted by Member States, to determine the new reimbursement rates. By its resolution 54/19 B, the General Assembly endorsed the recommendations of the Phase V Working Group. 2. The General Assembly, in its resolution 59/298, requested the Secretary-General to convene the next Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment in 2008 to carry out a comprehensive review of the contingent-owned equipment system, in accordance with the formats established by the Phase V Working Group, for a period of not less than 14 days. 3. The preparations for the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment started in September 2005 with the request of the Secretariat for national cost date from Member States for a comprehensive review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates, using 2006 as a base year. In September 2007, the Secretariat invited Member States to participate in the meetings of the 2008 Working Group and distributed consolidated national cost data from 25 Member States. Updated national cost data from 31 Member States and 16 issue papers were distributed to Member States in December 2007. Four additional issue papers were distributed to Member States on 15 January 2008. 4. The 2008 Working Group met in New York from 4 to 22 February 2008 to conduct a comprehensive review of reimbursement rates for the major equipment, self-sustainment and medical support services and of the procedures for carrying out future reimbursement-rate reviews. The Chairman of the 2008 Working Group submitted its report (A/C.5/62/26) to the Fifth Committee. The report of the 2008 Working Group and its annexes should be read in conjunction with the present report. II. Summary of proposals and recommendations A. Comprehensive review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates for major equipment, self-sustainment and medical support services: financial impact of the recommendations of the 2008 Working Group 1. Increase in the reimbursement rates 5. The 2008 Working Group conducted a comprehensive review of reimbursement rates for the major equipment, self-sustainment and medical support services category on the basis of the statistical model established by the Phase V Working Group. The 2008 Working Group recommended revised rates for major equipment, self-sustainment and medical support services (see A/C.5/62/26, annexes I.A.2, II.A.2, III.A.2 and III.A.3). 6. The overall impact of all changes in reimbursement rates and the addition of new services will result in an increase of approximately 2.7 per cent of the contingent-owned equipment portion of the United Nations peacekeeping budget based on draft and signed memorandums of understanding as at 31 January 2008 (see A/C.5/62/26, para. 39). The aforementioned overall increase is due to the recommended increase of 1.9 per cent for major equipment, including medical equipment, and of 3.8 per cent for self-sustainment, including the medical categories. Those increases will have an impact on the annual peacekeeping budget of $24.5 million (see annex II). 2. Increasing from 10 per cent to 20 per cent the provision to deploy major equipment as overstock 7. The 2008 Working Group recommended an increase in overstock of major equipment from 10 per cent to 20 per cent, which will reduce the maintenance load of the contingents as well as serve as reserve for items needing replacement. The Secretariat welcomes this recommendation, as it will result in an increase in the operational capacity of the peacekeeping operations. The implementation of the recommendation will entail a one-time cost for the deployment, repatriation, painting and repainting of 10 per cent of the major equipment in peacekeeping operations. The Secretariat used 10 per cent of the authorized major equipment listed in annex B of the memorandums of understanding of three missions, namely, the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, to arrive at an indicative estimated financial impact of $33.2 million (see annex II). For its calculations, the Secretariat chose the three large missions for which inland transportation of major equipment from the port of disembarkation to the unit location is costly. 3. Revision of the decision sheet to calculate mission factors 8. The 2008 Working Group recommended an additional calculation factor (see A/C.5/62/26, annex II.C.1) to take into account the potential for hostile engagement of United Nations forces by unidentified factions or by individuals or groups other than peace process participants. The Working Group also recommended a table for calculating this mission factor. 9. The Secretariat concurs with this recommendation, as the Organization is facing increasingly complex security situations in many mission areas. United Nations peacekeepers have been the targets of direct attacks by unidentified individuals or groups -- sometimes using non-conventional means -- who may not be part of the peace process. This constitutes a new type of threat that is substantially different from previous ones in terms of the intention and status of the attackers, the methods and means of the attacks, and so on. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has been the target of such attacks and has requested this additional factor. The financial implication of adopting this decision sheet for UNIFIL is $652,119 per annum. 10. The Secretariat will undertake a review of this factor in other peacekeeping operations at the request of either a Member State or the relevant peacekeeping operation. Troop/police-contributing countries can request a review of mission factors either through the Force Commander/Police Commissioner/Chief of Mission Support, who will then set the process in motion with Headquarters, or by having their Permanent Mission in New York contact the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Support. 4. Addition of the self-sustainment subcategory "Internet access" 11. The 2008 Working Group recommended the addition of a new self-sustainment subcategory, "Internet access", for troops and police deployed in peacekeeping operations. The Secretariat welcomes this recommendation, as this capability is an important part of a comprehensive strategy for the eradication of serious misconduct (including sexual exploitation and abuse) by peacekeeping personnel. This capability will help contingent personnel keep in touch with their families and friends and undertake distance learning, and it will significantly contribute to the morale of personnel. It may help reduce stress and enable personnel to make better use of their leisure time as well as assist them in raising their educational levels. The 2008 Working Group recommended reimbursement at $2.76 per person per month and established a guide to the standard required for providing Internet access, including a list of equipment. Field contingent-owned equipment verification teams will follow the principles of reasonability and flexibility in assessing the compliance of troop/police-contributing countries with the standards for Internet access. 12. The annual reimbursement to troop/police-contributing countries for Internet access is estimated at $2.9 million per annum (see annex II). 5. Provision of basic firefighting, fire-detection and alarm capabilities in field missions 13. The 2008 Working Group recommended standards and interim reimbursement rates for two new self-sustainment subcategories, "basic firefighting" and "firedetection and alarm capability", at $0.16 and $0.13 per person per month, respectively. These two categories are subcategories of "tentage" and "accommodation" and should be discussed during memorandums of understanding negotiations to decide if this capability will be provided by Member States or by the relevant peacekeeping operation. The 2008 Working Group recommended that the new interim rates should be reviewed, at the latest, when the next Working Group convenes. 14. The annual reimbursement to troop/police-contributing countries for basic firefighting is estimated at $140,627 and $114,259 for fire detection and alarm. These reimbursement rates are based on the current strength of troops/police selfsustaining under the tentage (59,155 personnel) and accommodation (14,128 personnel) categories. 15. The Secretariat welcomes this recommendation and notes that basic firefighting and fire detection and alarm capabilities are essential to enhancing the safety and security of contingent personnel and that it is necessary to clearly assign responsibility for the provision of those capabilities. Experience has shown that some contingents provide basic capabilities, that is, fire extinguishers and fire buckets for sand/water; some also provide alarms and detectors, while others do not. That leaves a vacuum in the field missions concerning responsibility for the initial supply and maintenance of equipment to provide those essential capabilities, including the recharging of extinguishers or batteries for fire detectors, if required. 6. Proposed reimbursement for level 2 and 3 medical structures 16. The 2008 Working Group recommended reimbursement to the troop/policecontributing countries when they deploy semi-rigid or rigid structures for level 2 and/or level 3 medical facilities under major equipment as containerized or hard-walled medical facilities, respectively. The square footage of a level 2 medical facility equates to a "Camp unit, medium (50 persons)" and that of a level 3 to one "Camp unit, medium (50 persons)" and one "Camp unit, large (150 persons)". The 2008 Working Group further recommended reimbursement to troop/police-contributing countries under the "tentage" self-sustainment category based on the number of beds in the patient wards from the first day of deployment, when the troop/police-contributing country deploys level 2 and/or level 3 medical facilities in tents. 17. The Secretariat supports this recommendation. As of February 2008, there were three level 2 medical facilities (one semi-rigid and two rigid structures) provided by troop/police-contributing countries in mission areas. The financial implication is estimated at $33,180 per annum, and details are provided in annex II. 7. Increasing from 7 to 15 the number of days of recreational leave allowance for contingent personnel 18. The 2008 Working Group also recommended an increase in recreational leave allowance from the current 7 days to 15 days for each six-month tour of duty for members of military contingents/formed police units and it requested the legislative bodies to consider this issue, as it comes under the umbrella of troop costs. Under the current rules, contingent personnel earn leave at 2.5 days per month -- a total of 15 days during a six-month assignment to peacekeeping missions -- but are entitled only to a recreational leave allowance of $10.50 per day for a maximum of seven days. The Secretariat welcomes this recommendation and is of the opinion that the provision of the additional eight days of recreational leave allowance would improve the morale of the troops/police personnel deployed in peacekeeping operations. The Secretariat estimates that the financial implication will be $14.6 million per annum based on a troop/police strength of 86,855 -- the level of troops/police currently self-sustaining under the welfare category. B. The contingent-owned equipment system 1. Revision of the format for the future triennial review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates 19. The 2008 Working Group recommended that actual cost data rather than indices should be used for future triennial reviews. It also recommended that Member States should indicate whether they wish to use existing contingent-owned equipment rates in lieu of national cost data, either in whole or in part. Furthermore, the 2008 Working Group requested the Secretariat to use the format contained in annex I.A.5 of its report to collect national cost data on major equipment from Member States for future triennial reviews. 20. The Secretariat concurs with the recommendation of the 2008 Working Group that actual cost data on each category of equipment would provide a better basis for the triennial review of reimbursement rates than group indices and will use the recommended format in the work of the next Working Group. As agreed by the Working Group, troop/police-contributing countries would be required to indicate whether they wanted to substitute existing contingent-owned equipment data for national data, either in whole or in part. To facilitate this choice, the Secretariat proposes that Member States use annex III to help them decide whether ContingentOwned Manual data could be used as national cost data. 2. New items and new categories of "special cases" major equipment 21. The 2008 Working Group reviewed the list of "special cases" major equipment and recommended: (a) Standard reimbursement rates for new items of major equipment (see A/C.5/62/26, annex I.C.2); (b) Raising the threshold value of "special cases" from $500 to $1,000, with a minimum useful life of one year, and the deletion of all items falling under the recommended threshold (see A/C.5/62/26, annex I.C.5); (c) Adding the following sentence to the definition of "special case": "The value alone should not determine whether an equipment is treated as a `special case'"; (d) Two hundred and fourteen items should remain as special cases (see A/C.5/62/26, annex I.C.3); (e) Deletion of a list of items reimbursed under self-sustainment (see A/C.5/62/26, annex I.C.6); (f) The Secretariat should propose a list of special cases for consideration by the next Working Group. 22. The Secretariat concurs with the recommendations of the 2008 Working Group, given that special cases frequently cause delays in the negotiation of memorandums of understanding and in the reimbursement process. The Secretariat will reflect the amendments in chapter 8 of the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual, maintain a database of all special cases and prepare a list of special cases that should have a standard reimbursement rate for presentation to the next Working Group for its review. 3. Revision of self-sustainment standard under "accommodation" 23. The 2008 Working Group recommended the addition of "Provide offices/workspaces in permanent rigid structures" to the standard of "accommodation" in the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual and that the existing reimbursement rate for "accommodation" apply until it is re-evaluated by the next Working Group. 24. The Secretariat welcomes this recommendation, as the provision of offices/workspaces is included under "tentage", and the same provision should also apply under "accommodation". This recommendation will harmonize the provisions under both categories and simplify verification procedures in the field and the contingent-owned equipment reimbursement system. 4. Revision of standards for "welfare" 25. The 2008 Working Group recommended an updated standard for "welfare" for troops/police personnel deployed in peacekeeping operations. It also recommended that verification of whether welfare has been provided to standard will be based on the welfare arrangements agreed between the troop/police-contributing countries and the Secretariat and reflected in appendix 2 to annex C to the memorandum of understanding. 26. The Secretariat welcomes the new standard, as welfare plays a critical part in the comprehensive strategy for the eradication of serious misconduct (including sexual exploitation and abuse) on the part of peacekeeping personnel. The Office of Internal Oversight Services observed that most contingents deploy without any form of, or very few, welfare and recreational facilities (see A/60/713, para. 48). Implementing this recommendation would help to promote the welfare and raise the morale of the military contingents/formed police units and address the concerns expressed by the Office of Internal Oversight Services. To assist Member States in planning for and deploying the appropriate equipment, the Secretariat proposes that a list of items be included as an appendix to the memorandum of understanding (see annex IV) and requests that the General Assembly endorse it. Field contingent-owned equipment verification teams will follow the principles of reasonability and flexibility in assessing compliance by troop/police-contributing countries with the standards for welfare. 5. Revision of standards for "basic first aid" and "high-risk areas" 27. The 2008 Working Group recommended a revised standard for "basic first aid", adding a field or battle dressing and medical disposable gloves to individual basic first-aid kits and the requirement to provide a basic first-aid kit to all troop/police-contributing country vehicles, workshops and maintenance facilities, to all kitchens and cooking facilities, and to any other areas where the Force Medical Officer deems it necessary. 28. The 2008 Working Group also recommended a revised standard for "high-risk areas (epidemiological)" as well as certain preventive measures, such as prophylactic pharmaceuticals, personal preventive health equipment and consumables (mosquito head net, repellent), and portable preventive health equipment and consumables (mosquito foggers, pesticides). 29. The Secretariat supports these changes to the standards, as they lead to a better understanding by the troop/police-contributing countries of the capabilities required under these two subcategories. This in turn would result in better safeguards for the health and well-being of peacekeepers. 6. Definition and reimbursement rates of "fee for service" 30. The 2008 Working Group recommended a new definition and a revised fee schedule as well as administrative procedures for "fee for service" under medical services provided by troop/police-contributing countries. 31. The fee for service concept is currently being used in the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and in the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Under this method, troop/police-contributing countries are reimbursed for medical services provided to United Nations and other authorized personnel not covered under self-sustainment reimbursement. The Secretariat welcomes the formalization of a long-standing method of reimbursement. This methodology sets out administrative procedures that would assist troop/police-contributing countries in claiming reimbursement in the mission areas. 7. Medical support facilities (modular medical concept) 32. A modular medical concept, which was proposed by the Secretariat, was considered by the 2008 Working Group. The 2008 Working Group agreed to the concept of the level 1, level 1+, level 2, level 2+ and level 3 medical facilities and provided standards for inclusion in the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual, but it was unable to finalize the equipment list for all modules. 33. The 2008 Working Group recommended that the aero-medical evacuation module and the forward surgery module content lists (see A/C.5/62/26, annexes III.E.2 and III.E.3) be included as appendices to annex B to chapter 3 of the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual. 34. The 2008 Working Group also recommended that interested Member States consult and further review the equipment lists for the remaining modules of the modular medical concept and forward them as an issue paper for distribution to all Member States prior to the convening of the next Working Group. Participation in this task by the Medical Support Section of the Department of Field Support is essential so as to ensure that the Organization's medical doctrine is duly considered and updated and that equipment lists for all modules are ready for the next Working Group. 35. The Secretariat is of the view that the modular medical concept allows each peacekeeping operation to design the medical facilities that best fit its environment, circumstances and the number of military personnel in each sector. It would reimburse the troop/police-contributing countries for what is needed and deployed in the mission area. The equipment list for the other modules, to be reviewed by the next Working Group, will greatly facilitate deployment in the field of suitable capabilities tailored to the real needs of each specific mission and facilitate memorandum of understanding negotiations. 8. Predeployment training 36. The 2008 Working Group recommended that: (a) The United Nations mandate to support mission-specific training prior to deployment be highlighted; (b) In that regard, the Integrated Training Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should be proactive and efficient in: (i) Supporting Member States in ensuring that their trainers have the appropriate training, information and materials to conduct effective national predeployment training; (ii) Issuing guidelines for training; (iii) Providing all available documents specific to each mission that are necessary for training. 37. The Secretariat concurs with the recommendations of the 2008 Working Group and is committed to supporting mission-related predeployment training. The Integrated Training Service has commenced a comprehensive peacekeeping training needs assessment. The Service will consult closely with trainers from Member States both during and after the needs assessment to ensure that the priority needs of Member States are being met. In particular, they will ensure that appropriate mission-specific and generic training materials and information are provided for predeployment training. They will also look at ways of strengthening the training recognition process whereby Member State training courses that meet standardized training guidelines are officially recognized by the United Nations as meeting its requirements. Additionally, the Integrated Training Service team will examine the concept of establishing mobile training teams to work with regional and national training centres to improve the overall effectiveness of Member State peacekeeping training. III. Conclusion 38. The Secretariat expresses its appreciation to the 2008 Working Group for the enormous task it undertook in carrying out a comprehensive review of large volumes of data and for the guidance it has provided. The proposed revised standards and administrative procedures and the addition of new categories and subcategories will benefit the Secretariat by improving the structure of the contingent-owned equipment system and provide more transparent and enhanced verification tools. 39. The Secretariat requests that the Member States submit national cost data no later than two months prior to the meeting of the next Working Group to allow time for the consolidation and validation of such data and issue papers no later than one month prior to the convening of the next Working Group. IV. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 40. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the report of the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment (A/C.5/62/26) are set out below: (a) Approve the new reimbursement rates as listed in annex I.A.2 for major equipment, annex II.A.2 for self-sustainment and annexes III.A.2 and III.A.3 for medical support services; (b) Adopt the revised format for future triennial review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates using actual cost data (see annex I.A.5); (c) In regard to "special cases" major equipment: (i) Approve the reimbursement rates for new items and new categories of major equipment in annex I.C.2; (ii) Agree to an increase in the threshold value of "special cases" from $500 to $1,000; (iii) Adopt the addition to the definition of "special cases"; (d) Approve the increase from 10 per cent to 20 per cent in the provision to deploy major equipment as overstock in accordance with the quantities authorized in annex B of the memorandum of understanding; (e) Adopt the predeployment training activities proposed by the Integrated Training; (f) Agree to the revision of the self-sustainment standard under "accommodation"; (g) Adopt the revision of the decision sheet to calculate mission factors; (h) Approve the increase in the number of days of recreational leave allowance for members of the military contingents/formed police units from 7 to 15; (i) Agree to the revision of the standard self-sustainment subcategory "welfare" and the inclusion of "Internet access" as a self-sustainment subcategory with a reimbursement rate of $2.76 per person per month; (j) Approve the standards and the reimbursement rates for the provision of "basic firefighting" and "fire detection and alarm" capabilities in field missions at $0.16 and $0.13 per person per month, respectively; (k) Adopt the proposed reimbursement method for level 2 and 3 medical structures; (l) Agree to the revision of standards for "basic first aid" and "high-risk areas"; (m) Adopt the definition and reimbursement rates of "fee for service" for medical support services; (n) Approve the revised standards of the level 1, level 1+, level 2, level 2+ and level 3 medical facilities and the equipment list of the aero-medical evacuation and forward surgery modules. Annex I Item Action to be undertaken by the General Assembly Secretariat view 1. Comprehensive review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates Approve the new reimbursement rates as listed in A/C.5/62/26, annex I.A.2, for major equipment; annex II.A.2, for self-sustainment; and annexes III.A.2 and III.A.3, for medical support services Recommends approval 2. Format for future triennial review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates Adopt the revised format, contained in annex I.A.5, for future triennial review of contingent-owned equipment reimbursement rates using actual cost data 3. Special cases: (i) new items of major equipment; (ii) increase of the threshold value; (iii) revised definition of "special case" (i) Approve the reimbursement rates for new items and new categories of major equipment in annex I.C.2 (ii) Agree to the increase of the threshold value of "special cases" from $500 to $1,000 (iii) Adopt the addition to the definition of "special case" 4. Provision to deploy major equipment as overstock Approve the increase from 10 per cent to 20 per cent in the provision to deploy major equipment as overstock as per authorized quantities in annex B of the memorandum of understanding 5. Predeployment training programme proposed by the Integrated Training Service Adopt the outline of predeployment training activities proposed by the Integrated Training Service 6. Self-sustainment standard under "accommodation" Agree to the revision of the self-sustainment standard under "accommodation" 7. Decision sheet to calculate mission factors Adopt the revision of the decision sheet to calculate mission factors 8. Increase the recreational leave allowance for contingent personnel Approve the increase in the number of days of recreational leave allowance for members of military contingents/formed police units from 7 to 15 9. Self-sustainment standard under "welfare" and the inclusion of "Internet access" Agree to the revision of the standard of the self-sustainment subcategory "welfare" and the inclusion of "Internet access" as a self-sustainment subcategory with a reimbursement rate of $2.76 per person per month 10. "Basic firefighting", "fire detection and alarm" capabilities Approve the standards and reimbursement rates for the provision of "basic firefighting", "fire detection and alarm" capabilities in field missions at $0.16 and $0.13 per person per month, respectively 11. Reimbursement method for level 2 and 3 medical structures Adopt the proposed reimbursement method for level 2 and 3 medical structures 12. "Basic first aid" and "high-risk areas" Agree to the revision of standards for "basic first aid" and "high-risk areas" 13. "Fee for service" Adopt the definition and reimbursement rates of "fee for service" for medical support services 14. Medical support facilities (modular medical concept) Approve the revised standards of the level 1, level 1+, level 2, level 2+ and level 3 medical facilities and the equipment list of the aero-medical evacuation and forward surgery modules Annex II Service or item Estimated amount Estimated total (United States dollars) Annual recurrent cost Overall increase in contingent-owned equipment rates 2.7 per cent x ($905,822,060: major equipment $521,659,710, self-sustainment $384,162,350) (based on draft and signed memorandums of understanding as at 31 January 2008) Recreational leave allowance = 86,855 troops/police x 8 days x $10.50 x 2 rotations Mission factor -- hostile action by unidentified factions other than peace process participants (requested only by UNIFIL at this time) Internet access = 86,855 troops/police x $2.76 x 12 months Basic firefighting = 73,243 troops/police x $0.16 x 12 months Fire detection and alarm = 73,243 troops/police x $0.13 x 12 months Level 2 medical structures: 2 UNIFIL, 1 UNMIS 1 semi-rigid camp unit, medium (50 men) = $649 x 12 months 2 rigid camp units, medium (50 men) = $896 x 2 x 12 months 3 ablution facilities (50 men) = $162 x 2 x 12 months Total Estimated total annual cost of implementing the recommendations of the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment Non-recurrent cost Increase in overstock of major equipment: UNAMID UNMIS MONUC Total estimated cost for the first year of implementation Name of Member State: _ Member State HAS provided national cost data - YES For all categories where no national cost data was provided, please input the data from Chapter 8 of the COE Manual. - NO Do not input data from the COE Manual Member State HAS NOT provided national cost data - YES Please input the data from chapter 8 of the COE Manual Signature_ Name_ (Please print) Title_ (Authorized Member State Representative) Date_ Country:_ Welfare Welfare stores should be available to all contingent troops at headquarters and in detached units/sub-units. Welfare stores should include, but are not limited to, the following items: Equipment Quantity Remarks Audio-visual entertainment equipment DVD VCR Television Computer and computer games Fitness equipment Free weights Exercise machines Team sports equipment Soccer Football Basketball Individual sports equipment Tennis Table tennis Badminton Handball Library Books Periodicals Board games Other equipment (pertinent to contingent's culture) Internet access equipment Computers Peripherals Webcams Microphones Scanners/printers Appropriate levels of maintenance (spare parts and bandwidth for the equipment mentioned above) Contingent-owned equipment verification teams will follow the principles of reasonability and flexibility in assessing the compliance of the troop/police-contributing countries with the standards for the "welfare" and "Internet access" subcategories. 