%%%ECONOMIC GROWTH|HUMAN SECURITY|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|PARTNERSHIP|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|AFRICA|TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|INVESTMENTS|TOURISM|AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT|RURAL DEVELOPMENT|COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT|EDUCATION|HEALTH|PEACE|GOVERNANCE|CLIMATE CHANGE|FOOD PRICES|

Sixty-second session Agenda item 64 (a) New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support Letter dated 6 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the General Assembly I have the honour to transmit herewith the outcome documents of the Fourth Tokyo International Conference on African Development, held in Yokohama, Japan, from 28 to 30 May 2008, which reaffirmed the importance of Africa exercising full ownership of its own development agenda and the need for a genuine partnership with the international community in pursuit of that agenda (see annex). The Conference was co-organized by the Government of Japan, the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank. I would be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 64 (a). (Signed) Yukio Takasu Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations TICAD IV Outcome Documents 1. Yokohama Declaration 2. TICAD IV Yokohama Action Plan and Appendix 3. TICAD Follow-up Mechanism 30 May 2008 YOKOHAMA DECLARATION TOWARDS A VIBRANT AFRICA 1.0 Introduction 1.1 The Heads of State and Government, and delegations of Japan and 51 African countries, together with the representatives of 34 other countries, 75 international and regional organizations, and representatives of the private sector, academic institutions and civil society organizations from both Africa and Asia, met in Yokohama, Japan from 28 to 30 May, 2008, for the Fourth Tokyo International Conference on African Development - TICAD IV. 1.2 The Conference took place against the backdrop of a rapidly-changing Africa determined to take responsibility for and to assert ownership over its own destiny: and an Africa increasingly confident and capable, itself, of determining that destiny. 1.3 The Participants at TICAD IV acknowledged that from its inception in 1993, the TICAD Process with Japan at its center and other co-organizers including the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank playing a valuable role stressed the importance for Africa to exercise full "ownership" of its own development agenda and the need for a genuine "partnership" with the international community in pursuit of that agenda. In this regard, the TICAD Process has also served as a bridge between Africa and Japan and Asia as a whole, and as a Forum through which the Asian development experience can be shared with Africa. It is clear that the pursuit of an even closer relationship, based on shared concerns and common strategic interests, is of critical importance in terms of further enhancing global development and stability. 1.4 The Participants at TICAD IV also recognized the need for Africa's diversified development partners, working together with the governments of Africa and with the African Union (AU) and its institutions and programmes - in particular the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) - to actively strive for far greater synergy and effective coordination between and among existing and future initiatives in support of the continent's development. 2.0 Recent Trends and Challenges 2.1 The Participants at TICAD IV acknowledged the positive trends which have emerged across the African continent in general since TICAD III in 2003. Increasing political stability and improved governance, buttressed by strong economic growth and rising levels of foreign direct investment - much of it coming from Asia - have helped to create a new awareness of trade, investment and tourism opportunities available across the continent. These opportunities present a hitherto unprecedented prospect for the countries of Africa to achieve real and sustainable economic growth, and to make, thereby, real and sustainable progress towards poverty alleviation, and genuine improvements in the quality of life and self-reliance across the continent. 2.2 In this regard, the Participants at TICAD IV commended the birth in 2001 of NEPAD, the transformation of the Organization of African Unity into AU in 2002 and the increasing effectiveness of Africa's Regional Economic Communities (REC's) as further confirmation of Africa's determination, and enhanced capacity to exercise full ownership of its own development agenda. The Participants also welcomed the strengthening of cooperation between AU and TICAD, which is exemplified by the resolution adopted at the Tenth Ordinary Session of the African Union Assembly held in Addis Ababa from 31 January to 2 February 2008. 2.3 The Participants also took note of the outcome of this above-mentioned AU Assembly, which called, inter alia, for an immediate acceleration in the industrialization of Africa, a definitive shift away from dependence on primary products, and the development of Africa-based industries for local value-addition and processing. 2.4 The Participants at TICAD IV noted the strenuous efforts being made by the African countries themselves towards improved governance across the continent, including the ongoing work of the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM). 2.5 The Participants at TICAD IV recognized that, notwithstanding these very encouraging trends, the countries of Africa continue to face a number of serious challenges and that achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) will be a difficult task. The most immediate of these challenges includes continuing widespread poverty and unemployment in rural and urban areas coupled with rapid population growth. Other significant challenges are low agricultural productivity, together with generally poor agricultural infrastructure ,and the increasingly severe effects of climate change; low levels of industrialization and inadequate generation of and access to energy across the continent; the scourge of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other infectious diseases which continues its ravages across much of the continent; inadequate access to education at all levels and a corresponding lack of adequate education-infrastructure - specially in sub-Saharan Africa. The Participants emphasized the special needs of least developed countries, land-locked and small island developing states. They also paid special attention to the issue of soaring rise of food prices and its negative impact on poverty reduction in Africa. 2.6 The Participants acknowledged that while African governments bear primary responsibility for the economic and social well-being of their respective peoples, the international community and, Africa's development partners in particular, have a crucial role to play in supporting Africa's own efforts to address and overcome these challenges. 2.7 In this regard, the Participants stressed the importance for the G8 countries to honor the commitments already made in respect of support for African development and for all Africa's development partners, including emerging partners to work towards a greater coordination and strengthening of the broad international partnership with the African continent - specifically to facilitate a greater focus of effort and to avoid duplication and any unnecessary wastage of scarce resources. 2.8 Building on the positive trends in Africa and guided by the vision outlined in NEPAD, but also fully cognizant of the considerable developmental challenges which continue to confront the countries of Africa, the Participants at TICAD IV committed themselves to work together on the following specific but inter-related priority-areas: Towards Boosting Economic Growth Towards Ensuring Human Security, including achieving MDGs and consolidation of peace and good governance Towards Addressing Environmental Issues and Climate Change Forging a Genuine Partnership towards a Vibrant, Prosperous Africa 3.1 The Participants at TICAD IV stressed that it is essential to accelerate broad-based economic growth and diversification and acknowledged the enormous, as-yet largely untapped natural-resource potential across the continent. Human Resource Development 3.2 The Participants at TICAD IV noted the enormous challenges facing African countries in the area of human resource development, especially in the field of science and technology. They noted the significant contribution being made in this regard by Japan and other development partners, and recognized the considerable potential for expansion in this critical sector of development cooperation. Accelerated Industrial Development 3.3 The Participants recalled the conclusions of the Tenth Ordinary Session of the African Union Assembly, with regard to the urgent need to accelerate the industrial development of Africa. Infrastructure 3.4 The Participants emphasized the fundamental need to focus on the development of region-wide infrastructure. Agricultural and Rural Development 3.5 The Participants at TICAD IV acknowledged the role of agriculture as a major component of economic activity across the continent, and emphasized the urgent need to significantly enhance current levels of agricultural productivity, and increase support to this critical sector, including through provision and management of water resources. Agricultural and rural reform in the framework of the NEPAD Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) were acknowledged as effective means to achieve food security and poverty alleviation and major driving forces for economic growth. In this regard, it is important to provide assistance for rural entrepreneurs and local industries. Trade and Investment 3.6 The Participants at TICAD IV noted that, although the current levels of international trade and investment with African countries, including trade and investment flows between Africa and Japan, and other Asian countries had certainly improved, Africa's share of global trade and investment flows was still insignificant. Accordingly, the Participants recognized the need to work together for the early, fair and balanced conclusion of the WTO Doha Round. They also acknowledged the importance of "Aid for Trade" initiative. Promotion of Tourism 3.7 The Participants stressed that Africa has enormous potential in this sector, and that tourism has the dual effect of positively impacting on several other sectors whilst building a positive image of Africa. They emphasized the importance, for African countries, to cooperate more closely in the tourism sector and, in this regard, recognized the need for sharing of experiences and know how as well as the promotion of technical cooperation programs. The specific importance of Eco-tourism was also underlined. Role of the Private Sector 3.8 The Participants at TICAD IV noted, also, the important role of the private sector - both domestic and foreign - in the promotion and financing of sustainable economic growth in Africa, especially with regard to the effective exploitation of the continent's natural resources, and the development of industrial, energy and mineral, agricultural, financial and other services sectors, and, equally, in the development and management of Africa's considerable human resources. 3.9 In this context, and spurred by the progress being made towards improving the overall business climate across the continent, the Participants welcomed the growing interest and activities of the Japanese and other Asian private sectors. They also welcomed Japan's initiative to strengthen closer Public-Private Partnerships by promoting trade and investment in Africa. 4.0 Achieving the Millennium Development Goals - MDGs: Economic and Social Dimension of "Human Security" 4.1 The Participants at TICAD IV noted that more vigorous impetus is necessary to attain the Millennium Development Goals by the year 2015. They acknowledged the inter-relatedness of the MDG's and the urgent need to promote a more fully-comprehensive approach towards their general attainment. 4.2 The Participants welcomed TICAD IV's focus upon and promotion of the concept of "human security", which underscores freedom from fear and freedom from want, and emphasizes the protection and empowerment of individuals and communities. 4.3 Community Development: Building Safe and Healthy Communities The Participants acknowledged that strengthening a comprehensive and community-based approach would help in achieving the MDGs. This approach encompasses human resource development, decent job-creation, in particular for the youth, income generation, expansion of access to primary health-care and basic education, as well as agricultural and rural development, including through promotion of the One-Village-One-Product (OVOP) movement. 4.4 Education: Realizing Education which opens up a New Future The Participants stressed the fundamental need to improve the quality of and expanding access to education for all African people, with special emphasis on youth, and to promote education linked to growth and self-sustainability, including technical and vocational training, science and higher education, while ensuring a cross-sectoral approach. 4.5 Health: Ensuring Reliable Health and Sanitation In addition to tackling HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, polio and other infectious diseases, the Participants acknowledged the significance of strengthening health systems to effectively deal with major health challenges including maternal, new-born, and child health. The Participants highlighted the importance of human resource development of health workers and expressed concern regarding the brain-drain of skilled health professionals. The Participants warmly welcomed the creation of the Hideyo Noguchi Africa Prize, the first ever of its kind. 4.6 Gender: Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment Recognizing the significant role of women in development and peace consolidation, the Participants at TICAD IV reemphasized the importance of advancing and protecting the human rights of women and promoting women's empowerment. They stressed the need to address issues such as disparity in education, violence against women, and insufficient participation of women in all spheres of decision making, while taking into account the cultural specificities of different countries. 5.0 Consolidation of Peace and Good Governance: Political Dimension of "Human Security" 5.1 The Participants reiterated that development and peace must work in tandem with each other. They noted the significant progress made in this regard across the African continent and stressed that, to realize a Vibrant Africa, dividends of peace must spread to every corner of the continent. 5.2 The Participants also reemphasized that countries coming out of conflict need special assistance to get on the path of reconstruction and sustainable development and to enjoy the fruits of prosperity. For this to come about, seamless peace-building efforts encompassing conflict prevention, early warning measures, conflict resolution, and preventing relapses into conflict, are critical as they will promote durable peace on the continent. To sustain peace acquired through these processes, sound vigorous democracy, continuous and inclusive dialogue, and strengthened governance need to be vigorously fostered. Furthermore, a smooth transition between one phase and another, and linkages between support for peace consolidation and other areas of development, are also crucial. 5.3 The Participants put an emphasis on the importance of Africa's ownership and welcomed AU's initiatives such as the Africa Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) and African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) to improve governance. The participants also welcomed the goodwill shown by development partners, especially to enhance Africa's peace-keeping capabilities. The participants also called attention to the significant role of the UN and its bodies such as the Security Council and the Peace Building Commission as well as the AU, Africa's regional organizations and African countries themselves contributing to peace keeping operations. They commended the mediation efforts of African countries for the reconciliation and peaceful resolution of armed conflicts, as well as their engagement in peace-keeping operations. 5.4 The Participants emphasized the importance of the early reform of the main UN bodies including the Security Council to better meet the international environment of the 21st century. The Participants reemphasized that the member states should exert efforts on the Security Council reform during the current session of the UN General Assembly. 6.0 Addressing Environmental Issues and Climate Change: To establish "Cool Earth Partnership" 6.1 Climate Change: The Participants at TICAD IV noted that African countries, which emit the least and embrace the Congo Basin, considered as the second largest ecological "lung" in the world, have generally been extremely vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change, including increased environmental degradation, deforestation, loss of biodiversity, and droughts and desertification that further threaten food security and health, as well as to increasingly frequent extreme weather patterns. African countries continue to be inadequately equipped in terms of their mitigation and adaptation capacities. The Participants at TICAD IV recognized the need to assist Africa to enhance environment protection initiatives and welcomed the initiatives taken by Africans themselves including the International Solidarity Conference on Climate Change Strategies for African and Mediterranean Regions held in Tunisia in November 2007. African countries appreciated Japan's "Cool Earth Promotion Programme" and acknowledged Japan's efforts in seeking to develop an international framework looking beyond the first steps taken in the current Kyoto Protocol on greenhouse gas emissions. In this regard, the Participants welcomed the announcement by the Government of Japan, in January 2008, of its intention to establish a "Cool Earth Partnership" with US$ 10 billion Financial Mechanism on the basis of policy consultations between Japan and developing countries - including African countries - to address the effects of climate change and to modernize their industries, by way of technology-transfer, to render them more energy-efficient and more environment-friendly. 6.2 Water: Securing access to water and sanitation The Participants acknowledged the importance of water as an indispensable resource for addressing development needs such as health, agriculture/food production, disaster risk reduction, and peace and security. They also acknowledged that it was essential to promote the sustainable use of water resources. 6.3 Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) The Participants acknowledged the importance of the Education for Sustainable Development initiative and its promotion to address environmental issues effectively. 7.0 A Broadened Partnership TICAD within a Broadened Global Partnership towards a Vibrant Africa 7.1 The Participants at TICAD IV acknowledged that, since its inception in 1993, the TICAD Process has strengthened the twin concepts of "Ownership" and "Partnership" and has made a significant contribution to African development. 7.2 The Participants recognized the importance of enhanced South-South cooperation within the context of TICAD Process and acknowledged the positive results of efforts, under TICAD Initiative, to promote trade and investment flows between Asia and Africa as well as encourage intra-Africa trade. 7.3 The Participants acknowledged the active involvement of African, Japanese and international civil society organizations in the TICAD process, and the importance of further broadening the existing TICAD partnership using a participatory approach. They also stressed the need to achieve greater synergy and coordination between and among existing initiatives so as to attain greater coherence, focus and efficiency in the overall global development partnership for a vibrant Africa. 8.1 The Participants at TICAD IV noted, with sincere appreciation, the continuing commitment of development partners including the Government of Japan, other TICAD co-organizers and the international community to the promotion of African development and, in particular, their championing of the TICAD Process. 8.2 The Participants warmly welcomed the progress achieved so far by the TICAD Process, and also commended the action-oriented outcome of the Conference and appreciated that this was clearly captured in this Declaration and in the accompanying TICAD IV Action Plan. 8.3 The Participants also welcomed the establishment of a TICAD Follow-Up Mechanism, tasked to continuously monitor and analyze the implementation of the TICAD Process as a whole, and the ongoing assessment of its impact upon African development across its many sectors of activity. 8.4 The Participants noted that a successful and timely attainment of the overarching objective of sustained and accelerated African development would require the commitment and engagement of the entire international community, and the knowledge and resources of all of Africa's development partners to be mobilized in a more consolidated and synergetic manner. 8.5 The Participants welcomed the commitment of Japan, as the G8 Chair, to reflect the outcomes of the TICAD IV at the discussions of the July 2008 G8 Hokkaido Toyako Summit and to seek active G8 support for African development. (end) This Action Plan, under the "Yokohama Declaration," is designed to provide a road map for the support of African growth and development under the TICAD (Tokyo International Conference on African Development) process. With robust economic growth of more than 5% per year and enhanced political stability, Africa is on the path toward the broad-based growth and development that will help it become a "continent of hope and opportunity." The TICAD process seeks to support this objective by mobilizing knowledge and resources to assist African countries accomplish clear development goals and achieve tangible outcomes. Since its inception, TICAD has been based on principles of ownership by African countries, partnership, and the expansion of South-South cooperation. This Action Plan lays out goals to be achieved and specific measures to be implemented through the TICAD process during the next five years to further the three TICAD priorities of Boosting Economic Growth, Ensuring Human Security (including the Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the Consolidation of Peace and Good Governance), and Addressing Environmental Issues/Climate Change under the Broadening Partnership. Progress will be monitored through the TICAD follow-up mechanism. The Government of Japan at the center of the TICAD process, has taken the initiative to show its strong commitment by announcing doubling ODA to Africa by 2012. This will contribute to the effective implementation of assistance so that the goals along the above-mentioned priorities can be achieved. The Government of Japan will also strive to actively mobilize all the policy tools it has to double direct investment from the Japanese private sector to Africa from 2008 to 2012. - Introduction - The TICAD process will promote a "Vibrant Africa" and its accelerated economic growth and diversification through support for infrastructure development, trade, investment and tourism, and agriculture. It will seek to advance self-sustainable economic growth that is effectively linked to poverty reduction and achievement of the MDGs, and encourage all stakeholders, including the private sector, to act together in support of the efforts African countries are making to broaden and accelerate growth through, inter alia, development of their human resources. It is essential to develop an infrastructure network to promote and support the expansion of industry, trade and investment as well as agriculture. The Commission for Africa report to G8 Gleneagles Summit indicated that additional assistance of 10 billion dollars per year would be required to meet Africa's infrastructure needs by 2010. African experts are now drafting a mid-long term strategic plan, which will necessitate both an expanded regional infrastructure and capacity building for maintenance and management. Actions to be taken in the next 5 years under the TICAD Process The TICAD process will focus on: 1. Regional transport infrastructure, including roads and ports 2. Regional power infrastructure 3. Water-related infrastructure 4. Enhanced involvement of regional institutions 5. Promotion of public-private partnership (PPP) in infrastructure 1. Regional transport infrastructure - Provide financial and technical assistance for the planning, construction and improvement of regional transport corridors and international ports. - Support capacity building for the management and maintenance of regional infrastructure. - Promote facilitation of cross-border procedures such as One Stop Border Post (OSBP). - Support technical cooperation for comprehensive community development along with infrastructure development. - Strengthen cooperation to provide a stable power supply for the whole region, and to build capacity to manage and maintain regional power networks. 3. Water related infrastructure - Support agricultural water-development initiatives to rapidly expand the share of land under irrigation, and other improved water control and management infrastructure. - Support capacity building of Regional Economic Communities (RECs) and regional development banks to better plan, finance and execute infrastructure programs, and provide technical assistance for regional infrastructure investment planning. - Promote, support and strengthen PPP in infrastructure such as ports, railway and electric power plants to increase opportunities for the private sector by utilizing other official flows (OOF). Trade, Investment and Tourism African Governments, recognizing the importance of trade and investment to sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction, are making efforts to promote trade and attract foreign investment, drawing on the experiences of the Asian economies. African Union (AU)/New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and RECs are also formulating common regional trade policies including improvements in the legal and regulatory framework and regional infrastructure, in order to promote intra-African trade and facilitate Africa's integration into the world economy. In this context, the TICAD process aims to achieve a significant increase of trade with and investment to African countries in collaboration with the private sector. Actions to be taken in the next 5 years under the TICAD process The TICAD process will strengthen efforts to: Promote and expand trade 2. Encourage foreign investment 3. Assist private sector development 4. Promote tourism 1. Promote and expand trade - Provide duty-free and quota-free market access for essentially all products originating from all African least developing countries. - Scale up "Aid for Trade" to increase the global competitiveness of African countries by accelerating assistance including Japan's "Development Initiative for Trade" and support the early, fair and balanced conclusion of the WTO Doha development Agenda negotiations. - Assist product development and export promotion in Africa, by further promoting One Village One Product (OVOP) initiative. - Enhance infrastructure management capacity through projects such as the OSBP. - Provide assistance to improve trading practices, and to build capacity in trade policy making and coordination of African countries and RECs. - Provide assistance to improve investment climate including the legal and regulatory frameworks in African countries. - Support the establishment of an information and consultation platform on the business climate for private companies intending to enter into African markets. - Utilize more effectively official funding sources such as investment credit, trade and investment insurance to enhance PPP and leverage private capital flows to Africa. - Provide assistance for capacity building to improve economic and corporate governance. - Support African countries to plan and implement industrial development strategies and policies, drawing on Asian experiences as appropriate. - Provide technical support to improve productivity, competitiveness and business expertise in promising industries, taking into account the effectiveness of information and communication technology (ICT). - Expand assistance to support the development of small and medium enterprises and local industries. - Collaborate with international financial institutions and regional development banks to strengthen the financial sector, including through the development of local bond markets and local currency financing mechanisms. - Provide technical and financial assistance to promote self-reliant utilization of energy and mineral resources. - Encourage and assist African countries' efforts to address security, hospitality management, infrastructure and environmental constraints to tourism development including through tourism training programs. - Support tourism operators to increase familiarization with African destinations and improve knowledge of the continent and what it has to offer. - Exploit the opportunity provided by the 2010 World Cup Soccer Tournament in South Africa to support long-term tourism promotion through events such as travel fairs. Agriculture and Rural Development Seventy percent of the poor in Sub-Sahara Africa or 230 million live in rural areas, and increase in food production and agricultural productivity are critical for food security, poverty reduction and economic growth in Africa. While the agricultural sector can be a driving force for the African economy, the continuing increase in food, fertilizer and fuel prices has become ever more threatening to food security. African countries have recognized the importance of the agricultural sector for development and are implementing NEPAD's Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) that seeks to improve agricultural productivity to attain an average annual growth rate of 6 percent by 2015. As part of that agenda, African countries have committed, in accordance with the 2003 AU Maputo Declaration, to allocate at least 10% of national budgetary resources for agriculture and rural development within five years. Support for agriculture under the TICAD process will include attention to the environmental impact of agricultural activities, as well as the empowerment of women, who play a critical role in agriculture, and the encouragement of South-South cooperation including triangular cooperation. The TICAD process will seek alignment with the CAADP agenda to: 1. Enhance capacity to increase food production and agricultural productivity 2. Improve access to markets and agricultural competitiveness 3. Support sustainable management of water resources and land use - Provide assistance to expand agricultural research, extension and advisory services including for adaptation to climate change, development of new crop varieties and improvement of soil fertility and other farming technologies, and increase the number of agriculture professionals through support for agriculture-related education and training in a gender sensitive manner. - Assist smallholders and farmers' organizations to adopt new technologies, expand agricultural land and the use of inputs and introduce appropriate machinery and equipment to raise productivity. - Increase rice production through developing capacities to adopt systematic crop management, and new methodologies including wider use of New Rice for Africa (NERICA), aiming at doubling the rice production in African countries in ten years. - Strengthen regional networks for transboundary pest and animal disease control. - Increase investments in physical infrastructure, such as roads, ports and market facilities in order to reduce transport cost, improve the ratio of retail to farm gate prices, reduce the percentage of post-harvest losses, and increase the percentage of agricultural production that is sold. - Provide technical and financial assistance to farmers to move up the value-chain and meet agricultural product and export standards. - Expand provision of credit to smallholders, especially women, to facilitate their uptake of new technologies and inputs, and accelerate their integration into agri-business value-chains. - Support pilot activities to promote the participation of small scale farmers, associations and small traders in the tender processes. - Support reforms in land titling, ownership and use to increase smallholder decision making power over the use and disposition of land. - Promote development, rehabilitation and maintenance of water resources management infrastructure to contribute to the joint efforts aiming at expanding the irrigated area by 20% in five years. - Enhance water resources management capacity through better tillage methods and water harvesting and storage, introduction of new technologies and capacity building of local governments and farmers' organizations. - Provide finance for small-scale community-managed irrigation and water management schemes for local markets, and individual smallholder schemes for high-value markets. 2008 is midway to the 2015 target for achieving the MDGs. Accelerated progress in Africa is crucial as statistics indicate that many Sub-Saharan African countries will fall short of attaining the goals, and that problems such as high maternal mortality rates and the prevalence of HIV/AIDS remain serious. While economic development is necessary in order to reduce poverty, it is also essential that the fruits of the economic growth reach all members of society, including the most disadvantaged, and are not restricted to a privileged few. In order to promote the achievement of the MDGs in Africa, the TICAD process will focus on the notion of "human security," which aims at building societies in which people are protected from threats against their lives, livelihoods and dignity and are empowered to realize their full potential. In enhancing "human security," a special emphasis will be placed on bottom-up, comprehensive, multi-sectoral and participatory approaches that encourage collaboration among national and local governments, international organizations, civil society, and other actors. Paying due attention to the inter-relatedness of each of the MDGs, the TICAD process will proactively focus on the areas of health and education, where the delays in achieving the MDGs are most conspicuous, and will encourage community development, gender equality, and the active participation of civil society. Community Development Community development and empowerment are vital elements of enhanced human security, both in rural and urban areas. Gender perspective is indispensable as women play an important role in community development. Cultural consideration is also important to ensure sustainable community development. Furthermore, community based approach is indispensable for consolidation of peace during transitional phase. In the Declaration on Employment and Poverty Alleviation in Africa, members of AU have recognized the importance to address social development, poverty reduction and employment creation in a coherent and integrated manner, and committed themselves to empowering the poor and the vulnerable, particularly in the rural communities and the urban informal economy, the unemployed and the under-employed. The TICAD process will focus support on: Comprehensive "Glocal" (global and local) community development Community based approach building on functional hubs 1. Comprehensive "Glocal" (global and local) community development - Support a comprehensive community-driven development approach and build on experiences such as the African Village Initiative (AVI) and the African Millennium Village (AMV). - Provide technical assistance, marketing skills and micro-finance for decent job creation, especially for young people, and income generation by collaborating with co-operatives. - Expand the OVOP project. 2. Community based approach building on functional hubs - Provide a comprehensive package of services at schools and community learning centers, including water supply and sanitation, school meals, first aid and referral service, literacy, and life-skill education, in addition to basic education. - Encourage involvement of local people in the school management ("School for All") in order to enhance their access to education and learning outcomes, and to strengthen linkages with local economy including through home grown feeding programmes. - Support water resource management by local co-operatives to generate income for education, health and agriculture initiatives. - Improve health centers as the core of support and provide training for health/medical workers. - Improve human settlements by establishing community development committees to improve housing, sanitation, water supply and drainage facilities. Education To achieve Education for All (EFA) and the MDGs, African countries need to develop holistic education sector plans and allocate sufficient national budgetary resources to implement them and develop related capacities. The TICAD process will support not only these efforts but also promote education and human resource development that leads to growth and sustainable socio-economic development. In doing so, efforts to achieve gender parity in education and synergy with other sectors including health, water and sanitation, need to be pursued. "The Second Decade of Education for Africa" (2006~2015), adopted by the AU in November 2007, has identified gender and culture, educational management information systems, teacher development, education and training, tertiary education, technical and vocational education and training, curriculum, and teaching and learning materials, and quality management as priority areas for the sector. In this framework, African countries aim to develop functional national Educational Management Information Systems (EMIS), achieve full gender equality in primary and secondary education, and bridge the gender gap in participation in mathematics, science and technology at the tertiary level. The TICAD process in respect of the commitments and actions made by African countries, will focus on the African efforts as follows: 1. Basic education - expansion of access and quality 2. Post basic education and higher education/research 3. Multi-sectoral approach 4. Education management 1. Basic education - expansion of access to and quality - Support construction and rehabilitation of school buildings and related infrastructure. - Provide assistance to train and ratain primary and secondary school teachers and support the establishment and expansion of teacher training systems and organizations. -Promote capacity development of local education administration and community-based school management through "School for All" programme. - Promote knowledge/experience sharing within Africa and between Asia and Africa on such themes as culture and gender sensitive curricula, learning materials and training manuals. - Promote human resource development in support of productive sectors by expanding institutions for technical and vocational education and training. - Strengthen partnership among universities, colleges and research institutes through joint researches and the exchange of researchers and students to expand research and knowledge accumulation in science and technology. - Promote high-level inter-governmental dialogues to strengthen science and technology cooperation. - Establish child-friendly school environment through comprehensive packages of assistance including safe water and sanitation facilities with separate toilets for boys and girls, school feeding, or food for schooling (take-home ration) and first aid and referral services. - Enhance life-skill education, including on prevention of HIV/AIDS and improvement of hygiene behaviors. ï¼”. Education management - Support the efforts to better manage education including the collection and analysis of education-related information/data to understand and meet educational needs. Health Africa, particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, faces serious challenges such as the prevalence of infectious diseases like HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), malaria and polio, and the high infant mortality rate and maternal mortality ratio. In addition, the emerging threats of climate change and global food crisis will pose new challenges to achievement of a range of health goals, from control of infectious disease to alleviating the burden of malnutrition. These challenges constitute a serious constraint to social and economic development, and a comprehensive and multi-sectoral approach involving, inter alia, safe water and sanitation, nutrition, basic education, gender equality is required. It is against this background that the Meeting of AU Ministers of Health in April 2007 adopted the "Africa Health Strategy," to promote the strengthening of overall health systems in Africa. AU has laid out regional strategies on major diseases and health issues including "Abuja Declaration and Framework for Action for the Fight against HIV/AIDS, TB and Other Related Infectious Diseases," in which African countries targeted to allocate 15% of public budget to the health sector, "African Regional Nutrition Strategy," as well as "Maputo Plan of Action for the Operationalisation of the Continental Policy Framework for Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights," and "Strategic Framework for Reaching the Millennium Development Goal on Child Survival in Africa", and efforts are being made accordingly. The TICAD process, in respect of the commitments and actions made by African countries,will engage in: 1. Strengthening of health systems 2. Improvement of maternal, new-born and child health 3. Measures against infectious diseases 1. Strengthening health systems - Promote training and retention of health workers to contribute to the joint effort achieving the WHO goal of at least 2.3 health workers per 1,000 people in Africa. - Improve the provision of health services, including through expansion of health infrastructure and facilities. - Promote establishment of monitoring and evaluation of health systems to enable policy decisions based on precise health information. - Encourage and recognize medical research and exemplary medical service practices combating infectious diseases in Africa through the Hideyo Noguchi Africa Prize. - Support interventions focusing on reducing under-five mortality rate and maternal mortality ratio. - Promote continuum of care for women and children across the span of pre-pregnancy, pregnancy, child birth and childhood via high impact intervention such as provision of immunizations and micro-nutrients for children. - Support the international efforts to achieve universal access to reproductive health services. - Contribute to the international efforts to raise the proportion of birth attended by skilled birth attendant in Africa to 75% in five years, as targeted by WHO. - Support the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria (GFATM). - Strengthen central government institutions for HIV/AIDS and prioritize prevention of new infections. - Support efforts to achieve the target of reducing by 50 % TB prevalence and mortality rates by 2015 relative to 1990 levels, including through prevention, testing, and treatment activities under Direct Observation Treatment, Short-course (DOTS). - Promote effective implementation of anti-malaria activities by combining preventive measures including distribution of long lasting insecticide-treated bed nets, and awareness raising and provision of nursing care. - Support comprehensive efforts to eradicate polio from Africa, through surveillance and vaccination campaigns. - Make efforts to control or eliminate Neglected Tropical Diseases through awareness raising, treatment and access to safe water and sanitation. Recently Africa has made great progress in ending conflicts and promoting rehabilitation, including efforts on building the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) and promoting African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM). This is an unparalleled opportunity for Africa to consolidate peace and strengthen good governance. Conflicts are indeed significant impediment to human security and development. Consolidation of peace encompasses different phases and a variety of actions, including preventing conflicts, mediating between parties and negotiating peace agreements, restoring and maintaining security and public order, providing humanitarian assistance, supporting rehabilitation, promoting social and economic development, and improving democratic governance. These processes require seamless and continuous support to make them irreversible. Conflicts easily spread in Africa where many countries share borders, and therefore, regional aspects should be taken into consideration in consolidating peace. Efforts in conflict prevention as well as risk management to minimize damages upon the outbreak of conflicts are also indispensable. Community-based and participatory approaches with an emphasis on enhancing capacities of local population help promote the ownership of African countries. The most vulnerable groups in society such as women, children, the elderly, and the persons with disabilities also need particular protection and support. At the same time, importance of strengthening coordination as well as sharing information and good practices among internal and external actors engaging in peacebuilding activities should be emphasized. The TICAD process will specifically focus on: 1. Conflict prevention 2. Humanitarian and reconstruction assistance 3. Restoration and maintenance of security 4. Promotion of good governance Contribute to developing the effective operation of Africa's early warning systems including the planned Continental Early Warning System under the APSA. Support early recovery and quick-impact interventions, including assistance to basic social infrastructure and services and to the return and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced persons. Support livelihoods through vocational training, job creation, and start-up assistance to small business and agriculture. Assist efforts to protect the most vulnerable groups in society, in particular, through improved access to education to reintegrate in society children and adolescents affected by armed conflict. Support efforts on disarmament of armed groups, de-mining, destruction of unexploded ordnance, stockpile management and collection of small arms which will contribute to both the restoration of safety, security and good governance and humanitarian and reconstruction efforts. Further promote mine action including mine risk education, victim assistance and de-mining projects in collaboration with NGOs and the private sector. - Encourage private sector contribution in peacebuilding efforts. - Enhance capacity of military, police, and civilians in African countries engaging in peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding. - Strengthen PKO centers in Africa and encourage exchange of experience between Asia and Africa. - Support the African Stand-by Force under the APSA. - Assist efforts in strengthening cross-border control and regional cooperation to regulate the flow of small arms, smuggling and human trafficking. - Support the implementation of the Programs of Action of the APRM Country Review Report. - Provide assistance to build capacity in legal systems, financial control and the public service. - Strengthen economic governance through the NEPAD-OECD Africa Investment Initiative. Addressing climate change is an urgent challenge for Africa, given its vulnerability to adverse impacts such as more frequent and intense droughts and floods. In order to realize a "global sustainable society", it is necessary for all countries, including those in Africa, to collaborate and develop an effective framework beyond 2012 on climate change, and take action toward the goal of reducing global greenhouse gas emissions. The TICAD process will promote policy dialogue in the field of climate change, support developing of an effective framework, and strengthen assistance to African countries that make efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and achieve economic growth in a compatible manner, in the areas of policy planning, mitigation, access to clean energy, and adaptation to climate change. With regard to adaptation, the TICAD process will promote effective management of water resources, as well as efforts in related areas such as health, agriculture and food security. In this context, it is important to promote a participatory approach involving a wide range of stakeholders including central governments, international organizations, local governments and communities, private sector and civil society organizations. Furthermore, coordinated efforts are required under various initiatives including Japan's "Cool Earth Partnership" with Africa. In Africa, efforts are underway at the national level as well as within international and regional frameworks developed by the United Nations, AU/NEPAD and RECs. The TICAD process will strengthen efforts, in the following areas: Mitigation Adaptation Water and Sanitation Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) 1. Mitigation (1) Promotion of mitigation measures Support active participation by African countries in developing an effective framework beyond 2012 on climate change, in which all countries take actions and work together, based on the Bali Action Plan. - Promote the formulation of projects and awareness-raising campaigns for further implementation of the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), and support the institutional and capacity development of Designated National Agencies in each country. Support the development of and access to basic information on forest resources and land use to encourage sustainable forest management and promote conservation and reforestation projects in response to Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (REDD). (2) Promotion of the use of clean energy and improvement of energy access Support the formulation of policies and plans to expand usage of renewable energy, and assist renewable energy programmes including facilitating transfer of management and maintenance technology. Support the development and management of electricity power grid to promote improved access to and efficient use of electricity, and promote better access of the poor to affordable and efficient energy through comprehensive rural development programmes. 2. Adaptation Promote technical assistance such as establishing and updating the Global Map data for the entire Africa, describing the status of its environment in five years. (1) Measures against natural disasters - Support the formulation of natural disaster prevention and emergency activity plans based on the assessment of risk and vulnerability of each region to disasters including droughts and floods. - Assist efforts to establish early warning systems and strengthen capacity at the community level to cope with natural disasters. (2) Measures to combat desertification - Assist the development and dissemination of new and existing technologies for utilization of water resources, soil conservation and reforestation including utilization of drought-resistant plants. - Assist efforts to raise awareness to combat desertification at the community level and introduce appropriate measures to reduce overgrazing, over-cultivation and deforestation. 3. Water and Sanitation (1) Effective water resources management Assist formulation of water cycle management plans based on the assessment of potential water resources and specific local conditions and the improvement of administrative capacity to implement these plans. Promote the transfer of technology and expertise on water resources management with due consideration to the specific situation of each region. (2) Access to safe water and sanitation facilities - Promote the development of water and sanitation facilities with affordable technologies. - Support capacity building of managers and users of water and sanitation system and promote awareness raising campaigns to improve hygiene practices including hand washing. 4. Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) - Promote ESD through integration of ESD into policies and practices to realize a more sustainable society. The TICAD process has consistently embraced the concept of "Ownership" and "Partnership" and the scope of the "Partnership" with Africa has expanded steadily. Asia-Africa cooperation is one of the key elements of the TICAD process that progresses through mutual learning and sharing of best practices and technology between the two regions. African countries are in the process of integration, making strides towards the deepening of an intra-African partnership within the framework of the Abuja Treaty. They have also made significant achievements as embodied in the action plan of the NEPAD, while the AU has made its own strides in collaboration with RECs as major pillars of continental integration. Broad-based partnership and a participatory approach involving private companies, NGOs and academia is crucial, and African countries are making efforts to engage as many actors as possible in the process of development. Better coordination among these partners under the African ownership is also of vital importance for these efforts to lead to maximum outcome and impacts on the ground. 1. Promote South-South Cooperation, in particular Asia-Africa Cooperation 2. Deepen Regional Integration 3. Broaden Partnership - Transfer efficiently skill and technique, share knowledge and experience, and promote joint research within Africa and between Asia and Africa. - Promote the exchange of people, trade and investment and services to strengthen the ties between Asia and Africa. - Encourage the full use of existing institutions mandated in the field of South-South cooperation, such as the Asian Productivity Organization (APO) and National Productivity Organizations in both Asia and Africa. - Encourage triangular cooperation, both in the context of intra-Africa and Asia-Africa cooperation, recognizing the important role of the AU/NEPAD and RECs. - Promote PPP, in recognition of the important role of private sector in the African development. - Enhance coordination with the civil society and encourage cooperation with the academia. APPENDIX Boosting Economic Growth-- Infrastructure Proposed Measures by Japan/Implementing Partners Implementing Partners Potential Resources, Possible Contributions GoJ/JICA GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥37 billion on infrastructurea GoJ: provision of loans to projects under this sectorb 1. Transport â— Development/expansion of national and regional transport corridors GoJ/JICA/WBG/ AfDB/EC/ICA WBG: scale up co-financing of national and regional transport corridors, estimated financing of ï¼„600 million EC: Euro 5,6 billion in 10th EDF (all infrastructure including energy and ca. Euro 300 million contribution to EU-Africa infrastructure Trust Fund) for next five years AfDB: For the period 2008 to 2012, $ 5 billion for national transport and regional transport corridors GoJ/WBG/AfDB/ICA: Use the Infrastructure Consortium for Africa (ICA) as a platform to promote regional infrastructure development â— Promote facilitation of cross-border procedures GoJ (MOFA/MOF)/ GoUK(DFID)/ JICA GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: expansion of the One Stop Boarder Post (OSBP) project to 14 points GoUK(DFID): Support OSBP in the framework of the Regional Trade Facilitation Programme at a border post in Southern African region GoJ (MOF): hold seminars/training and dispatch experts in the field of customs to support OSBP projects in collaboration with WCO 2. Power â— Support development/expansion of power projects and transmission and distribution networks GoJ/WBG/AfDB/Africa-EU Partnership on Energy/ICA/ JICA WBG: (i) double annual lending to $ 2 billion and aim to mobilize another $ 2 billion in co-financing, (ii) support to Southern Africa Power Pool, West Africa Power Pool, Central Africa Power Pool and East Africa Power Pool in the order of $ 500 million per year, (iii) IFC to finance 15 + Public Private Partnership (PPP) in power sector FY 2008-2011, estimated financing of ï¼„400-500 million AfDB: From 2008 to 2012, $ 5.5 billion for power generation, transmission and distribution EU: Support for African states next 5 years ca. Euro 300 million Boosting Economic Growth -- Trade, Investment and Tourism 1. Promote and Expand Trade â— Promote "One Village One Product" initiative, based on the "Development Initiative for Trade", by establishing a new comprehensive framework to improve African products' market access to Japan by (i) providing consultation on African products, (ii) dispatching experts from Japan to Africa, (iii) inviting African people for marketing research, (iv) holding business seminars, (v) supporting African companies participation in trade fairs in Japan, (vi) implementing "Development and Import Schemes" to assist Japanese companies in commercializing African products GoJ(METI)/JETRO GoJ(METI)/JETRO: expand JETRO budget on the "One Village One Product" (OVOP) initiative â— Promote trade of African countries, expansion of Aid for Trade programs, including by leveraging knowledge of Asian countries and provision of technical assistance European Commission and EU Member Contries/GoJ/ JICA/WBG/Asian countries and other partners EU: Euro 2 billion per year out of which 50% for African, Carribean and Pacific (ACP) countries in the framework of EU Aid for Trade GoJ(MOFA): provide financial assistance to trade-related technical projects in cooperation with international organizations JICA: decuple the quota of African trainees in the field of trade WBG: promote South-South cooperation and knowledge sharing between Asia-Africa countries and provided technical assistance for trade policy capacity building â— Support capacity building in trading practice and trade finance â— Provision of seminars and training courses. Expand trade insurance and support membership of African countries in the Africa Trade Insurance Agency WBG WBG: (i) Expand IFC trade financing program in Africa to $ 1 billion per annum, (ii) Support membership of additional African countries in African Trade Insurance Agency â— Support research and capacity building in gender and remittances: promote effective utilization of remittances for local development UNDP INSTRAW UNDP: support gender responsive local development through UNDP/Japan WID Fund â— Support the development of small and medium enterprises and local industries GoJ(MOFA)/ UNIDO GoJ(MOFA)/UNIDO: $ 5 million in 2008 for enterpreneurship training 2. Attract Foreign Investment â— Support improvements in legal system and investment climate (i) Establish or promote an information and consultation platform on the business climate in Africa, (ii) Contribute to achieve self-reliance development of competitive local industries and improve economic and corporate governance GoJ(MOFA)/ JETRO/JBIC/ UNCTAD/WBG GoJ/JETRO: Offer regularly information on the business climate of Africa for Japanese private companies GoJ/JBIC/UNCTAD: provide policy recommendations to African countries over the next 5 years GoJ: Considering providing support for the NEPAD-OECD Africa Investment Initiative. ã€GoJ provided Euro 600 thousand for the NEPAD-OECD Africa Investment Initiative FY 2005-2007ã€‘ and promote African efforts in investment policy reform, using multilaterally-endorsed instruments such as the OECD Policy Framework for Investment WBG: Scale up support to presidential investor councils in African countries, build on African enterprise study to promote African private sector, expand Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) programs, promote Asia-Africa technical assistance and learning on role of FDI in fostering African enterprises â— Utilize other official flows (OOF) to encourage foreign investment to Africa â— Utilize actively investment credit, trade and investment insurance JBIC/NEXI/WBG JBIC: Set up the JBIC Facility for African Investment (FAI) to offer equity investment, guarantees, and local currency financing. JBIC will provide financial support of ï¼„2.5 billion over 5 years JBIC/IFC: Enhance cooperation based on the Memorandam of Understandings (MOU), especially to strengthen the effectiveness of FAI NEXI: Enter into the memorandam of understanding on cooperation with the Islamic Corporation for the Insurance of Investment and Export Credit (ICIEC), and promote further trade and investment insurance â— Start up bilateral consultation frameworks including bilateral legal framework such as Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) for improving business climate GoJ (MOFA/METI) GoJ (MOFA/METI): Consider BIT negotiations with African countries â— Enhance Public-Private Partnership to effectively coordinate between official flows and private capitals, to expand good practices of Corporate Social Responsibilities in linking up with official flows GoJ GoJ: Establish a mechanism enabling ODA to complement private sector's activities contributing to African development GoJ: Dispatch of Public-Private Missions to African countries â— Promote European companies' business with Africa through EU Africa Business Forum European Commission and EU Member Countries EC: Support to macroeconomic framework and regulatory environment for enterprise development (EU Private Sector Enabling Environment Facility); EC-ACP BizClim Euro 20million FY 2008-13 â—Promote Japanese companies' business with Africa through Growing Sustainable Business (GSB) programme GoJ (MOFA)/UNDP GoJ (MOFA): Support GSB programme through UNDP Partnership Fund UNDP: to consolidate its attempt to engage Japanese companies in GSB in Africa 3. Private Sector Development â— Support African countries in policy making on industrial development strategies and provide technical support for improving industrial development GoJ (MOFA)/ JICA/ AOTS/WBG GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: Expand the quota of private sector development related training programs for 1500 Africans to improve the productivity of promising industries, the competitiveness of products both in quality and price and the business skills of employees AOTS: promote training activities for Africa to facilitate trade and investment by transferring manufacturing and marketing skills from Japan WBG: (i) Expand knowledge transfer between Asia and Africa on business climate including Export Processing Zones (EPZs), labor/skills training, trade logistics, transport, management of ports, etc., (ii) Engage in lending, technical assistance, and advisory work on investment climate reforms and cooperation in 40 Sub-Saharan African countries â— Support African countries to develop intellectual property related systems and human resources in order to achieve self-sustained development of competitive local industries as well as improve the investment climate GoJ (METI)/WIPO GoJ (METI)/WIPO: Offer ï¼„ 1 million to the WIPO Fund-in-Trust of Japan for capacity building for all the countries in Africa, primarily focusing on human resource development â— Support financial assistance to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) activities and local industries GoJ (MOFA)/AfDB GoJ: Enhance contribution to EPSA/AfDB by providing additional loan ($300 million in 2008) â— Strengthen the financial sector, including developing local bond market and local currency financing mechanisms, facilitate sharing of experiences among countries, provision of technical assistance. Expand collaboration on Making Finance Work for Africa WBG/other partners WBG:(i) Launch partnership for making finance work in Africa (ii) Hold regional workshops to share experience of financial sector innovation and best practices â— Provide technical cooperation and financial assistance for promoting energy and mineral resources industries â— Provide cooperation including the field of remote-sensing for mineral resources in Southern African Development Community (SADC) GoJ(METI)/ JOGMEC GoJ (METI)/JOGMEC : provide technical assistance â— Gem Cutting Training Project for a potential African country TICA RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 60,000 4. Tourism Promotion â— Support tourism of non-African countries operators in developing familiarization measures of Africa and improving their knowledge of Africa and what it has to offer WBG: continue and expand tourism projects in at least 5 countries, focusing on policy and business environment strengthening, tourism linkages, infrastructure and private sector development â— Engage in long-term tourism promotion by utilizing events such as travel fairs, taking account of the 2010 World Cup Soccer Tournament in South Africa GoJ (MLIT/MOFA) GoJ (MLIT/MOFA): promote African sector of the annual travel fair â— Implement projects on capacity building including training programmes and dispatch of experts in collaboration with regional tourism training centres in Africa JICA: decouple the quota of trainees in the field of tourism Boosting Economic Growth-- Agriculture Agriculture GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥26 billion on agriculturea 1. Agriculture and response to high food prices (short term) â— Immediate interventions to address rising food prices: rapidly increased supply response for food staples; assistance to consumers; targeted interventions to address hunger GoJ/WBG and other partners GoJ: Provide emergency food aid worth of ï¼„100 million between May and July 2008 (mainly targeting Africa) , and other measures to be identified WBG: Launch Global Food Response Facility and implement short-term targeted measures to meet emergency needs in individual countries â— Short-term response to emergency food security through humanitarian aid, safety net and support to livelihoods EC EC: Euro 300 million 2. Agriculture and response to high food prices (medium-long term) â— Partners support Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) strategic planning and programming at national and regional levels, as well as scaled up interventions in land and water management, infrastructure (e.g. irrigation) and market development, and expansion and uptake of agricultural technology â— Implementation of CAADP to increase food supply over medium-long term â— Strengthened community based farmers organizations and water users associations, and expanded agricultural research and technology, for example through support for community-based initiatives and regional agricultural research programs GoJ (MOFA)/WBG GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: (i) grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥26 billion mentioned above, (ii) development and rehabilitation of irrigation facilities, including small-scale irrigation schemes (100,000 ha) WBG: Estimated lending of $ 4 billion for agricultural growth over 5 years. IFC target of $ 400 million by 2010 for support to agribusiness up to $ 1 billion in co-financing in five pilot countries GoJ/WBG: (i) support the establishment of CAADP trust fund (Japan's contribution - $ 2 million), (ii) scale-up co-financing especially in irrigation, (iii) set up a special grant window of $ 20 million in the JSDF for rural development including capacity building for land and water management â— Doubling rice production in African countries within 10 years GoJ (MOFA)/ JICA/AGRA GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥26 billion mentioned above AGRA: Support for rice crop development, improvement of soils, the strengthening of rice markets, and the development of water management systems. Total support from AGRA is expected to be in the amount of approximately $100 million over the coming five to seven years â— Improve rice varieties of higher productivity and dessminate them through farmers organizations GoJ/UNDP GoJ:provide funds to NERICA programme through UNDP Partnership Fund â— Support to agriculture and rural development under 10th EDF and thematic program EC: Euro 2 billion (FY 2008-2013) â— Improve NERICA, develop and introduce drought resistant crops and improve soil fertility GoJ(MAFF)/ JIRCAS GoJ (MAFF)/JIRCAS: Contribute to the productivity enhancement of agricultural products (ï¿¥88 million FY 2008) â— Enhance capacity to increase food production and agricultural productivity GoJ (MOFA)/JICA GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: capacity building for 50,000 agricultural leaders â— Enhance development of human resources for agricultural research GoJ(MAFF) GoJ (MAFF): improve the research capabilities for researcher (ca. 20 researchers FY 2008) â— Improve technical method for land and water development / management to increase agricultural production especially in rice GoJ (MAFF): (i) study implementationï¼ˆï¿¥ 210 million FY 2008) (ii) provide budget to IWMI Trust Fund ï¼ˆï¿¥ 11 million on FY 2008ï¼‰ â— Study on the technologies for sustainable food production GoJ (MAFF): Examination for local cultivation technique, for possibility of innovation and prevalence for NERICA crop (ï¿¥17 million on FY2008) â— Promoting Rice Cultivation in Africa through Small Scale Irrigation (small scale infrastructure by farmers, food for work, perticipatory approach and land reclamation at community level) GoJ (MAFF): Provide budget to WFP Trust Fund FY 2006-2011 (ï¿¥213 million on FY 2008) â— Promotion of organizing farmers through learning agricultural cooperative activity in Japan GoJ (MAFF): Hold training courses for promotion of organizing farmers (ï¿¥22 million on FY 2008) â— Technical cooperation between Thailand and a potential African country on Improvement and Strengthening of the Technical Harvesting Capacity and Fish Processing at the Artisanal Fisheries RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 52,000 â— Technical cooperation between Thailand and a potential African country on Freshwater Aquaculture and Coastal Aquaculture RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 20,000 â— Technical cooperation on the Monitoring and Management of a potential country's Fish and Fisheries Products RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 15,000 â— Capacity development in Increasing Productivity of Rice, Fisheries and Horticulture Crop to a potential African country RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 100,000 â— Capacity development in agricultural research to a potential African country RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 17,000 MDGs-- Community Development, Education and Health 1. Community Development â— Promote the "One Village One Product (OVOP)" Movement to achieve poverty reduction through community development GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: expansion of OVOP projects to 12 countries â— Support African Millennium Village (AMV) GoJ (MOFA)/ UNDP GoJ (MOFA)/UNDP: expansion of AMV projects to 12 countries in total â— Promote enlarged access to energy services for productive uses at rural communities through the scaling-up of multifunctional platform programmes GoJ/UNDP/AfDB GoJ/AfDB: provide funds to multifunctional platform programmes UNDP: provide technical support to multifunctional platform programmes (currently supporting the development of investment programmes for an enlarged access to energy services for productive uses) â—Support women's entrepreneurship initiatives GoJ (MOFA): support pilot initiative through UNDP/Japan WID Fund UNDP: carry out pilot initiative â— Extend technical cooperation on generating income for villagers through training programme on "One Tambol One Product (OTOP)", Micro-finance and SME development â— Technical cooperation project on sustainable development between a potential African country and the Kingdom of Thailand (Phase II) RTE RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 130,000 â— Exchange best practices under the concept of Sufficiency Economy and New Agricultural Theory by creating Model Village in a potential African country RTG: planning FY 2009-2012 (ca. ï¼„ 160,000) to implement the project 2. Education GOJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥44 billion on educationb Basic Education-expansion of access and quality â— Provide learning opportunities for children GoJ (MOFA)/JICA/EC GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: Construct 1,000 primary and secondary schools containing roughly 5,500 classrooms for about 400,000 children EC:Euro 359,5 million under 10th EDF not including budget support part of which contributes to education outcomes for ACP states next 5 years â— Support to Fast Track Initiative Catalytic Fund EC/WBG/EFI/FTI Donors including EC WBG: expansion of primary education opportunities through the Education for All Fast Track Initiative or EFA FTI (a global partnership of over 30 bilateral agencies working with developing countries to advance progress toward the goal of universal completion of quality primary education by 2015). Pledges to FTI's main trust fund (the Catalytic Fund) have reached $1.4 billion to date by contribution from 16 donor countries, of which approximately $ 950 million have been allocated to the 18 African countries whose education sector plans have been endorsed. FTI is expected in time to help all 33 low-income African countries present credible plans for endorsement and subsequent grant funding by the EFA FTI donor partners EC: countribute Euro 22 million to the Catalytic Fund next 5 years â— Construct and rehabilitate school facilities and provide teacher training for child-friendly schools UNICEF/Nelson Mandera Foundation/the Hamburg Society UNICEF/Nelson Mandera Foundation/the Hamburg Society: Construct/rehabilitate school facilities and provide teacher training for at least 1,000 child-friendly schools in rural and poor urban communities of countries in Eastern and Southern Africa â— Expand access to quality primary education through school fee abolition policies and other measures to address household cost barriers to education UNICEF/ UNESCO-IIEP/UNDP/WBG/ADEA UNICEF/UNESCO-IIEP/WBG: In terms of research, feasibility studies and capacity development in cooperation with research and training institutions, contribute to efforts of school fee abolition policies and other measures to address household cost barriers to education in at least 10 countries â— Empower literacy programms and learners to contribute to peaceful and sustainable community delvelopment and for better management of education and health UNESCO UNESCO: Implement Literacy Initiative for Empowerment (ILFE) in 22 countries â— Support countries to adopt basic education for a minimum period of 9-10 years with appropriate curriculum framework UNESCO: Assist 11 countries in adopting basic education for a minimum period of 9-10 years with appropriate curriculum framework through Basic Education in Africa Program (BEAP) â— Provide education for community transformation through design, construction and staff training for primary and/or junior secondary schools to transform the quality of life for border communities in countries links by conflict UNICEF/ UN country teams (UNCTs)/Plan International and others UNICEF/UNCTs/Plan International and others: Design, Construct school facilities and provide staff training for at least 100 primary and/or junior secondary schools to transform quality of life for border communities in countries linked by conflict (Initiative on "Learning Along Borders for Living Across Boundaries" )by UNICEF program on "Education in Emergencies & Post Crisis Transition Countries" â— Expand school-based management of schools with community participation and extend programs to additional countries. Illustrative activities include measures to improve and disseminate tools for community management of schools, train school committees GoJ(MOFA/MOF)/JICA/WBG GoJ(MOFA/MOF)/JICA: Expand projects to improve educational environment based on "School for All" models for 10,000 schools in West Africa. Also, set up a special grant window of $ 10 million in the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) to further promote community participatory school management model GOJ/JICA/WBG: Provide technical input necessary for WBG to organize a stock-taking conference to foster South-South exchange and cross-country learning â— Expand teacher training in math and science through SMASE (Strengthening of Mathematics and Science in Education) by extending program to additional countries and encouraging sharing of experiences GoJ (MOFA)/JICA/ WBG GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: (i) Expand SMASE projects for 100,000 teachers; (ii) Promote experience-sharing among SMASE-WECSA (Western, Eastern, Central and Southern Africa) member countries; (iii) Provide teacher training in Math and Science Education for all SMASE-WECSA member countries GoJ/JICA/WBG: WBG coordinate conference on Africa-Asia Exchange on Mathematics and Science Education (AAE/MSE) with technical support on teacher training by JICA â— Increase financial and technical assistance support to the private education sector IFC: Provide ï¼„50-100 million over next 5 years with partners to support expansion of privately-provided education Post-basic education and higher education/research â— Enhancement of post-basic education (higher education, technical and vocational education and training (TVET), human resource development for promotion of science and technology and industry. Encourage sharing of country experiences and expansion of programs GoJ (MOFA)/ JICA/ WBG/EC GOJ (MOFA)/JICA : Promote expanding experience of JICA project WBG/JICA: WBG evaluates vocational training experience and updates regional analytical work on TVET and dissemination conference with technical support and information sharing from JICA EC: Nyerere programme (Euro 60 million) to promote intra-African higher education exchanges and ERASMUS MUNDUS programme(Euro 30 million) for access to EU Higher Education next 5 years â— Provide innovative vocational education in selected fields for talented unemployed youth who missed out education due to conflict UNICEF/UN country teams (UNCTs)/WFP/ Plan International and others UNICEF/UNCTs/WFP/Plan International and others: Design, Costruct school facilities and provide staff training for at least 20 high quality "Talent Academies" in countries linked by conflict (Initiative on "Talent Academies" )by UNICEF program on "Education in Emergencies & Post Crisis Transition Countries â— Strengthen partnership among universities, colleges and research institutions through joint researches and the exchange of researchers and information/knowledge sharing UNESCO/JICA/ UNU/Hiroshima University UNESCO/JICA/UNU/Hiroshima University: Africa-Asia University Dialogue for Basic Education Development Project to promote research and reflection through dialogues and collaboration between universities in 12 African and 6 Asian countries â— Hold policy dialogues, including a meeting of Japanese and African ministers in charge of science and technology, for promoting science and technology cooperation between Japan and Africa GoJ (CAO) GoJ (CAO) : Hold a Japan-Africa science and technology ministers' meeting and some forms of dialogue with African countries â— Extend cooperation in the field of education by means of uni-lateral, bi-lateral and third party's financial support GoV (Ministry of Education) GoV: (i) receive 5 African students in university in the field of agriculture, (ii) dispatch 3 educational experts to help write textbooks â— Extend technical cooperation on education by providing scholarships in Master degree level to two potential African countries for 5 person each RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 150,000 â— Expand the number of Jananese government scholarship students from Africa GoJ (MEXT/ MOFA) GoJ (MEXT/MOFA): Expand the quata of Japanese government scholarship, to accept more than 500 students from Africa in next 5 years â— Based on the needs of developing countries, promotion of international joint research targeting global issues such as environment and energy, national disaster prevention and infectious disease control and envisaging future utilization of research outcomes GoJ (MOFA/MEXT)/ JICA/JST GoJ/JICA/JST: JICA and JST budget â— Dispatch the Japanese researchers to universities/research institutions in African countries and implement joint research with young local researchers in order to resolve the global issues facing African countries GoJ (MOFA/ MEXT)/ JICA/JST GoJ (MOFA/MEXT)/JICA/JST: JICA and JST budget Multi-sectoral approach â— Enhance life-skill education, including on prevention of HIV/AIDS and improvement of hygiene behaviors UNESCO: Assist 30 countries which are participating in the Gloval Initiative on HIV/AIDS and Education (EDUAIDS) with a focus in Eastern and Southern Africa in implementing activities related to the development of comprehensive national responses â— Provide School feeding or food for schooling to girls WFP WFP: Provide school meals to 23 million children in 45 African countries who attend School hungry by 2013 in cooperation with NGOs and national governments Others â— Enhance public-private partnership to effectively coordinate between ODA and private resources and foster private contribution to education UNESCO/World Economic Forum (WEF) UNESCO/WEF: Promote the Partnership for Education initiative to foster private sector contributions to educations through Multi-stakeholder Partnership 3. Health GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥43 billion on healtha â— Improve the provision of health services, including through expansion of health infrastructure and facilities â— Enhance health management and monitoring of health services, with a special focus on MDGs 1,4,5 and 6 GoJ (MOFA)/WBG/EC/GoV GoJ (MOFA): improvement of 1,000 hospitals and health centers WBG: Expand programs for maternal and child health, malaria, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, and strengthening health systems. Specific targets to be identified. WB current funding levels of $ 648 million GoJ/WBG: (i) support establishment of a new multi donor trust fund for malnutrition (Japan's contribution - $ 2 million) and (ii) set up a special grant window of $ 20 million in the JSDF(Japan Social Development Fund) to enhance health management and monitoring of health services EC: Euro 493.1 million direct support for health in African countries under the European Development Fund next 5 years GoV: Extend the stay and dispatch 100 new experts and 30 experts to Africa each year (2007-2010) â— Support the provision of integrated, community-based approaches to delivering a package of high impact, low cost, health and nutrition interventions for MDGs 1,4,5 and 6 UNICEF UNICEF: Implement interventions such as vitamin A supplementation, de-worming, nutrition screening, Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS), Zinc supplementation and childhood immunizations in 47 African countries â— Support training and retention of health and medical workers, including Skilled Birth Attendants GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: training of 100,000 health and medical workers â— Promote community health care in Africa The Japan Medical Association as a member of the World Medical Assciation JMA: i) Make efforts to promote cooperation with the African region based on organizations such as the African Medical Association consisting of 25 member countries, ii) Attempt to improve the gynecological field in Senegal by a Japanese Takemi fellow from the Takemi Program at the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston â— Improvement of child health GoJ (MOFA)/ UNICEF and other health related organizations GoJ (MOFA)/UNICEF and other health related organizations: save the lives of 400,000 children â— Scale up results based financing for health, and buy-down approach for IBRD loans in partnership with private foundations. Increase support to private sector provision of health care and to government departments responsible for regulating private health care providers WBG/EC WBG: Buy-down projects in an additional 8 countries EC: Result-based financing is provided through Euro3,441,3 million in general budget support for African countries next 5 years which includes health-related indicators â— Support research and policy dialogue on HIV/AIDS and care GoJ (MOFA)/UNDP/EC GoJ:support pilot initiative through UNDP Partnership Fund UNDP: Pilot initiative underway EC: Estimated EC/EU support for the European& Developing countries Clinical Trials Partnership (EDCTP), which focus on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and malaria amounts to Euro500 million for 2008-2013 â— Strengthen control and elimination of Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTD), through greater access to rapid impact interventions and opitimal use of resources through integrated vector management GoJ (MHLW/MOFA)/ JICA GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥43 billion mentioned abovea GoJ(MHLW): planning FY 2009 to increase/provide budget to WHO to strengthen control and elimination of NTD in Africa â— Scale up efforts to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria GoJ (MOFA): pledge and disburse financial contribution of $ 560 million to the Global Fund EC: Pledged support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria for 2008-2010 of a total of Euro 300 millionb a Not including GoJ (MHLW) contribution to UNAIDS â— Promote measures against infectious diseases - Prevent the spread of HIV through education UNESCO: Assist 30 countries which are participating in the UNAIDS Global Initiative on Education and HIV & AIDS (EDUCAIDS) with a focus in Eastern and Southern Africa in implementing activities related to the development of comprehensive national responses â— Encourage and recognize medical research and exemplary medical service practices combating infectious diseases and strengthening health systems in Africa through the Hideyo Noguchi Africa Prize GoJ (CAO) : planning FY 2009 and FY 2011 to hold symposiums in cooperation with WHO â— Further pursue the 'Program of Founding Research Centers for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases' commenced in 2005 and strengthen the network between domestic and overseas research centers in countries at high risk of emerging and reemerging infectious diseases to minimize the potential threats to lives caused by these diseases GoJ (MEXT) GoJ (MEXT): (i) create research system in Japan involving Japanese universities and research institutions with high research, potentials on emerging and reemerging infections, (ii) conduct collaborative research with researchers at some overseas collaboration centers in Africa, (iii) strengthen the network between Japanese and overseas research centers for active joint research, (iv) develop human resource through conducting joint research â— Send Japanese researchers to African universities and research institutions and promote joint research GoJ (MEXT/ MOFA)/JICA/JST GoJ (MEXT and MOFA)/JICA/JST:JICA and JST budget â— Transfer technology and know-how in low-cost anti-Malaria drug production in a potential African country RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 85,000 â— Support public health system and mobile medical team in rural areas of a potential African country RTG: for the year 2009, ca. $ 16,000 â— Support for private provision of health care WBG: support private sector provision of health care through IFC initiatives. IFC target is $ 1 billion investment and Technical Assistane (TA) funds over the next 5 years, 40% from IFC, remainder from other partners, including local banks in Africa, development financial institutions (DFIs), foundations, and the private sector Consolidation of Peace and Good Governance â— Provide support for addressing humanitarian crises and consolidating peace GoJ/Various international organizations and UN organs/WBG GoJ: continue to duly assist African countries ($ 763.4 million (FY 2003-2007)) in addressing humanitarian crises and consolidating peace UNV: deployment of UNV volunteers and UNV support for national capacity in crisis management and consolidation of peace (UNV: $ 3.2 million) WBG: scale up assistance for transition from war to peace and post-conflict recovery and reconstruction, including support for demobilization and reintegration, rehabilitation of infrastructure, health and education facilities, and assistance to small scale enterprises and agriculture to promote economic expansion â— Support African Peace Facility EC: Provide Euro 600 million under the 10th EDF for African Peace Facility next 5 years â— Support PKO centers in Africa GoJ/UNDP/ UNESCO GoJ: provided $ 15.5 million to five PKO centers in Africa under its Peacekeeping Support Program (projects are now underway) and will support the sharing of experiences between Asia and Africa GoJ: provided $ 1.5 million to enhance the capacity of non-governmental organizations engaging in peacebuilding (project is now underway) 2. Good Governance â— Strengthen economic and corporate governance of African countries through the NEPAD-OECD Africa Investment Initiative GoJ/NEPAD-OECD GoJ: consider providing support for the NEPAD-OECD Africa Investment Initiative. ã€GoJ provided Euro 600 thousand for the NEPAD-OECD Africa Investment Initiative FY 2005-2007ã€‘ â— Support the implementaion of the Program of Action of APRM Country Review Report GoJ: launch an initial project which supports the implementation of the Program of Action of APRM Country Review Report through the UNDP Partnership Fund â— Support Good Governance Incentive tranche of the 10th EDF EC: Euro 2.7 billion under the 10th EDF for ACP states next 5 years Addressing Environment/Climate Change Issues â— Support active participation by African countries in the UNFCCC process to formulate an effective post-2012 framework, in which all major emitting countries take actions and work together, based on the Bali Action Plan GoJ/EU GoJ: Support by "Cool Earth Partnership"d EU: "Global Climate Change Alliance"e â— Support development and use of clean energy, including solar energy, through sector strategy and policy formulation and investment in renewable energy GoJ/WBG WBG: to co-finance key regional hydropower projects IFC: $ 4-5 million investment in clean energy developed under the Africa off-grid lighting programme and joint facilities for sustainable energy investments with up to $ 100 million on IFC's own account â— Support investments in sustainable land and forest management and identification of emission reductions and carbon finance opportunities from REDD(Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries) WB: help access to Forest Carbon Partnership Facility and Climate Investment Funds â— Support the development of and access to basic information on forest resources to encourage sustainable forest management GoJ(MEXT): Provide ALOS(Advanced Land Observing Satellite)/PALSAR data of Africa that can be used for forest management â— Conserve and rehablitate forests surrounding refugee camps suffering from deforestation GoJ (MAFF) GoJ (MAFF): (i) formulate a technical manual for conservation and rehabilitation of forests for three African countries (FY 2008), (ii) project duration (FY 2006-2010) â— Support implementation of projects to promote sustainable forest management in Africa GoJ (MOFA)/ITTO GoJ (MOFA): Provide financial assistance for the implementation of ITTO projects in the field of sustainable forest management in Africa â— Support the provision of affordable and clean energy for lighting African Human Settlements UN-HABITAT UN-HABITAT: support the project through UN-HABITAT Water and Sanitation Trust Fund ($ 1 million) â— Support the promotion of biofuel production compatible with food security GoJ(MAFF): Examine the possibility of biofuel production compatible with food security in Africa (ï¿¥6 million FY 2008) â— Support disaster prevention and management capacity (focus on droughts and floods and main vulnerable countries) GoJ: Support by "Cool Earth Partnership" (d) WBG: undertake country needs assessments, provide estimated funding of $ 75 million for activities in African countries under Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery and Adaptation to Climate Change in Arid Lands initiatives in coming year. IFC to undertake adaptation pilot studies for potential investment â— Support the formulation of water resource management plans including (i) key hydrological assesments, (ii) flood risk management and (iii) appropriate water management technology initially focus on the countries under water stress WBG: $ 306 million for flood risk management and preparedness in FY 2008 â— Support African countries' efforts for addressing and adapting to climate change at national, sub-national and community levels, under the Japan-UNDP Joint Framework for Partnering to Address Climate Change in Africa GoJ (MOFA)/ UNDP/ GEF GoJ (MOFA): provide funds of $ 92.1 million as a part of the Japanese "Cool Earth Partnership" UNDP/GEF: provide funds of $ 31 million UNDP:carry out the programme â— Support an initiative to assist African Human Settlements combating climate change impacts UN-HABITAT: support the initiative ($ 3 million) GOJ(MOFA)/ JICA/WBG GOJ (MOFA)/JICA: grants and technical assistance out of ï¿¥30 billion on water and sanitationa WBG: Target of providing water to 2.5 million people a year through 50,000 connections and 4,500 community water points, ensure that 75% of urban water utilities recover their operation and maintenance costs, and that 85% of the community water points are operational in 14 African countries with stand alone WBG water projects. Estimated increased funding allocated to water supply and sanitation (WSS) stand alone operations from $ 878 million in IDA 14 to $ 1.2 billion in IDA 15 â— Promote the development of water and sanitation facilities (e.g. wells including those with solar panels, and toilets) GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: provide safe drinking water to 6.5 million people â— Capacity building on water resources management GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: capacity building of 5,000 water managers/users â— Support delivering sustaible water and sanitation services to the poor UN-HABITAT: support the project through UN-HABITAT Water and Trust Fund ($ 19 million) â— Promote ESD through integration of ESD into policies and practices GoJ (MOE/ MEXT)/UNESCO/UNU GoJ: Host an International Forum on ESD Dialogue 2008 in Tokyo GoJ (MEXT): Support UNESCO's Teacher Education Programme on ESD in Sub-Saharan Africa through Japanese Funds-in-Trust for Education for Sustainable Development GoJ (MEXT): Implement Environmental Education for teachers in Africa through UNU (ï¿¥30 million) GoJ (MOE): Support environmental conservation grass roots activities in developing countries including Africa through Japan Fund for Global Environment (at least ï¿¥12 million to Africa) Broadening Partnership Potential Resources to be committed â— Promote Asia-Africa cooperation, as well as Japan/Africa/Africa tri-angular cooperation GoJ(MOFA)/JICA/UNDP/WBG/UNV GoJ (MOFA)/JICA: hold seminars in Japan or in third countries and help Asian countries dispatch experts to Africa out of GoJ/JICA Budget GoJ/UNV: dispatch Asian Volunteers to Africa (2006-2008: $ 1.65 million) GoJ/UNDP/WBG: hold the Fifth Africa-Asia Bussiness Forum (AABF V), facilitated by capacity building component of the African SMEs and the banking sector, in the early part of 2009 WBG: facilitate South-South cooperation and promote knowledge sharing between African countries and emerging partners in Asia, and seek co-financing for high-priority projects in African countries from Asian partners â— Train core productivity professionals in Africa for the expansion of the productivity movement and create mechanisms for the National Productivity Organizations in APO members to proactively initiate assistance for the productivity movement in Africa APO APO: Transfers expertise (resource persons and training materials) from Asia-Pacific Region to the productivity movement in Africa. Holds training program to create a pool of productivity professionals and organizes the tailor-made program for the development of National Productivity Organizations in Africa including study missions to the APO members and the dispatch of productivity experts to Africa â— Expand Asia Africa Knowledge Co-creation Program (AAKCP) JICA: promote AAKCP in 12 countries for improving management â— Promote effective technical transfer and capacity building through South-South Cooperation GoJ (MAFF): (i) Provide budget to FAO Trust Fund FY 2006-2011 (ii) Hold Training & Seminars for market access, small-scale irrigation, rice crop and fishery cultivation (ï¿¥101 million FY 2008) â— Promote knowldege-sharing and joint research activities through establishing and utilizing the network of universities and research institutions within and between Asia and Africa in the fields of renewable energy, food security, health, gender in science and technology, etc GoJ(MOFA)/ UNDP/UNESCO GOJ(MOFA)/UNDP/UNESCO: Organize needs assessment study for Asia-Africa University Network (AADUN) . Based on the study, facilitate to launch concrete joint research activities in possible collaboration with other existing network in several areas such as renewable energy, food security, health, gender in science and technology in collaboration with University Twinning and networking scheme (UNITWIN) Networks and UNESCO Chairs â— Continue to consider joint projects between Japan, Vietnam and an African country in the framework of trilateral cooperation based on the Strategic Partnership between Japan and Vietnam GoJ(MOFA)/GoV/JICA GoJ(MOFA)/JICA: JICA budget GoV: (i) send experts in the field of agriculture, (ii) expand models to other African country a Above-mentioned figures do not include Non-Project Grant, Food Aid, emergency Grant, Grant of specific fields like the Grant Aid for Fishery, etc. b Up to $ 4 billion (ï¿¥ 420 billion) to be provided by GoJ over five years for the development of Africa, with special focus on infrastructure and agricultural development. c EC: Global Fund allocations are not earmarked by region or diseases, but based on country demands - in round 5 African coutnries received 55% of the grants, and 58% went to HIV/AIDS. In addition, AIDS is addressed as a cross-sectoral priority in EC development cooperation, and mainstreamed in all sectors, notably health, education, transport, etc. d "Cool Earth Partnership" is composed of a total of ï¼„10 billion to be disbursed globally over five years starting from 2008. e "Global Climate Change Alliance" is a comprehensive policy with some funding of ca. Euro 50 million for a selected number of pilot countries starting from 2008. Note 1. Concrete projects will be selected through consultations between Japan/Implementing Partners and African countries 2. MDB projects are to be decided 3. $ = US dollars Abbreviations ADEA: Association for the Development of Education in Africa MDB: Multi-Development Banks AfDB: African Development Bank METI: Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry AGRA: Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa MEXT: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology AOTS: The Association for Overseas Technical Scholarship MHLW: Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare APO: Asian Productivity Organization MLIT: Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism APRM: African Peer Review Mechanism MOE: Ministry of the Environment CAO: Cabinet Office MOF: Ministry of Finance DFID: UK Department for International Development MOFA: Ministry of Foreign Affairs EC: European Commission EDF: European Development Fund EU: European Union NEPAD-OECD: The New Partnership for Africa's Development- Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development NEXI: Nippon Export and Investment Insurance FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization GEF: Global Environment Facility RTE: Royal Thai Embassy GoJ: Government of Japan GoUK: Government of United Kingdom RTG: Royal Thai Government TICA: Thailand International Development Cooperation GoV: Government of Vietnam UNAIDS: Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS IFC: International Financial Cooperation UNCTAD: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development INSTRAW: UN International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women UNDP: United Nations Development Programme UNESCO-IIEP: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural ITTO: International Tropical Timber Organization Organization-International Institute for Educational Planning IWMI: International Water Management Institute JBIC: Japan Bank for International Cooperation JETRO: Japan External Trade Organization UNFCCC: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UN-HABITAT: United Nations Human Settlements Programme UNICEF: United Nations Children's Fund JICA: Japan International Cooperation Agency JIRCAS: Japan International Research Center for Agricultural Science UNIDO: United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNV: United Nations Volunteers Programme WBG: World Bank Group JMA: Japan Medical Association WCO: World Customs Organization JOGMEC: Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation WFP: World Food Programme JSDF: Japan Social Development Fund WIPO: World Intellectual Property Organization JST: Japan Science and Technology Agency MAFF: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries TICAD Follow-up Mechanism 1. Introduction ãƒ»On the occasion of TICAD III, several African heads of state pointed out that now it'd been ten years since the TICAD process started. It needed to be further institutionalized through some concrete monitoring mechanism. High expectations as such for the follow-up activities of the TICAD process were expressed. ãƒ»In the keynote address of then Prime Minister Koizumi at TICAD III, he mentioned that "Japan will move to institutionalize TICAD follow-up systems." Subsequently, Japanese government has held Ministerial Conferences based upon various specific themes per year, from the perspective of following up the discussions at TICAD III. ãƒ»On the other hand, documents and contributions that had been announced in the TICAD process encompass a broad range and involve a number of stakeholders, and careful follow-up actions are necessary to look at the impact which is made by TICAD process. 2. Significance of Establishment of Follow-up Mechanism ãƒ»To contribute to steady implementation of related initiatives. ãƒ»To be able to discuss openly with not only African states but with relevant countries and organizations about the concept/ way of thinking promoted by the TICAD process and its concrete outcomes. ãƒ»To improve transparency and accountability of TICAD activities. 3. Modality Based upon above, TICAD Follow-up Mechanism will be established with a Three-Tier structure as below. (1) Organizational Composition (i) First Tier: Secretariat ã€Actorã€‘ ãƒ»Secretariat inside MOFA (the Middle Eastern and African Affairs Bureau). ã€Objective/ Outlineã€‘ To conduct information gathering/ analysis / public relations activities, in collaboration with related governmental agencies, regarding the current status of implementation of the priorities under the TIACD process, especially Yokohama Action Plan and Appendix in the follow-up process of TICADâ…£. ã€Actionã€‘ ãƒ»Information transmission through web-sites (positive linkage with UNDP web-site) ãƒ»Establish a consultation service of TICAD, through which interaction with civil society is possible. ãƒ»ADC will make use of the Secretariat. (ii) Second Tier: Joint Monitoring Committee of the TICAD process (expected to be held in Japan) ãƒ»African states (Members of TICAD committee from ADCs), Japanese government and related governmental organizations, TICAD co-organizers, AU Commission (incl. NEPAD Secretariat), donor countries, international organizations (embassies and liaison offices in Japan). ãƒ»Produce an annual Progress Report. (do not conduct review or assessment of the report, which will be the main task of TICAD Follow-up meetings). ã€Frequencyã€‘ ãƒ»Hold Joint Monitoring Committee meetings once a year as a rule. (iii) Third Tier: TICAD Follow-up meetings ãƒ»TICAD Participants including Japanese government (and related governmental organizations where necessary), TICAD co-organizers, African states, AU Commission (incl. NEPAD Secretariat), RECs, donor countries, international organizations, etc. ã€Objective/ Significanceã€‘ ãƒ»Take advantage of TICAD related Ministerial Conferences on specific themes to review and assess on-going TICAD activities based upon the annual progress report, and to instruct accelerated implementation where necessary, at Ministerial level (or high level officials). ãƒ»Hold TICAD Follow-up meetings once a year as a rule. 