%%%ELECTION OF OFFICERS|

President: Mr. Kerim (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m. Announcement regarding the results of the election of the Chairpersons of the Main Committees The President: I should like to inform members that the following representatives, whom I wish to congratulate, have been elected Chairpersons of the six Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session and are accordingly members of the General Committee for that session: First Committee, Mr. Marco Antonio Suazo of Honduras; Special Political and Decolonization Committee, or Fourth Committee, Mr. Jorge Argüello of Argentina; Second Committee, Mrs. Joy Ogwu of Nigeria; Third Committee, Mr. Frank Majoor of the Netherlands; Fifth Committee, Mr. Gábor Bródi of Hungary; and Sixth Committee, Mr. Hamid Al Bayati of Iraq. Agenda item 6 Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the sixty-third session The President: In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, we shall now proceed to the election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for its sixty-third session. All members of the General Assembly are eligible in this election except those already represented in the General Committee, namely, those countries whose representatives have been elected to the presidency of the General Assembly or to the chairmanships of the Main Committees for the sixty-third session. In accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138, of 19 December 1978, the 21 Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the sixty-third session shall be elected according to the following pattern: six representatives from African States, five representatives from Asian States, one representative from Eastern European States, two representatives from Latin American and Caribbean States, two representatives from Western European and other States, and representatives of the five permanent members of the Security Council. In accordance with paragraph 16 of annex V to the rules of procedure, the election of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly by secret ballot will be dispensed with when the number of candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be filled. We shall proceed accordingly. I shall now read out the names of the endorsed candidates. African States: Cameroon, Egypt, Namibia, the Niger, Rwanda and Togo. Asian States: Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Myanmar and Solomon Islands. Eastern European States: Moldova. Latin American and Caribbean States: Bolivia and Jamaica. Western European and other States: Portugal and Spain. Since the number of candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be filled in each region, I declare those candidates elected, in addition to the representatives of the five permanent members of the Security Council. The following States have therefore been elected to vice-presidencies of the General Assembly for its sixty-third session: Afghanistan, Bolivia, Cameroon, China, Egypt, France, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, the Niger, Portugal, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Solomon Islands, Spain, Togo, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the States that have been elected to vice-presidencies of the General Assembly for its sixty-third session. Having elected the Chairpersons of the six Main Committees and the 21 Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the sixty-third session, the General Committee of the General Assembly for its sixty-third session has thus been fully constituted in accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure. The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m. 