%%%DESERTIFICATION|DROUGHT CONTROL|AFRICA|WOMEN'S ADVANCEMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|STATISTICAL SERVICES|POPULATION|DEVELOPMENT TRENDS|PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION|BUDGET|

98-15035 (E) 110698 United Nations E/AC.51/1998/6 (Sect. 7A) Economic and Social Council Distr.: General 29 May 1998 Original: English Committee for Programme and Coordination Thirty-eighth session 1-26 June 1998 (part I) Item 4 (d) of the provisional agenda Programme questions Report of the Secretary-General on the new narrative for section 7A, Economic and social affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999 In its resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its thirty-eighth session a new programme narrative for section 7A, Economic and social affairs. The revised programme narrative of section 7A, as contained in the annex to the present report, is submitted in accordance with the above request of the General Assembly. E/AC.51/1998/6 (Sect. 7A) Annex Section 7A, Economic and social affairs Contents Page Overview A. Policy-making organs B. Executive direction and management C. Programme of work 1. Policy coordination and inter-agency cooperation 2. Advancement of women 3. Social development 4. Sustainable development 5. Statistics 6. Population 7. Global development trends, issues and policies 8. Public economics and public administration 9. Combating desertification, particularly in Africa D. Programme support 7A.1 The United Nations is in a unique position from which to address, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, the challenges of promoting development in the context of the globalization of the world economy and the deepening interdependence among nations. In order to further reinforce this role and in line with the objectives outlined in his report (A/51/950), the Secretary-General has decided to consolidate the Departments for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development (section 7), Economic and social information and policy analysis (section 9) and Development Support and Management Services (section 10) into a single department under section 7A, Economic and social affairs. Integration of capacities for policy formulation, analytical and normative functions and relevant technical cooperation activities will serve to rationalize, reduce overlapping and fragmentation and strengthen support to the key areas of sustainable development, social development and gender issues and the advancement of women as well as enhance substantive support for the intergovernmental processes in the economic, social and environmental spheres. The activities outlined initially in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999, which included 10 subprogrammes under sections 7, 9 and 10, have, where appropriate, been merged into eight subprogrammes and will be carried out by the new Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 7A.2 The overall orientation of the programme is to further, as a central mission of the Organization, the promotion of development and to strengthen the contribution of the United Nations to international cooperation in the economic, social and environmental fields. The programme will facilitate a more active and effective role of the Organization in promoting international cooperation for development and provide policy guidance on global development issues. The Department’s major focus during the biennium 1998-1999 will be to provide a coordinated framework and an institutional structure for promoting internationally agreed goals and objectives and monitoring the implementation of the programmes, objectives and platforms of action in the economic, social and related fields adopted at United Nations conferences and special sessions of the General Assembly. 7A.3 The mandates for the programme derive from the Secretariat’s responsibility to provide substantive support to the General Assembly, in particular the Second and Third Committees, the Economic and Social Council and relevant subsidiary bodies, relevant resolutions concerning international economic cooperation, resolutions on the restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields, on operational activities for development, on public administration and development, on relevant aspects of the mandate of the Secretary-General, including his responsibilities as the Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination. The Agenda for Development, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 51/240 of 20 June 1997, will provide a broad frame of reference and policy guidance for the activities in support of international cooperation for development. The overall policy framework for the programme is based also on the programmes and platforms of action adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and the Assembly at its subsequent nineteenth special session on the overall review and appraisal of the implementation of Agenda 21, the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the international Conference on Population and Development, the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women. In implementing the programme, particular attention will be paid to the special needs of Africa and least developed countries, small island developing States and South-South cooperation, as well as to the need to incorporate a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system. Activities under programme 6 of the medium-term plan, Africa: New Agenda for Development, that are the responsibility of the Department, are still presented separately as section 8 of the proposed programme budget, in line with the provisions of section V of Assembly resolution 49/219 of 23 December 1994. 7A.4 The programme will be implemented through strategies aimed at integrating the capacities of the Department for normative, analytical, statistical and technical cooperation activities to maximize the complementarity and synergy within and between its organizational components. As part of its normative activities, the Department will contribute to and facilitate international dialogue and debate on development cooperation with a view to building consensus in the economic and social spheres by providing substantive support to standing and ad hoc intergovernmental processes. The programme will assist Member States in developing integrated and coordinated policy responses to development issues and to emerging global problems, negotiating global agreements on norms, standards and cooperative action and enhancing the effectiveness of operational activities for development. As the key priority under its normative work, the Department will continue to provide substantive support to the policy-making organs indicated in the proposed programme budget for 1998-1999 under former sections 7, 9 and 10. The Department will also continue to provide Secretariat support for integrated policy development and assist the Secretary-General in enhancing policy coherence and coordination both within the United Nations and among organizations of the United Nations system, as well as in reinforcing the intergovernmental and the intersecretariat coordination machinery. In that regard, it will provide substantive support to the Administrative Committee on Coordination and its Organizational Committee, the Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development, the Inter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality and other subsidiary bodies of the Administrative Committee on Coordination dealing with operational and programme questions. 7A.5 The policy analysis activities of the programme are designed and executed in direct support of the normative and policy-making functions of the Organization and are aimed at providing information in order to promote understanding of and to enhance insight into development processes. This work assists Member States and the international community in determining development priorities and in devising policies and measures to achieve them at the international, national and local levels. As part of its policy analysis, the Department will monitor, analyse and evaluate global economic and social policies and trends, including population trends; make projections and identify new and emerging issues requiring attention by the international community; monitor the advancement and empowerment of women; analyse the role of the State and the public sector in development; and compile and disseminate analytical statistical data and economic and social indicators with a view to facilitating the formulation and monitoring of development strategies and goals at the international, regional and national levels. 7A.6 The Department’s policy advisory services, supplemented by research and training, will support the efforts of Governments, on request, in formulating development strategies and building national capacities aimed at sustained economic growth and sustainable development in such fields as economic and social development, the advancement of women, public administration and finance, natural resources and energy and their interface with the environment. The Department will review emerging issues and promote the sharing of experiences and best practices at the national level, thereby fostering synergy among normative, analytical and operational activities. The Department will utilize regular budget and extrabudgetary resources to assist, within the context of national needs and priorities, in the development of programmes and projects aimed at strengthening human, institutional and policy-making capabilities. To maximize the impact of the programme’s advisory services, South-South arrangements will be bolstered wherever appropriate. Those activities will take into account the outcomes and commitments of relevant United Nations conferences. 7A.7 The Department’s functions represent a crucial interface between global policies and national action and between research and operational activities, thereby facilitating the translation of international agreements into strategies at the country level and feeding back lessons learned and experiences gained from the country level into the international policy development process. In implementing the programme, the Department will also aim at strengthening linkages between the United Nations and civil society and at developing innovative means of cooperation and modes of partnership in areas of common interest. 7A.8 The estimated percentage distribution of the total resources of the Department would be as follows: Regular budget Extrabudgetary Total 7A.9 The distribution of the resources under the section is summarized in tables 7A.1 to 7A.3 below. Table 7A.1 Summary of requirements by component (Thousands of United States dollars) Component appropriation Table 7A.2 Summary by object of expenditure (1) Regular budget Object of expenditure Posts Other staff costs Non-staff compensation Consultants and experts Travel Contractual services General operating expenses Hospitality Supplies and materials Furniture and equipment Grants and contributions (2) Extrabudgetary resources Estimates 1998-1999 237 831.8a Total (1) and (2) a Breakdowns of the estimates of extrabudgetary resources by source of funds are provided below under part C, Programme of work, and under each subprogramme, as relevant. Table 7A.3 Post requirements Organizational unit: Department of Economic and Social Affairs Established posts Temporary Regular budget resources Professional category and above USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4/3 P-2/1 General Service category Principal level Other levels Grand total Table 7A.4 Summary of requirements by programme Programme 1. Statistical Commission 2. Commission on Population and Development 3. Commission for Social Development 4. Commission on the Status of Women 5. Commission on Sustainable Development 6. Committee for Development Planning 7. Committee on Natural Resources 8. Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for Development 9. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 10. Meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance 11. Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters 7A.10 The standing intergovernmental organs and expert bodies the servicing of which the Department will assume responsibility under its mandate and the related resources are as follows. 7A.11 The Statistical Commission was established by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 8 (I) of 16 and 18 February 1946. Its terms of reference, as set out in Council resolutions 8 (I), 8 (II) of 21 June 1946 and 1566 (L) of 3 May 1971, are to assist the Council in: (a) promoting the development of national statistics and the improvement of their comparability; (b) coordination of the statistical work of the specialized agencies; (c) development of the central statistical services of the Secretariat; (d) advising the organs of the United Nations on general questions relating to the collection, interpretation and dissemination of statistical information; and (e) promoting the improvement of statistical methods in general. 7A.12 The Working Group on International Statistical Programmes and Coordination was established by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1306 (XLIV) of 31 May 1968. At its seventeenth session, the Statistical Commission decided that the Working Group should: (a) deal with questions of policy, coordination and priorities of the statistical programmes of the United Nations system; (b) constitute a means by which the Statistical Commission could maintain contact, between biennial meetings, with the work of the Statistics Division of the Secretariat and of the statistical services of the specialized agencies; (c) consider current questions, relating to the United Nations system, of organization, policies, arrangements and priorities for the electronic data-processing of economic and social statistics, including databases; and (d) consider questions regarding the statistics required for purposes of reviews and appraisals. 7A.13 The thirtieth session of the Statistical Commission will be held from 1 to 5 March 1999, and the nineteenth session of the Working Group on International Statistical Programmes and Coordination was held from 10 to 13 February 1998. 7A.14 The Population Commission was established by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 3 (III) of 3 October 1946. Its terms of reference were initially set out in Council resolution 150 (VII) of 10 August 1948. Following the International Conference on Population and Development and the adoption of the Programme of Action by the Conference, the General Assembly, in its resolution 49/128 of 19 December 1994, renamed the Population Commission the Commission on Population and Development, decided that it should meet on an annual basis and revised its terms of reference. The mandate of the Commission was further revised by the Assembly in its resolution 50/124 of 20 December 1995. The membership of the Commission was increased from 27 to 47, each elected for a four-year term (Council decision 1995/320 of 12 December 1995). The Commission normally meets annually for a period of five working days. 7A.15 The revised mandate of the Commission includes: (a) arranging for studies and advising the Council on population issues and trends, the integration of population and development strategies, population and related development policies and programmes, provision of population assistance and addressing any population and development questions on which either the principal or the subsidiary organs of the United Nations or the specialized agencies may seek advice; (b) monitoring, reviewing and assessing the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development at the national, regional and global levels, identifying reasons for success and failure and advising the Council thereon; and (c) reviewing the findings of research and analysis pertaining to the interrelationship between population and development at the national, regional and global levels and advising the Council thereon. 7A.16 The Social Commission was established as a functional commission of the Economic and Social Council by Council resolution 10 (II) of 21 June 1946. As a result of a comprehensive reappraisal of the role of the Commission, the Council, in its resolution 1139 (XLI) of 29 July 1966, renamed it the Commission for Social Development to clarify its role as a preparatory body of the Council for the entire range of social development policy. Following the convening of the World Summit for Social Development in 1995, the Council, by its resolution 1995/60 of 28 July 1995, decided that the Commission should review, on a periodic basis, issues related to the follow-up and implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and Programme of Action adopted by the Summit. The Council also decided that the Commission should review its mandate, terms of reference and scope of work in order to elaborate its multi-year programme of work and should review the frequency of its meetings in the light of its responsibility for the follow-up to and review of the implementation of the Summit. By its resolution 1996/7, the Council decided to expand the membership of the Commission from 32 to 46 and to annualize its sessions, each session being for a period of eight working days. The Council also decided to invite experts to participate in the meetings of the Commission when priority subjects addressed in the Copenhagen Declaration and Programme of Action were under discussion. 7A.17 The Commission on the Status of Women was established as a functional commission of the Economic and Social Council by Council resolution 11 (II) of 21 June 1946. Originally 15, the membership was increased to 18 in 1951, to 21 in 1961 and to 32 in 1966. By its resolution 1989/45 of 24 May 1989, the Council decided to enlarge the membership to 45 in 1990. The Commission reports to the Council on matters concerning the promotion of women’s rights in the political, economic, social and educational fields and makes recommendations to the Council on problems requiring immediate attention in the field of women’s rights. It meets annually in New York for 10 working days. Its sessions bring together observers both from within and outside the United Nations system. 7A.18 The Commission, which acted as the preparatory body for the Fourth World Conference on Women has a central role within the United Nations system in monitoring the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action and advising the Council thereon in accordance with its strengthened mandate. In its resolution 1996/6 of 22 July 1996, the Council gave the Commission a catalytic role in mainstreaming the gender perspective in policies and programmes and confirmed its existing mandates. The Commission adopted a multi-year work programme for a focused and thematic approach that will culminate in the quinquennial review and appraisal of the Platform for Action in the year 2000. 7A.19 In line with Council resolution 1995/29, the Commission established an open-ended working group to elaborate a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which meets in parallel to the Commission. 7A.20 The Commission on Sustainable Development was established as a functional commission of the Economic and Social Council by Council decision 1993/207 of 12 February 1993. Its functions are set out in General Assembly resolution 47/191 of 22 December 1992. The Commission is composed of 53 members elected for terms of office of three years, meets annually for a period of two to three weeks and receives substantive and technical services from the Department. The Commission reports to the Economic and Social Council and provides recommendations to the General Assembly through the Council. The Commission has a practice of establishing two ad hoc open-ended inter-sessional working groups that meet once a year for a period of one working week to deal with issues determined by the Commission. 7A.21 The Intergovernmental Forum on Forests was established by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1997/65 of 25 July 1997 in accordance with resolution S/19-2 of 28 June 1997 adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session. The Forum meets annually for a period of up to two weeks and reports to the Commission on Sustainable Development. 7A.22 The Committee for Development Planning was established by the Economic and Social Council by its resolution 1035 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964. Its terms of reference were approved by the Council in its resolution 1079 (XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 and reconfirmed by the Council in its decision 1995/215 of 10 February 1995. The Committee is composed of 24 members, serving in their individual capacity, who are appointed by the Council on the nomination of the Secretary-General for terms of office of three years. The Committee meets annually for a period of eight working days. The Committee establishes working groups that meet inter-sessionally to prepare for the annual meeting of the Committee. The Secretary-General, in his report entitled “Renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform” (A/51/950), recommended that the Committee for Development Planning be replaced by panels of experts on various policy issues set up by the Economic and Social Council on an ad hoc basis, whose members would be appointed on the recommendation of the Secretary-General (para. 134). 7A.23 The Committee on Natural Resources is a subsidiary organ of the Economic and Social Council. Its terms of reference are defined in the annex to General Assembly resolution 46/235 of 13 April 1992. The Committee consists of 24 experts, acting in their personal capacity, nominated by their Governments and elected by the Economic and Social Council for a four-year term. The Committee consists of two working groups that address water and mineral resources issues in an integrated fashion. The Committee meets biennially for eight days. The Secretary-General, in his report entitled “Renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform” (A/51/950), recommended that the Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy and Energy for Development and the Committee on Natural Resources be consolidated into the Commission on Sustainable Development (para. 135). Its fourth session was held from 10 to 19 March 1998. 7A.24 The Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for Development was established by the Economic and Social Council by its decision 1992/218 of 30 April 1992. Its terms of reference were set out by the General Assembly in its resolution 46/235 of 13 April 1992. The Committee is composed of 24 government-nominated experts, acting in their personal capacity, elected by the Council for terms of office of four years. The Committee meets biennially for two weeks. 7A.25 The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women was established in accordance with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979. It reviews reports of States parties submitted in accordance with article 18 of the Convention and formulates suggestions and general recommendations. The Committee reports annually through the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly. As from 1997, the 23-member Committee holds two regular annual sessions in New York of 15 working days each, preceded by a five-day pre-session working group. 7A.26 By its resolution 1199 (XLII) of 24 May 1967, the Economic and Social Council decided that the United Nations programme in public administration should be reviewed from time to time by a meeting of experts and that the report of the meeting should be submitted to it for consideration. Some 20 to 25 experts are invited by the Secretary-General in their individual capacity to participate in the Meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance. Although there is no mandated periodicity, meetings are generally held biennially for a period of 10 to 14 days. The fourteenth meeting was held from 4 to 12 May 1998. 7A.27 The Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters was set up in accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution 1273 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 and consists of 25 tax experts (10 from developed and 15 from developing countries) nominated by their Governments but acting in their personal capacity. Its ninth meeting will be held in 1999. 7A.28 The 25-member Group reports to the Economic and Social Council and holds biennial sessions at Geneva for 10 days. Its sessions are devoted to the conclusion of tax treaties between developed and developing countries that would be acceptable to both parties and would fully safeguard their respective revenue interests. These include the revision of the United Nations Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and Developing Countries and the United Nations Manual for the Negotiation of Bilateral Tax Treaties between Developed and Developing Countries. The meetings of the Group also bring together observers from developed and developing countries and countries with economies in transition, international and regional intergovernmental organizations and professional non-governmental organizations active in the international taxation area. The Secretary-General, in his report “Renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform” (A/51/950), recommended that the work of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts in International Tax Matters be reviewed after the completion of its present mandate (para. 135 (e)). Table 7A.5 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.6 Post requirements Programme: Executive direction and management Office of the Under-Secretary-General 7A.29 The Under-Secretary-General is responsible for the overall direction, supervision and management of the Department in the implementation of its mandates and approved programme of work. The Under-Secretary-General is assisted by the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-agency Affairs and by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. The senior management of the Department will ensure effective integration of capacities for normative, analytical and technical cooperation work to maximize complementarity and synergy within the organizational units of the Department and will direct the overall coordination of technical cooperation activities, particularly with a view to ensuring continuity and policy consistency in the transition from the management arrangements in the former Department for Development Support and Management Services to the integrated approach of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs. The Under-Secretary-General also serves as Chairman of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs. 7A.30 The Office of the Under-Secretary-General will provide support and advice to the Under-Secretary-General on the planning, coordination, management and assessment of the work programme of the Department, including programme aspects of the programme budget, programme performance monitoring and evaluation. The Office will consult, collaborate and coordinate with other departments, offices, funds and programmes, as well as non-United Nations entities, on matters of common concern. It will also act as the focal point for information on the work of the Department and ensure, including through the Information Support Unit, that such information is effectively disseminated internally and properly projected externally. Table 7A.7 Summary of requirements by programme 1. Policy coordination and inter-agency support 2. Gender issues and advancement of women 3. Social policy and development 9. Combating desertification, particularly in Africa (1998 only) Source of funds estimates (a) Services in support of: (i) United Nations organizations (ii) Extrabudgetary activities (b) Substantive activities Trust Fund for the Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development Trust Fund for Support of the Work of the Commission on Sustainable Development United Nations Trust Fund for Case Studies on the Functioning of the Operational Activities for Development of the United Nations System United Nations Trust Fund on Family Activities United Nations Youth Fund United Nations Voluntary Fund on Disability Trust Fund for Supporting the Negotiating Process on the International Convention to Combat Desertification and Drought Special Voluntary Fund for Supporting Developing Countries Affected by Desertification and Drought, in particular Least Developed Countries, to Participate in the Negotiation Process on the International Convention to Combat Desertification and Drought Trust Fund for the Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action Trust Fund for International Economic and Social Research Trust Fund for Development Planning and Projections Trust Fund for the International Comparison Project UNFPA (c) Operational projects UNDP Technical Cooperation Project Trust Funds Subprogramme 1 Policy coordination and inter-agency cooperation Table 7A.8 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.9 Post requirements Subprogramme: Policy coordination and inter-agency cooperation 7A.31 This subprogramme will be implemented by the Division for Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination. The main task of the Division is to provide effective substantive support to the Economic and Social Council, including through the preparation of reports and the identification of themes, in particular in relation to its high-level, coordination and operational activities segments, and to the Council’s subsidiary bodies; to the General Assembly, especially its Second Committee; and to the Administrative Committee on Coordination and other inter-agency bodies, including the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs. In supporting the intergovernmental machinery and inter-agency work and in promoting policy development, the subprogramme aims at enhancing policy and programme coordination within the United Nations system and assisting intergovernmental processes and the Secretary-General in integrating the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development in the context of sustained economic growth and sustainable development. In that regard, the subprogramme will focus on assisting the Economic and Social Council to carry out more effectively its responsibilities for system-wide coordination and harmonization of the work of its subsidiary bodies. In that connection, substantive support to the Council in executing its coordination functions, including through subject-oriented special sessions, will be strengthened. The subprogramme will also focus on the follow-up to the Agenda for Development and coordination of the implementation of declarations, strategies and programmes of action in the economic and social fields adopted by major United Nations conferences. The preparation of relevant policy reports of the Secretary-General will be undertaken in close cooperation and coordination with other programmes in the economic and social areas, as well as on the basis of inputs from the academic and research community, non-governmental organizations and the private sector. Support will continue to be provided to the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council in the economic and social fields. 7A.32 The Division will provide substantive secretariat support to the newly created Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs, the central objective of which is to achieve coherence and complementarity within the United Nations system, in particular with respect to normative and policy-oriented work in the area of development. Substantive support to the Administrative Committee on Coordination and its subsidiary machinery will be strengthened to enable the Committee to guide effectively the process of modernizing the United Nations system and adapting it to the new political, economic and social environment and to address the new challenges in a responsive and cost-effective way. This will involve systematic monitoring, in particular through the Organizational Committee of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, of the implementation of the decisions of the Committee with a view to strengthening policy and programme coherence within the system and a closer interaction between the Committee and the Economic and Social Council, in particular through the inclusion in its reports to the Council of action-oriented recommendations aimed at improving United Nations system-wide coordination on issues under its consideration. 7A.33 The Division will also assist in fulfilling the Secretary-General’s responsibility for preparing policy recommendations and evaluation reports on the reforms of the operational activities for development of the United Nations system. Those reports are guided by relevant decisions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and are prepared in connection with the triennial comprehensive policy review in 1998 and the follow-up to it. The reports cover the management of operational activities; funding and resources for development; the functioning of the resident coordinator system; programming and implementation modalities; monitoring and evaluation; the harmonization of administrative activities and of rules and procedures; and the identification of effective responses to the changing requirements of recipient countries. To translate intergovernmental policies into operational guidance for country- and regional-level action, the Division works through the Administrative Committee on Coordination and the United Nations Development Group. Activities 7A.34 During the biennium 1998-1999, the following activities will be undertaken: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental/expert bodies (i) General Assembly a. Parliamentary documentation i. Thirty reports on follow-up to an Agenda for Development (two); follow-up on the renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international cooperation for development through partnership (two); policy issues to be determined by the General Assembly (two); annual report of the Economic and Social Council (two); progress in the implementation of the Declaration on International Cooperation and the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade; Administrative Committee on Coordination comments on Joint Inspection Unit reports dealing with system-wide and/or inter-agency issues (two); implementation of recommendations of Joint Inspection Unit reports (two); culture and development; communication for development programmes; inter-agency issues in the economic and social fields (two); restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields (two); comprehensive triennial policy review of operational activities for development containing policy recommendations; issues to be determined by the executive boards of United Nations funds and programmes, including their overall financial picture as called for by the General Assembly in its resolutions 48/162 of 20 December 1993 and 50/227 of 24 May 1996 (two); comprehensive statistical data on operational activities for development (two); system-wide evaluation of the impact of components of operational activities; resources and related issues (two); issues arising from Assembly resolutions on operational activities for development; actions taken by the Second and Third Committees on their agenda items (two); and malaria and diarrhoeal diseases (1998); b. Substantive servicing. Forty plenary meetings and 30 informal consultations of the Second Committee; 4 meetings of the United Nations pledging conference; and 40 meetings of General Assembly working groups. (ii) Economic and Social Council i. Twenty-four reports on issues to be determined by the Economic and Social Council for submission to the high-level segment (two) and to the coordination segment (two); follow-up of the 1997 and 1998 coordination segments for submission to the general segments in 1998 and 1999 respectively (two); consolidating issues for consideration and action by the Council in its general segment (two); reports to special meetings of the Council (four); work of the Joint and Co-sponsored United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome on progress made in the fight against HIV/AIDS; overview reports of the Administrative Committee on Coordination (two); report of the Administrative Committee on Coordination on programmes and resources of the United Nations system for the biennium 1998-1999; progress made by the United Nations system focal point in the implementation of multisectoral collaboration on tobacco and health; work of the Committee on non-governmental organizations (two); annual consultations pursuant to paragraph 61 (a) of Council resolution 1996/31 (two); non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Council (two); progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions emerging from the triennial policy review of operational activities for development by the General Assembly (two); study on the main theme to be identified by the Assembly at its fifty-third session on triennial policy review; reports of the Council to the Assembly (two); b. Substantive servicing. Ten meetings of organizational sessions; 80 of substantive sessions; 40 of informal consultations; and 40 of working groups; (iii) Committee for Programme and Coordination a. Parliamentary documentation. Two annual overview reports of the Administrative Committee on Coordination; b. Substantive servicing. Eight meetings; (iv) Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations a. Parliamentary documentation. Thirteen reports on new applications for consultative status received from non-governmental organizations (two); requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (two); deferred requests for consultative status (two); deferred requests for reclassification (two); quadrennial reports on the activities of non-governmental organizations in consultative status (general and special category) with the Council; forthcoming issues at substantive sessions of the Council (two); requests by non-governmental organizations to be heard by the Council at its substantive session (two); b. Substantive servicing. Forty meetings of the Committee; six of the annual consultations between the Committee and non-governmental organizations in consultative status prior to sessions of the Council, pursuant to paragraph 61 (a) of Council resolution 1996/31; (b) Other substantive activities (RB/XB) (i) Recurrent publications. Four recurrent publications: calendar of meetings open to the participants of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (two); directory of senior officials of the United Nations system of organizations (two); (ii) Technical material. Update and maintain the Internet home page of the Division for Policy Coordination and Economic and Social Council Affairs; (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (i) Substantive and technical servicing. Eight meetings of the Administrative Committee on Coordination and 48 of its Organizational Committee; 40 meetings of the Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions of the Administrative Committee on Coordination; 16 of the Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions Working Group on the resident coordinator system; and 20 of the Joint Consultative Group on Policies, including its high-level sessions and its subgroups on harmonization of programming policies and procedures; harmonization at the country level; common premises and services; and personnel and training; (ii) Substantive servicing. Twenty-four monthly meetings of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs. The Committee comprises 15 entities, namely, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the five regional commissions, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), the Office of Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations University, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development and the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, and meets monthly. The main objective of the Committee is to strengthen and focus the normative, policy and knowledge-related functions of the Secretariat and its capacity to serve the United Nations intergovernmental bodies. To that end, the Committee is actively pursuing the goal of reducing duplication of effort and facilitating greater complementarity and coherence as well as achieving a more efficient division of labour among its members. The members of the Committee regularly consult with one another on work programmes as well as other substantive and administrative matters of collective concern in order to identify and exploit ways of pooling resources and services so as to maximize programme impact and minimize administrative costs, and more generally to facilitate joint strategic planning and decision-making. In addition, the Committee is engaged in identifying areas where issue management networks could be fruitfully established and to that end has initiated subgroups on cross-sectoral issues; (iii) Focal point responsibilities. World Decade for Cultural Development; years and anniversaries; focal point on the World Food Programme (WFP); hunger, food security and nutrition; HIV/AIDS; intergovernmental organizations in the economic and social fields; malaria and diarrhoeal diseases; tobacco and health; drug abuse control; and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Committee on the Macrothesaurus; (iv) External relations with intergovernmental and regional organizations. Liaison, as required, with the 1,700 non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and assistance in the coordination of their activities, acting as focal point for the non-governmental organizations in their relations with intergovernmental bodies and the Secretariat; cooperation and liaison, as required, with the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Organization of American States (OAS), the League of Arab States, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and OECD on issues of economic and social development, contribution to activities in the field of food and nutrition and liaison with WFP in relation to food issues and cooperation with intergovernmental, non-governmental and regional organizations on issues in the economic and social fields. The resources requested would cover the cost of posts indicated in table 7A.9 above. It is proposed to abolish one General Service (Other level) post that became redundant as a result of a review and redistribution of the functions of the support staff. Subprogramme 2 Advancement of women Table 7A.10 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.11 Post requirements Programme: Advancement of women 7A.35 The subprogramme will be implemented by the Division for the Advancement of Women, which is headed by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. The Special Adviser reports directly to the Secretary-General on matters relating to gender balance and other gender-related issues of concern to the United Nations. In that regard, the Special Adviser is assisted by the Focal Point for Women in the United Nations Secretariat, who (a) monitors progress on the strategic plan of action for the improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat (1995-2000); (b) provides secretariat services to the Steering Committee for the Improvement of the Status of Women in the Secretariat; and (c) prepares, as required, reports to the General Assembly and the Commission on the Status of Women and studies on issues related to the improved status of women in the Secretariat. The work of the Division is organized into two clusters relating to gender analysis, monitoring and gender advisory services, and gender and women’s rights coordination. 7A.36 Activities will aim at achieving effective support for the implementation of actions described in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women, and of related recommendations of other global conferences, in particular the World Conference on Human Rights, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, the World Summit for Social Development, the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and other global or regional programmes of action such as the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s. Attention will also be given to the implementation of the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa and to the implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s. 7A.37 Under its normative activities, the Division will improve the monitoring of the extent of women’s enjoyment of their human rights and of whether violations of those rights are dealt with by all human rights mechanisms. In that regard, it will enhance support to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, which since 1997 has held two regular annual sessions. Particular emphasis will be placed on the African region, and liaison will be enhanced with regional intergovernmental organizations, such as OAU, OAS and CARICOM, in the implementation of human rights instruments. The subprogramme will also include substantive support, including the preparation of mandated documentation, to the Commission on the Status of Women, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, in accordance with the long-term programme of work of the Commission. 7A.38 Under its policy analysis and monitoring activities, the Division will focus on the preparation of the World Survey on the Role of Women in Development, 1999, and the initiation of the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1999) and of the review of the system-wide medium-term plan for the advancement of women (1998). In delivering its advisory services, including needs assessment missions and regional and subregional training seminars, the subprogramme will provide gender advisory services to developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and countries with economies in transition, in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, notably with regard to the full enjoyment of human rights of women, the establishment and strengthening of national machinery for the advancement of women, women and new technologies and the increased role of women in leadership and public life, including in civil service systems. Assistance will also be provided to States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women from the African region, in line with the African Platform for Action for the advancement of women, the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa and the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s, to strengthen women’s organizations and civil society for development, including in peace-building. In addition, studies will be conducted on best practices in the field of elimination of violence against women, peace-building, decision-making and economic empowerment with a view to adaptation and replication in developing countries through South-South cooperation. Fact-finding missions on women’s human rights will be undertaken in collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 7A.39 A particularly important dimension of the subprogramme is the comprehensive and integrated mainstreaming of gender issues, which has been given more leverage through the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of agreed conclusions on mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system and of the system-wide medium-term plan for the advancement of women. The mainstreaming will be promoted within relevant intergovernmental forums, the policies, departments and offices of the United Nations Secretariat, the organizations of the United Nations system, other intergovernmental organizations and Member States. In that regard, support will be provided to the annual meetings of the Inter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality, a standing committee of the Administrative Committee on Coordination. Linkages and partnerships with other United Nations coordinating bodies and with a network of non-governmental organizations as well as substantive support to non-governmental organizations will be enhanced and strengthened. An information system related to the Platform for Action in support of Governments and specialized constituencies and enhancing women’s access to new technologies will be designed and maintained, including through the means of e-mail and the Internet. 7A.40 During the biennium 1998-1999, the following activities will be undertaken: a. Parliamentary documentation. Eleven reports on the work of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women at its seventeenth to twentieth sessions (two); status of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (two); effective mobilization for women in development; the situation of women in rural areas; 1999 World Survey on the Role of Women in Development; Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, including mainstreaming of a gender perspective, in particular in United Nations funds and programmes, specialized agencies and subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly and on means of implementation (two); and improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat (two); b. Substantive servicing. Twelve plenary meetings of the General Assembly and 10 of informal consultations on draft resolutions; a. Parliamentary documentation. Five reports on implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, including mainstreaming of a gender perspective, in particular in subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council and United Nations entities whose work is coordinated by the Council, such as regional commissions, funds and programmes (two); mid-term review of the system-wide medium-term plan for the advancement of women; operational activities related to gender (submitted to the operational activities segment); and the advancement of women and implementation of the Platform for Action (submitted to the high-level segment); b. Substantive servicing. Twelve meetings of the high-level segment, operational activities segment and general segment of Council sessions on items related to the advancement of women; and 10 informal consultations on draft resolutions and agreed conclusions; (iii) Commission on the Status of Women i. Nineteen reports on implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, including mainstreaming of a gender perspective (covering in particular the work of the Division, national level activities and non-governmental organization activities as well as reports in accordance with other resolutions, such as on Palestinian women, women taken hostage and a joint workplan with the Centre for Human Rights) (two); list of confidential communications (two) and non-confidential communications (two) relating to the status of women; thematic issues before the Commission in accordance with the multi-year work programme (two), such as violence against women, women and armed conflict, the human rights of women, the girl child, women and health and institutional mechanisms for the advancement of women; emerging trends and new approaches to issues affecting the situation of women or equality between women and men, determined by the Commission or its bureau at the preceding sessions (two); synthesized report on the implementation plans of Governments and the United Nations system; annotated comparisons on an optional protocol to the Convention (two); preparation of the comprehensive review and appraisal of the implementation of the Platform for Action; mid-term review of the system-wide medium-term plan for the advancement of women; update on the improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat (two); and improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat (two); ii. Conference room papers to support the mainstreaming of the human rights of women in general human rights activities (two); iii. Conference room papers on issues related to the report of the Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women (two); iv. Conference room papers on results of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (two); v. Conference room papers and background material for informal consultations of the Chairperson of the Commission with interested parties; vi. Background papers on expert group meetings organized by the Division in preparation for the critical areas of concern; vii. Background materials and papers to monitor progress made in implementing the strategic plan of action for the improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat (1995-2000); b. Substantive servicing. Eighty meetings (plenary and optional protocol working group meetings); 10 informal consultation meetings on draft resolutions and agreed conclusions; and 16 informal consultation meetings of the Chairperson of the Commission with interested parties; (iv) Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women a. Parliamentary documentation. Fifty-eight reports on analysis of initial and periodic reports (40) by States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women to assist the Committee in its consideration of those reports; identification of trends in the implementation of specific articles of the Convention to be decided on by the Committee (two); ways and means of expediting the work of the Committee (four); conference room papers on the report of the pre-session working group (four); and issues to be determined by the Committee (eight); b. Substantive and technical servicing. Forty meetings of pre-session working groups; 80 meetings of Committee and 40 meetings of in-session working groups; and two meetings for briefing new members; (v) Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women a. Parliamentary documentation. Three reports on declarations, reservations, objections and notifications of withdrawal of reservations related to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; list of candidates for the election of 11 members of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; and report of the meeting; b. Substantive and technical servicing. Four meetings; (vi) Ad hoc expert group meetings. Five ad hoc expert group meetings on women and health; comprehensive review and appraisal of the implementation of the Platform for Action; preparation of the World Survey on the Role of Women in Development; emerging issues for the period 2001-2005; and promoting women’s leadership in civil service systems; (b) Other substantive activities (i) Recurrent publications. Directory of National Machinery for the Advancement of Women; Women 2000 (four issues); and Network (quarterly newsletter); (ii) Non-recurrent publications. Gender Issues in Civil Service Systems; a publication on energy and women is to be implemented jointly with the Division for Sustainable Development; (iii) Briefings. Briefings for delegates and representatives of non-governmental organizations on relevant issues under consideration by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; preparation of the Commission’s meetings; policies and strategies to meet the target of 50 per cent women in posts in the Professional category and above overall and at the policy and decision-making levels; briefings of the working group on the elaboration of the draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; (iv) Technical material. Update of database on women in decision-making positions in Governments, international intergovernmental organizations, bodies and negotiating entities, and on women in electoral processes worldwide; directory of focal points within the United Nations system on questions relating to women; and further development, design, maintenance and management of WomenWatch (Internet home page); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB/XB) Substantive and technical servicing of the annual Inter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality meetings and servicing of informal inter-sessional meetings, including preparation of conference room and background papers and the reports on the annual sessions; development of procedures and guidelines for mainstreaming and coordination, in cooperation with relevant departments and offices of the United Nations Secretariat and the United Nations system; substantive support to the Office of Human Resources Management on the development of guidelines on gender training and on mainstreaming a gender perspective in the policies and programmes of the organizations of the United Nations system; development of training modules and participation in training related to the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; follow-up to recent United Nations conferences and thematic years (background papers and participation in special events); and external relations with a network of non-governmental organizations and organizations of civil society, and substantive support to non-governmental organization networking (background papers; participation in special events; and continuous updating and maintenance of departmental database on non-governmental organizations); (d) Gender advisory services (RB/XB) (i) Advisory services. Advisory missions to States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women that have not yet submitted their initial report to the Convention; five needs assessment and diagnostic missions on women in leadership, and including women’s access to leadership and women in the civil and foreign service; (ii) Group training, seminars and workshops. Regional and subregional training seminar on women in peacekeeping and peace-building (one); on violence against women: training of judiciary and law enforcement officials (five); and on national machinery for the advancement of women (four). South-South workshops on the use of e-mail and the Internet in southern Africa (one). Workshop on gender issues in the civil service (one). Subprogramme 3 Social development Table 7A.12 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.13 Post requirements Programme: Social development 7A.41 The subprogramme will be implemented by the Division for Social Policy and Development, which will be responsible for the execution of activities relating to subprogramme 5.3, Social development, of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001,a in its entirety, part of subprogramme 7.4, Global approaches to social and micro-economic issues and policies, and part of subprogramme 8.2, Environment and social development management. 7A.42 The main objective of the subprogrammes is to maximize the effectiveness of the United Nations in contributing to the building of secure, just, free and harmonious societies offering opportunities and higher standards of living for all. The activities of the subprogramme will promote the implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development. An important focus of the subprogramme during the biennium 1998-1999 will be the preparations for the special session of the General Assembly in the year 2000 to evaluate implementation of the commitments and plans agreed upon at the World Summit for Social Development and to plan future action, pursuant to Assembly resolution 51/202 of 17 December 1996. The subprogramme will also provide active support to the implementation of other relevant international instruments, such as the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, the Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities, the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, the International Plan of Action on Ageing and the United Nations Principles for Older Persons. 7A.43 The work of the Division will be organized around four clusters related to the major themes resulting from the Summit: (a) poverty eradication and employment; (b) social integration; (c) socio-economic policy and development management; and (d) intergovernmental support services and implementation. Specific tasks will include monitoring and social analysis, including the preparation of a supplement to the Report on the World Social Situation; policy and programme development; policy advice and technical cooperation; facilitating the negotiation of agreed positions, resolutions and international standards and norms; coordination of activity on social issues within the United Nations system; exchange of information and ideas among Governments and between Governments and the non-governmental sectors – business, unions, civil society and scholars; and advocacy on behalf of groups needing special support. 7A.44 Substantive support for the annual sessions of the expanded Commission for Social Development will be enhanced so that the Commission can carry out its responsibilities for follow-up to and review of implementation of the Copenhagen Programme of Action, including the preparation of the agreed priority themes, “social integration and participation” (1998) and “social services for all” (1999). Documentation, information and substantive services will also be provided to the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly in accordance with the multi-year programme of work of the Commission (1997-2000). 7A.45 The Division will assist in the preparations for the first world conference of youth ministers, to be hosted by the Government of Portugal with the support of the United Nations. Particular attention will also be paid to the preparation and broad-based observation in 1999 of the International Year of Older Persons, including substantive servicing of the ad hoc support group established to assist the Commission in the observation of the Year. The Division will also serve as the global focal point for the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006). 7A.46 Another important dimension of the work of the Division will be to promote the social perspective on development in relevant intergovernmental forums and through dialogue and cooperation with concerned programmes of the United Nations system. Assistance will be provided, on request, to Governments, including intergovernmental meetings, on policy, and evaluation and building capacities of specific population groups – older persons, youth, persons with disabilities – for participation in the development process. 7A.47 Advisory services will be provided to Governments, at their request, and regional organizations aimed at developing capacities in areas within the purview of the subprogramme, at the national and regional levels, with special emphasis on the needs of the least developed countries, Africa and small island developing States. Activities will comprise the formulation, execution, monitoring and evaluation of specific technical projects. Assistance will also be provided to Governments in devising multidisciplinary operational strategies that promote equitable social and economic development. The Division will pay particular attention to key areas of socio-economic development and management, including integrated development strategies and management; socio-economic policy formulation and implementation; employment creation and poverty eradication; and structural adjustment policies. In that regard, particular emphasis will be placed on social development, including improvement in human services; social integration, especially of disadvantaged, marginalized and vulnerable groups; reconciliation, including that of refugees and ex-combatants; the social dimensions of adjustment; and the participation of civil society. To facilitate the operationalization of global policies on social and economic development and to strengthen related linkages, the Division will organize training workshops and seminars and will undertake research and field studies, to be disseminated in both printed and electronic formats. 7A.48 To improve the availability of information and outreach among specialized constituencies, effective use will be made of information and communications technologies with a view to engaging interested communities in dialogue and to building networks among them on selected social issues. Substantive support will be provided, as appropriate, to ad hoc inter-agency meetings on priority social policy and development topics. Special attention will be given to the development and support of specialized networks of non-governmental organizations in the social development field. 7A.49 During the biennium 1998-1999, the following activities will be undertaken: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies a. Parliamentary documentation. Eleven reports on follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development (two); United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (two); guidelines in respect of cooperatives; follow-up to the International Year of the Family; follow-up to the World Programme of Action for Youth; International Year of Older Persons (two); and implementation of the Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities; and an interim report on the world social situation; b. Substantive servicing. Thirty-two meetings of the General Assembly, including meetings of the Third Committee; (ii) Economic and Social Council. Substantive servicing: eight meetings; (iii) Commission for Social Development a. Parliamentary documentation. Nine reports on promoting social integration and participation of all people (two); social services for all; initiation of the overall review of the implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development; survey of national family policies; work of the ad hoc support group of the Commission on preparations for observation of the International Year of Older Persons (two); and follow-up to work of the Special Rapporteur on Disability (two); b. Substantive servicing. Forty meetings (including eight of working groups); four inter-sessional meetings of the Bureau; and six meetings of the ad hoc open-ended support group of the Commission on preparations for observation of the International Year of Older Persons; c. Ad hoc expert groups. Fourteen ad hoc expert groups on promoting social integration and participation of all people; social services for all; initiation of the overall review of the implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development; legislative and administrative initiatives in support of cooperatives and development; employment strategies; monitoring of poverty-eradication strategies (General Assembly resolutions 50/107 of 20 December 1995 and 51/178 of 16 December 1996) (two); promoting a society for all ages; family-sensitive approaches to development (Assembly resolution 50/142 of 21 December 1995); investment policies for social development in countries with economies in transition; experiences in social reconciliation and conflict resolution in sub-Saharan Africa; preparation for the special session of the General Assembly in the year 2000 (two); and global patterns and trends in social expenditures and their implications for national and international development strategies; (i) Recurrent publications. Thirty-two recurrent publications, as follows: social policy and social progress (four); bulletin on eradication of poverty (two); United Nations youth information bulletin (six); disabled persons bulletin (six); bulletin on ageing (six); “Countdown to 1999” (six); and directory of bodies and organizations concerned with social policies and development (two); (ii) Non-recurrent publications. Twelve non-recurrent publications on social policy options for social integration and development; global patterns and trends in social expenditures and their implications for development strategies at the national and international levels; distribution of income and wealth; supplement to the 1997 Report on the World Social Situation; strategies on poverty eradication; capacity-building for institutional development and participation; national capacity-building for implementing family-sensitive policy case studies; selected country profiles of family-sensitive policies; world situation of youth; policy options for a society for all ages; selected innovations and best practices in relation to the goals and objectives of the International Year of Older Persons; and selected papers from expert group meetings; (iii) Technical material. Periodic updates of the database of specialized constituencies (governmental and non-governmental) concerned with social policies and development, including interested non-governmental committees; the Internet home page of the Division, including the follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development; and the social perspective on development home page with respect to substantive content, the development of external linkages and expanded mail-server capacities; (i) Ongoing consultations with Governments, United Nations system agencies, regional commissions and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations on follow-up related to social objectives of recent United Nations conferences and thematic years; (ii) Conference of Ministers responsible for youth issues (General Assembly resolution 50/81 of 14 December 1995): report of the conference, to be submitted to the Assembly through the Commission for Social Development; five background documents to the conference on national youth policies and international cooperation, youth participation, education, health and employment; and substantive and technical servicing of 10 meetings; (iii) Interregional meeting on policies to promote a society for all ages (General Assembly resolution 50/141 of 21 December 1995): report of the meeting; and background document on “Society for all ages: concept, principles and policy options”; (iv) Substantive and technical servicing of inter-agency consultations regarding the United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (annual) and of the ad hoc inter-agency meetings on youth, ageing and disabled persons (annual); (v) Substantive participation at annual meetings of the Committee for the Promotion and Advancement of Cooperatives; (vi) Support and promotion of networks among non-governmental organization committees and caucuses related to follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development; the United Nations Decade for Eradication of Poverty; older persons, including observation of the International Year of Older Persons; youth; family; and disabled persons; (vii) Support for and preparation of information materials for the observance of international days for poverty eradication (17 October), cooperatives (first Saturday of July), families (15 May), older persons (1 October) and disabled persons (3 December); (viii) Promotion and development of networks with research and academic centres and institutions; (ix) Substantive and technical servicing of the annual meeting of the Administrative Committee on Coordination/Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions on post-conflict resolution; participation in Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Rural Development; (d) Technical cooperation (RB/XB) (i) Advisory services a. Substantive support, on request, to initiatives of Governments to implement further international instruments related to social policies and planning, social institutions and participation and social integration, including substantive support of activities financed by general trust funds in the social development field, such as activities of the Special Rapporteur on Disability and their follow-up; b. Assisting Governments of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, in cooperation with United Nations agencies and commissions, in analytical assessment, diagnostic studies and evaluations of their current social situations, as well as follow-up on the World Summit for Social Development; missions in social policy and social development; (ii) Group training including seminars and workshops Integrating disability concerns in planning and technical assistance projects; social analysis, including assessment of the impact of policies on specific population groups; social integration; (iii) Field projects Field projects (country, regional and interregional) in the area of social development. Subprogramme 4 Sustainable development Table 7A.14 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.15 Post requirements Programme: Sustainable development 7A.50 The subprogramme will be implemented by the Division for Sustainable Development. The main objective of the Division is to provide coordinated support for the implementation of Agenda 21 and other outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States and work programmes and decisions adopted by the Commission on Sustainable Development and the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session (resolution S-19/2). 7A.51 During the biennium, substantive support to and servicing of the Commission on Sustainable Development will be further enhanced. The subprogramme will continue to aim at developing a comprehensive framework to integrate better the economic, social and environmental aspects of sustainable development. Analytical studies and reports assessing progress in the implementation of Agenda 21, at the international and national levels, including at the level of major groups, will be prepared. Assistance will be provided in the formulation of policy proposals on sustainable development issues, and support will be extended to consensus-building in the Commission on Sustainable Development, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other relevant intergovernmental and expert bodies. Support will also be provided to the Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for Development, the Committee on Natural Resources and, subject to a decision on its continuation, to the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board on Sustainable Development. Special focus will continue to be given to the promotion of a dialogue and strengthening the partnerships for sustainable development with the major groups, including business and industry, the scientific community and non-governmental organizations. 7A.52 The subprogramme will include activities related to the implementation of thematic programmes of work adopted by the Commission on Sustainable Development in such areas as financial resources and mechanisms, changing production and consumption patterns, transfer of environmentally sound technology and indicators of sustainable development. Pursuant to the decisions of the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session, support will be provided to intergovernmental processes on forests, freshwater and energy, as well as to such new areas of international cooperation as tourism and transport. 7A.53 Special attention will be paid to the efforts in support of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. The relevant work will result in contributions to the consideration of issues relating to small island developing countries in the Commission on Sustainable Development and the preparations for the special session of the General Assembly on a five-year review of progress in the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, to be held in 1999. South-South cooperation in the area of sustainable development will also be further promoted, especially through regional exchanges of national experiences in the implementation of Agenda 21, including reviews by and among those countries which agree to do so within regions. 7A.54 The subprogramme will continue to serve as the custodian of data provided by Member States in their national reports. In order to facilitate exchanges of national experiences and good practices in sustainable development, the access of Governments, international organizations and non-State actors to relevant information, including in electronic form, will be improved. Further emphasis will be given to the strengthening of coordinated approaches towards sustainable development among the organizations of the United Nations system through the Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development and its task managers, with a view to integrating further the concept of sustainable development in United Nations system-wide activities, formulating collective policy proposals and recommendations for action on key sustainable development issues and effective monitoring of the implementation of Agenda 21, the outcome of the nineteenth special session of the General Assembly and other intergovernmental mandates in the area of sustainable development. 7A.55 In order to support the formulation and implementation of national strategies that promote sustainable development and to strengthen relevant institutional capacities at the national level, the subprogramme, at the request of Governments, will provide advisory services and undertake training activities. Particular attention will be given to such issues as financing of sustainable development, policy instruments for changing consumption and production patterns, sustainable development planning and policy formulation, sustainable development indicators and sustainable management of mineral, water and energy resources. Attention will be given to the involvement of local initiatives and participation in sustainable development efforts. 7A.56 During the biennium 1998-1999, the following activities will be undertaken: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental/expert bodies (RB/XB) a. Parliamentary documentation. Five reports on implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (General Assembly resolution 51/183); vulnerability index for small island developing States; five-year review of the Barbados Programme of Action on Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States; and products harmful to health and the environment (two); b. Substantive servicing. Thirty-six meetings of the Second Committee, including 20 for informal consultations; a. Parliamentary documentation. Four reports on the third session of the Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for Development; the fourth session of the Committee on Natural Resources; coordination of science and technology for development; and consumer protection; b. Substantive servicing. Eight meetings of the Council and 24 meetings of informal consultations; (iii) Commission on Sustainable Development and its Bureau and subsidiary bodies a. Parliamentary documentation. It is estimated that up to 44 reports will be prepared on issues to be included in the Commission’s work programme for 1998-1999 (10); for the Commission on Sustainable Development’s Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (10); on the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action on Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (15); on assessment of national implementation of Agenda 21 with graphical annexes (2); on streamlining of the national reporting process (2); on provision of common access to United Nations system information on sustainable development; and on the work of the High-level Advisory Board on Sustainable Development (4) (subject to the decision on its continuation). In addition, up to 50 background papers will be submitted to the Commission and 10 background papers to the Bureau; b. Substantive servicing. Forty meetings of the Commission and 32 in-session drafting group meetings; 40 meetings of the inter-sessional subsidiary bodies; 40 meetings of the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests; 20 meetings of the Commission’s Bureau; informal consultations; and 12 meetings of the open-ended intergovernmental group of experts on energy and sustainable development to be held in conjunction with inter-sessional meetings of the Commission; (iv) Committee on Natural Resources a. Parliamentary documentation. Nine reports on activities of the organizations of the United Nations system in the field of water resources and inter-agency coordination (three); follow-up to the comprehensive assessment of the freshwater resources of the world; issues related to the spatial planning of land and water resources; reports on activities of the United Nations system in the field of mineral resources and inter-agency cooperation (two); development and application of state-of-the-art technologies for the utilization/reprocessing of mineral industry waste with a view to reducing the ecological burden on the environment; and a discussion paper on the basic problem of improving the capacity of developing countries and countries with economies in transition to capture the maximum economic and social benefits of their potential for mineral production; b. Substantive servicing. Four plenary and six working group meetings on water and mineral resources and six meetings of informal consultations at the fourth session of the Committee; (v) Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy and on Energy for Development a. Parliamentary documentation. Six reports on follow-up to the decisions/recommendations of the Committee at its previous session; environmentally sound and efficient technologies; renewable sources of energy, including biomass, ethanol and wind energy; development and implementation of rural energy policies; energy and transportation; and coordination of activities of the organizations of the United Nations system in the field of energy; b. Substantive servicing. Sixteen meetings of the Committee and four informal consultation meetings; (vi) Ad hoc expert groups (RB/XB). Thirty-three ad hoc expert groups on changing consumption and production patterns (one); evaluation of the testing phase of indicators of sustainable development (one); phase III on indicators of sustainable development (two); priority issues for small island developing States (two); financial issues of Agenda 21 (two); the Global Modelling Forum (two); modalities for implementation of sustainable development strategies (two); strengthening regional cooperation and coordination in implementing Agenda 21 (four); implementation of the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (one); technological transformation for sustainable development (four); major group concept (one); participation and role of the private sector in sustainable development (one); information on sustainable development for decision-making (two); data-gathering and processing needs for updating future comprehensive assessments of the freshwater resources of the world (one); global knowledge base on mineral resource potential (one); assessment of options for water resources management and the implications for private investment (one); barriers to sustainable energy development in developing countries with emphasis on Africa (one); energy in the transportation sector (one); challenges and barriers to achieving energy and material efficiency (one); South-South cooperation in renewable energy development (one); and interregional seminar on consumer protection: extension of the guidelines for consumer protection (one); (i) Analysis of national information and preparation of country profiles. Two sets of guidelines for Governments for submission of voluntary national information on their activities to implement Agenda 21; two sets of country profiles based on individual national reports; preparation of five country energy profiles; (ii) Recurrent publications. Thirty-nine publications: CSD Update (12); indicators of sustainable development: framework and methodologies; sustainable development series: thematic papers on sustainable development issues (four); financial issues of Agenda 21 (two); Natural Resources Forum (eight); International Rivers and Lakes Newsletter (four); newsletter on technical activities in planning and management of natural resources, to be issued in electronic format (four); energy newsletter (two); Consolidated List of Products Whose Consumption and/or Sale Have Been Banned, Withdrawn, Severely Restricted or Not Approved by Governments (two); (iii) Non-recurrent publications. Thirteen non-recurrent publications on principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development and brief series on the results of regional round tables (four); groundwater management for the twenty-first century: prospects for control and recovery; from regulation to participation: options for water resources management with special emphasis on small island developing States; corporate-community relationships and roles in promoting sustainable development in the mineral sector with special focus on African countries; analysis of electricity requirements and viable supply options for sustainable development; supply and use of low-carbon natural gas with higher efficiency conversion and enhanced use in the transport sector; gender issues in sustainable energy development; clean coal technology update; extension of the guidelines for consumer protection; (iv) Technical material. Development, maintenance and updating of the databases on the sustainable development Web site (virtual country profiles); the sustainable development section of the departmental Web site; the directory of national sustainable development focal points; the network of focal points for indicators of sustainable development; small island developing States; policy instruments for changing production/consumption patterns; and water resources, concerning global quantity, quality and management issues; as well as information on activities of organizations of the United Nations system and other international organizations and non-governmental organizations in the field of energy and water resources; promotion and dissemination of a new release of groundwater for Windows software (United Nations publication); case studies of sustainable energy services; two videos: energy services to the rural poor; and coal mine safety and environmental issues; (i) Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development and its task managers system a. Documentation. Twenty background papers for the Committee (10) and the meetings of the task managers (10); and 8 reports submitted to the Administrative Committee on Coordination on meetings of the Committee (4) and meetings of the task managers (4); b. Substantive servicing. Twelve meetings of the Committee and eight meetings of the task managers system; (ii) Steering Committee for Water Supply and Sanitation and the Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Water Resources a. Documentation. Four reports and background papers; b. Substantive servicing. Twenty meetings; (iii) Substantive and technical servicing of the Management Board of the United Nations Technical Cooperation Programme in Natural Resources and Energy; joint programming activities with regional commissions in association with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD); (iv) External relations and outreach, including with non-governmental organizations. Participation in and substantive support to various intergovernmental, inter-agency, expert and major group meetings that are directly related to or organized in support of the Commission on Sustainable Development work programme; liaison with financial institutions, including the Global Environment Facility; special events, such as World Water Day, and those held during the sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development, such as support to youth activities (regional consultations with youth, youth indicators and networking) and “major-group days”; and cooperation with Consumers International, the International Organization for Standardization and the International Cooperative Alliance on issues of consumer protection; (i) Policy advisory services. A number of missions to Governments of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, at their request and in cooperation with United Nations agencies and regional commissions, related to formulation of strategies that promote sustainable development, including financing of sustainable development, use of economic instruments and building relevant institutional capacities, including for monitoring and assessment, as well as related to the management of mineral, water and energy resources; (ii) Training. Organizing national, subregional and regional training meetings and workshops for and with national policy makers; (iii) Field projects (country, regional and interregional). Provision of technical services to a number of technical cooperation projects on water and mineral resources management and other technical cooperation projects related to energy resources in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. Subprogramme 5 Statistics Table 7A.16 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.17 Post requirements Programme: Statistics 7A.57 The subprogramme will be implemented by the Statistics Division. 7A.58 The Statistics Division, during the biennium 1998-1999, will continue to provide substantive inputs to the activities of the Statistical Commission and its Working Group and to serve as a global centre for the international collection, standardization, analysis and dissemination of economic, social and related data, with particular attention to data systems on international trade, environment, energy, industrial commodity production, national accounts and demographic and social statistics. In particular, the Division will continue to develop the United Nations Economic and Social Information System (UNESIS) in cooperation with the regional commissions. UNESIS is an information system encompassing data collection, processing, storage, exchange and dissemination of economic and social information to users for policy-making purposes. 7A.59 Special efforts will be made to improve the usefulness and accessibility of international economic and social data to international and national policy makers. The quality of international statistics and metadata and their usefulness for policy monitoring and analysis will be enhanced through the development and application of new data-processing, network and quality control technologies to enhance coverage, reliability and timeliness in collection, processing and dissemination. 7A.60 Efforts of the Division to expand the number of countries that implement the 1993 System of National Accounts will continue. The Statistics Division, in close collaboration with other international organizations, will undertake a series of activities aimed at improving economic statistics and promoting the System of National Accounts through training and other forms of technical cooperation. 7A.61 The subprogramme will continue to play an important part in the implementation of Agenda 21, particularly with regard to the development and dissemination of integrated environmental and economic accounting statistics and indicators of sustainable development. For example, revisions to the System for Integrated Environmental and Economic Accounting will be produced to improve the international community’s ability to measure the environment-related expenditures and the impact of human activity on the environment. 7A.62 To monitor progress in the human dimensions of development, the Division will extend the scope and dissemination of consistent and integrated sets of social statistics (including demographic, housing, gender and disability statistics and social indicators and analysis). 7A.63 The Division will continue to coordinate and harmonize the collection and dissemination of statistical information by the international agencies. It will also continue to provide support to Member States in the development and strengthening of their institutional capabilities in the area of statistics and statistical data-processing through the provision of professional advisory services, workshops, seminars and fellowships, with particular emphasis on developing countries, especially those in the African region and small island developing countries. The Division will continue to provide professional advisory services to build national capacity in statistics and to encourage intra-regional dialogue and networks to promote South-South cooperation. A key dimension of the subprogramme will continue to be the coordination and development of international statistical standards and classifications. In addition, the Division will endeavour to promote the use of modern surveying and mapping techniques as a tool for growth and development, including in the context of regional cartographic conferences. 7A.64 During the biennium the following activities will be undertaken: (i) Substantive servicing of meetings. Statistical Commission (10 meetings); Working Group on International Statistical Programmes and Coordination (8 meetings); Committee on Contributions (80 meetings); Fifth Committee (20 meetings); Seventh United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names (4 meetings); nineteenth and twentieth sessions of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names (7 meetings); (ii) Parliamentary documentation. Nine reports to the Statistical Commission at its thirtieth session on progress in international trade statistics, national accounts, critical issues in economic statistics, including the International Comparison Project, international classifications, UNESIS draft standards for data structure and metadata in international data exchange and dissemination; one report of the Working Group on its nineteenth session; two reports of the Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Statistical Activities; one report of the Task Force on Environment Statistics; one report on progress in demographic, housing, social and gender statistics; one report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on development indicators of women’s rights; one report to the Commission on the Status of Women on the development of gender statistics; one report to the Commission on Human Settlements on the development of human settlements statistics; one report to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on the United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems; one report to the Working Group on International Statistical Programmes and Coordination on inventory of data-collection activities; and outlines of substantive reports for the thirtieth session of the Statistical Commission; (iii) Ad hoc expert group meetings. Seven ad hoc expert group meetings on environmental statistics, vital statistics and civil registration systems; review of the Guide to Economic Characteristics in Censuses; the computerization of national accounts, international economic and social classifications (two expert meetings); and review of UNESIS draft standards for data structure and metadata in international data exchange and dissemination; (i) Eighty-two recurrent publications. The Compendium of Environmental Indicators; Environment Statistics Newsletter (4); Industrial Commodity Statistics Yearbook, 1996 and 1997; 1996 Energy Balances and Electricity Profiles; Energy Statistics Yearbook, 1996 and 1997; Demographic Yearbook, 48th and 49th editions; Population and Vital Statistics Reports (8); Compendium of Human Settlements Statistics; Monthly Bulletin of Statistics (24, print and on-line); Statistical Yearbook, 1998 and 1999; World Statistics Pocketbook, 1998 and 1999; International Trade Statistics Yearbook, vols. I and II (45th and 46th editions); international trade statistics (COMTRADE) microfiches (2); classifications hotline newsletter (6 on-line); Yearbook of National Accounts Statistics, 1996 and 1997 (print); SNA Newsletter: SNA News and Notes (4); Social Indicators (Internet) (8); Statistical Indicators on the World’s Women (Internet) (2); Standard Country or Area Codes for Statistical Use (Rev. 5); World Cartography Bulletin (2); Newsletter of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names (4); (ii) Thirteen non-recurrent publications. Report on country studies in environmental accounting; Principles and Recommendations for Population and Housing Censuses (CD-ROM); Indicators on the World’s Women; principles and recommendations for vital statistics and civil registration systems; Guide on Development and Analysis of Criminal Justice Statistics (in cooperation with the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Division); UNESIS standards for data structure and metadata in international data exchange and dissemination: technical paper; compendium of country experiences with the computerization of national accounts; technical report on the compilation of production accounts for the financial sector; compendium of country experiences with the practical compilation of household sector accounts; Functional Classifications of the System of National Accounts; Guide to Economic Characteristics in Population and Housing Censuses; Handbook on Census Management; Manual on Fishery Accounting; (iii) Technical material. Technical papers on environmental accounting (annual); synopsis of the inventory of activities in environmental statistics; revised commodity list for use in the area of industrial commodity production statistics; use of statistics for monitoring national implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; second version of the microcomputer interface “COMTRADE for Windows”; technical papers on conceptual issues in national and satellite accounting and analysis (annual); training material for the implementation of the System of National Accounts; recurrent analytical tables based on the national accounts database (annual); correspondence tables between classifications (annual); alphabetical and numeric index of sections 5 to 9 of the Central Product Classification, version 1.0; update of the Classifications Inventory (annual); Classification of the Functions of Government (Rev.1); Classification of Individual Consumption by Purpose; report on the Inventory of Classifications; International Comparison Project Information Circular (in print and on-line) (annual); Central Product Classification, version 1.0; Manual of Trade-in-Services; draft compiler’s manual for international trade statistics; disability indicators on the Internet (1998) and update (1999); Wistat (version 4); Trial International Classification of Activities on Time-Use Statistics (Internet) (1998); and the Statistics Division’s Internet home page (monthly updates); “Technical materials and technical papers for the twentieth session of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names”; (iv) Updated databases on environment and national accounts; general industrial statistics on mining, electricity and water; commodity production statistics; index numbers of industrial production; construction statistics; trade statistics; classifications; demographic and social statistics; responses to ad hoc requests from Member States and other users for information on internationally recommended concepts and methods, as well as national practices in the fields of environment, energy and industry statistics, trade statistics, national accounts statistics, classifications and demographic and social statistics; provision of information on computer tapes, diskettes, printouts and customized formats in the fields of environment, energy and industry statistics, international trade statistics, national accounts statistics, classifications, demographic and social statistics and UNESIS common databases; (i) Participation in activities of intergovernmental bodies outside the United Nations system. Substantive servicing and participation in annual meetings of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Advancement of Environment Statistics, the Group on Production Classifications, the Voorburg Group on Service Statistics, the London Group on the revision of the System of Environment and Economic Accounting and the Harmonized System Committee of the World Customs Organization; and provision of advice on scale of assessment methodology to other organizations (African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, OAU, etc.); (ii) Participation in activities of non-governmental organizations, including the session of the International Statistical Institute; participation in activities of the International Federation of Surveyors, the International Cartographic Association and the International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing; (iii) Participation in activities of funds, programmes and agencies of the United Nations system, including the Inter-secretariat Working Group on National Accounts; Task Force of Statistics of International Trade-in-Services; inter-agency task forces on environmental statistics, industrial and construction statistics, international trade statistics and finance statistics; Steering Committee on the Coordination of Technical Assistance in Statistics to the Countries of the Former Soviet Union; Conference of European Statisticians; Conference of African Planners, Statisticians and Demographers; Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific Committee of Statistics; Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia Committee of Statistics; Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean/OAS Committee of Statistics; Coordinating Committee for African Statistical Development; Joint Consultative Group on Policy/Gender and Development Subgroup; and Inter-agency Census Coordination Committee for Sub-Saharan Africa; (iv) Substantive servicing of the annual meeting of the Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Statistical Activities and participation in the Administrative Committee on Coordination Inter-agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality; (i) Advisory services at the request of Governments. Technical advisory services on economic, demographic, social, industrial, energy and environment and trade statistics to developing countries and countries with economies in transition; and ad hoc provision of technical cooperation services on national accounts and computers and informatics; (ii) Group training (seminars, workshops, symposia). Organization of training workshops for developing regions; (iii) Fellowships. Provision of short-term training, fellowships, study tours and on-the-job training for participants from developing countries and countries with economies in transition; (iv) Field projects. Provision of technical services to Member States and regional and interregional projects and training to assist developing countries and countries with economies in transition to strengthen national capabilities in the collection, processing and dissemination of statistics. Subprogramme 6 Population Table 7A.18 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.19 Post requirements Programme: Population 7A.65 This subprogramme will be implemented by the Population Division. 7A.66 The activities of the subprogramme during the 1998-1999 biennium will support the implementation of the actions contained in the Programme of Action adopted by the International Conference on Population and Development. In particular, the activities will include monitoring progress towards the achievement of the goals set out in the Programme of Action, as well as analysing and investigating new policy issues and emerging global trends in the field of population and development. 7A.67 Documentation and substantive services will be provided to the Commission on Population and Development, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, according to the long-term programme of the work of the Population Division and as mandated. Analytical reports will be produced on the thematic issues before the Commission in 1998 and 1999, as well as the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development. 7A.68 A major focus of the subprogramme will be to provide accurate and timely information and analyses of population trends and policies. During the biennium 1998-1999, official United Nations demographic estimates and projections will be prepared for all countries and areas of the world, as well as urban and rural areas and major cities. Those estimates and projections will serve as the standard and consistent set of population figures for use throughout the United Nations system. 7A.69 International migration, an area of concern highlighted by the Conference and by the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, and the demographic and social consequences of the ageing of populations, will be two of the emerging issues of importance that will be addressed. Emphasis will be placed on the measurement of levels and trends of international migration, the analysis of its causes and its relationship to development. Other priority areas for analysis will be national population policies, including fertility, mortality and migration policies, and the relationships among population dynamics and development issues. Studies will be carried out on the social, economic and other factors that affect mortality, fertility, migration and population growth, and on population change and its effects on the social, economic and environmental conditions of people. 7A.70 The activities in this subprogramme will increase Member States’ capacity to formulate national population and related policies for the effective implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development. Through the provision of technical cooperation, the subprogramme will assist Governments in improving their institutional capabilities for the collection and analysis of national population information and for the formulation of national policies. As part of the follow-up to the Conference, the subprogramme will include the strengthening and expansion of the Population Information Network (POPIN) to enable it to respond effectively to requests for information and to support coordination among the United Nations entities in the field of population. 7A.71 During the biennium the following activities will be undertaken: (i) Substantive servicing of meetings. Second Committee of the General Assembly (4 meetings); Economic and Social Council (4 meetings); Commission on Population and Development (22 meetings); and inter-sessional meetings of the Bureau of the Commission (8 meetings); (ii) Parliamentary documentation. Seven reports to the Commission on Population and Development on world population monitoring (two); review and appraisal of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development; progress reports on activities in the field of population (two); proposed programme of work in the field of population for 2000-2001; and report on world demographic trends; (iii) Ad hoc expert group meeting on population ageing; (i) Twenty-four recurrent publications. Levels and trends of international migration; international migration and its relationship to development; World Population Prospects annex tables; World Population Prospects, Sex and Age Distribution of World Population; World Urbanization Prospects, annex tables; World Urbanization Prospects; report of the Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Demographic Estimates and Projections at its twentieth session; Global Population Policy Database, 1999; Population Policy Diskette Documentation; Population, Resources, Environment and Development Database Documentation; Summary of World Population Monitoring (annual); World Population Monitoring (annual); review and appraisal of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development; Population Bulletin of the United Nations (semi-annual); and Population Newsletter (semi-annual); (ii) Six non-recurrent publications on mortality; contraceptive use; nuptiality, adolescence and childbearing; the results of the eighth population inquiry among Governments; emerging issues in population policy; and population and development; (iii) Technical material. Databases on contraceptive use; fertility levels and trends; mortality; international migration; world population; demographic indicators; sex and age in five-year groups; populations; sex and age in single years; age patterns of fertility; urban and rural areas; urban agglomerations; global review and inventory of population policies; and population, resources, environment and development; (iv) Information materials and services. Wall charts on world population, urban and rural areas, urban agglomerations and contraceptive use; provision of ad hoc information services and data on contraceptive use, fertility, international migration, mortality and national, urban, rural and city estimates and projections and demographic indicators; provision of ad hoc information services and data on population policies and on interrelationships between population and development trends; catalogue of Population Division publications; documentation on POPIN and the POPIN Gopher/World Wide Web site; population reference centre acquisition list (monthly); activities of the POPIN Advisory and Coordination Committee (annual); activities of the POPIN Information Technology Working Group (annual); state of the art report in the area of population and development strategies; evaluation of population and reproductive health programmes; population data analysis and research; training in population and development; (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB/XB). Contributions to interdepartmental activities, including activities of inter-agency task forces, on international migration, mortality, fertility and family planning; activities of the Administrative Committee on Coordination Subcommittee on Demographic Estimates and Projections (twentieth session); inter-agency and inter-departmental activities on provision of basic social services for all, population policies, status of women and sustainable development; collaboration with organizations of the United Nations system in the preparation of reports to the Commission on Population and Development on the activities of the United Nations system in the field of population and on the follow-up to the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development; activities of the POPIN Advisory and Coordinating Committee and collaboration with organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of population information through the POPIN Gopher/World Wide Web site; liaison with governmental and non-governmental organizations working in the field of population in relation to the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development; (i) Advisory missions to Member States and provision of technical support in the fields of mortality, internal and international migration; population estimates and projections; implementation of population policies and programmes and development issues; and information technologies in the field of population; (ii) Provision of advice to Member States and regional support teams in the formulation and implementation of population and development strategies; training in population and development; population data analysis and research; and evaluation of population and reproductive health programmes. Subprogramme 7 Global development trends, issues and policies Table 7A.20 Summary by object of expenditure Trust Fund for Development Planning and Projection Table 7A.21 Post requirements Programme: Global development trends, issues and policies 7A.72 The subprogramme will be implemented by the Division for Development Policy Analysis. The overall objective of the subprogramme is to provide timely information on and analysis of recent and anticipated global macroeconomic developments, with a view to promoting the development of all countries and their full and effective integration into the world economy. 7A.73 With the integration, globalization and liberalization of the world economy, Governments increasingly now take into account developments outside their national boundaries. Individually, in formulating their national development strategies and actions, Governments need to foresee and react to the consequences for their national economies of increasing exposure to external forces and take measures to ensure that their countries are in a position to seize the opportunities that the global economy presents. Collectively, Governments require information about developments in the world economy that call for a multilateral response. 7A.74 As a contribution to these needs for global economic analysis, a first set of activities under this subprogramme will involve the monitoring and assessment of economic developments that have international causes or consequences. The associated outputs of the subprogramme will include semi-annual short-term economic forecasts for the regions and major economies of the world. The annual World Economic and Social Survey will complement these forecasts with analyses of topical global economic issues, while the preparation of a long-term socio-economic perspective will facilitate the formulation of development strategies for the twenty-first century. 7A.75 A second set of activities will be the examination of national policies, in which attention will be focused on two aspects. The first will assess the efforts and achievements of countries in undertaking measures to improve their position in the world economy; the objective will be to identify the lessons learned. The second will address the consequences of national economic developments and policy measures for other countries; in particular the more vulnerable members of the international community (such as African countries and small island developing States). The objective of this second area of work will be to support international economic cooperation, in particular the efforts of the United Nations in this regard. 7A.76 During the biennium the following activities will be undertaken: (i) Substantive servicing of meetings. Second Committee of the General Assembly (24 meetings); Economic and Social Council (16 meetings); Committee for Development Planning (20 meetings); working groups of the Committee for Development Planning (30 meetings); (ii) Parliamentary documentation a. General Assembly. Eight reports on finance for development (one); global financial integration and the strengthening of collaboration between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods Institutions, in particular the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (two); external debt crisis and development (two); sustainable development and international economic cooperation: implementation and follow-up to major consensus agreements on development (one); financing of development, including net transfer of resources between developed and developing countries (one); and overall socio-economic perspective of the world economy (one); b. Economic and Social Council. World Economic and Social Survey (two); reports on the state of the world economy (two); and reports on the work of the Committee for Development Planning (two); c. Ten reports on thematic issues submitted to the working groups of the Committee for Development Planning (five) and the outcome of the working groups of the Committee (five); (iii) Ten ad hoc expert group meetings on emerging macroeconomic issues related to the preparation of the World Economic and Social Survey (four); the prospects for sub-Saharan Africa in a globalizing economy; Asian development successes: causes and replicability; and the Project LINK outlook for the world economy (four); (i) Recurrent publication. World Economic and Social Survey (annual); (ii) Non-recurrent publications. Overall Socioeconomic Perspective for the World Economy; six working papers on selected macroeconomic issues, including relationships between economic growth and trade in services, the relationship between economic growth and merchandise trade, financing the social safety net, emerging issues in development finance and strategies for international development in the twenty-first century; (iii) Technical material. Four issues of Project Link World Outlook; four issues of World Economic Situation and Emerging Global Macroeconomic Issues; (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB/XB). Consultations and coordination with IMF, the World Bank and other relevant specialized organizations, including UNCTAD and the regional commissions; provision of improved global on-line access to the LINK model and its analytical databases to other bodies of the United Nations system and to Member States; external relations with academic, governmental and non-governmental economic research institutes through the exchange of background papers and consultations. Subprogramme 8 Public economics and public administration Table 7A.22 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.23 Post requirements Programme: Public economics and public administration 7A.77 This subprogramme is an amalgamation of subprogrammes 7.4, Global approaches to social and microeconomic issues and policies, and 8.1, Public administration, finance and development, of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001.a It will ensure synergy in the delivery of all programme activities under both subprogrammes. The subprogramme is implemented by the Division for Public Economics and Public Administration, and its objective will be to assist the international community in its policy deliberations for developing and promoting global approaches to critical aspects and dimensions of public economics and public administration in the development process, with a view to integrating them effectively into national and international development strategies. This will be achieved by contributing to normative activities of the relevant intergovernmental and expert bodies, carrying out multisectoral analyses and providing policy advice to interested Governments, in particular those of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, in the areas within its purview. 7A.78 The subprogramme will focus on meeting the needs of Member States, at their request, for information and policy-oriented analysis on the role of the State and of market mechanisms in national efforts to foster economic growth and to increase efficiency and distributional equity. Activities will include analytical studies on the potential and shortcomings of market solutions in relation to problems of allocation, distribution and regulation, in particular with regard to the provision of public goods and services, at the national and international levels. Attention will also be paid to research on and analysis of public expenditure patterns and trends; privatization, deregulation and competition policies; the interaction between the public sector and technological innovation; and public policies regarding enterprise and private sector development. 7A.79 The subprogramme will provide assistance, on request, to Governments of developing countries and countries with economies in transition on key issues and emerging trends in public administration for development, in order to facilitate, through the exchange of knowledge and experience, their efforts to improve the efficiency of public institutions and administrative procedures. Activities will focus on strengthening government capacity, at the central and local levels, for policy development, administrative restructuring, civil service reform and institutional and human resource development; improving performance in the public sector; and introducing efficient and accountable managerial systems, structures and information technologies in accordance with national development objectives. Emphasis will be also placed on developing and promoting a participatory approach to policy-making. 7A.80 The impact of advisory and technical cooperation work will be enhanced through the subprogramme’s function as a clearing house for information and experiences in the field of public administration for development. The Division will utilize new and cost-effective technological approaches in the collection, maintenance and dissemination of information on public economics and public administration, in particular best practices, with a view to adaptation and replication in interested countries. Substantive documentation and support will be provided to the Meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, which provides policy guidance to the subprogramme in this area. 7A.81 Another important set of activities of the subprogramme relate to the support, within the context of national needs and priorities, to Governments’ efforts to introduce and promote rational management of tax systems and financial administration. Particular attention will be paid to activities related to strengthening national capacities for resource mobilization and revenue administration; enhancing the efficiency and performance of tax administration; and improving financial management skills in budgeting systems and techniques, accounting and auditing. In that regard, substantive and technical support will continue to be provided to the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters. 7A.82 The subprogramme will also respond to requests from Governments and intergovernmental bodies for information, methodologies, assessments and policy proposals regarding the linkages between political and economic issues and policies. The Division will prepare reports for submission to the General Assembly and the Security Council, as required, on the economic and social impact of United Nations-imposed sanctions, the imposition of coercive economic measures, and selected aspects of post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction. Cooperation with relevant organizations and institutions inside and outside the United Nations system, including non-governmental organizations, will be expanded. 7A.83 During the biennium 1998-1999, the following activities will be undertaken: (i) Substantive servicing of meetings. General Assembly (8 meetings); Economic and Social Council (6 meetings); meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance (in addition to technical servicing) (25 plenary and 20 working group meetings); and Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (in addition to technical servicing) (22 plenary and 16 working group meetings); a. General Assembly. Four reports: consolidated report on public administration and development (1998); reports on economic assistance to countries affected by the implementation of multilateral economic sanctions (1998 and 1999); and report on economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries (1999); b. Economic and Social Council. Three reports on privatization and regulation policies in developing countries and countries with economies in transition (in conjunction with the World Economic and Social Survey 1998); report on the Fourteenth Meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance (1998); report on the Ninth Meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (1999); c. Meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance. Report on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 50/225; report on the review of the work on the programme in public administration and finance; five analytical/working papers on thematic issues; d. Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters. Revised United Nations Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and Developing Countries; revised United Nations Manual for the Negotiation of Bilateral Tax Treaties between Developed and Developing Countries; (iii) Ad hoc expert group meetings. Privatization and regulation policies in developing countries and countries with economies in transition (1998); global patterns and trends in public expenditures and their implications for national and international development strategies (1999); the impact of multilateral sanctions on target countries and third States (1998); economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries (1999); professionalism and leadership in civil service systems (1998); civic participation in local governance (1999); public financial management: auditing standards and procedures (1998); capacity-building in civil service of least developed countries (1999); (i) Conferences. Preparation and holding, in cooperation with the Tokyo metropolitan government, of the World Conference on International Cooperation of Cities and Citizens; preparation and holding, jointly with the Economic Commission for Africa and in cooperation with the Italian and Japanese Governments, of an international conference on governance in Africa; (ii) Recurrent publications. Development Administration Newsletter (four issues); List of Publications on Public Economics and Public Administration (two issues); public administration profiles of selected African countries (five issues); and Supplement to International Tax Agreements; (iii) Non-recurrent publications. The role of market mechanisms in the provision of public goods and services; global patterns and trends in public expenditures and their implications for development strategies at the national and international levels; interaction between public sector and technological innovation; contribution of small and medium-size enterprises to economic development; public policies regarding private sector and enterprise development; capacity-building in civil service of least developed countries; guidelines on government re-engineering by the use of information technology; decentralization and recentralization in countries with economies in transition; professionalism and leadership in civil service systems; the role of civil society in local governance; governance in Africa: emerging issues and strategies; redesigning management systems and procedures; comparative study on civil service codes; South-South cooperation in public economics and public administration; public financial management: auditing standards and procedures; United Nations Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and Developing Countries (update); United Nations Manual for the Negotiation of Bilateral Tax Treaties between Developed and Developing Countries; (iv) Information services and technical material. Internet home page on public economics and public administration and on international cooperation in tax matters; technical documents available electronically at the United Nations Web site; country profiles in public administration available at the Web site; database on administrative reforms available on the Internet; policy, legal and regulatory framework for small enterprises in Africa; manual on administration and cost of elections (CD-ROM); (c) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison (RB/XB). Participation in meetings on public economics and public administration of global and regional intergovernmental organizations inside and outside the United Nations system; participation in activities of non-governmental organizations on issues within the Division’s purview; cooperation with the relevant United Nations programmes, such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the regional commissions, UNCTAD, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and the United Nations University, among others, in areas of mutual concern; substantive support to the subsidiary bodies of the Administrative Committee on Coordination on the follow-up to the global conferences, as well as the Sub-Group on Capacity-building for Post-conflict Rehabilitation and Reconstruction and the Sub-Group on Capacity-building for Governance in follow-up to General Assembly resolution 50/225, through provision of background papers and reports of the meetings; (d) Advisory services (RB/XB) (i) Advisory services. A number of needs assessment/diagnostic missions will be undertaken, on request, on programme design and project formulation on governance; civil service reform; human resources management and development; information technology for public management; local governance; decentralization; post-conflict rehabilitation; budgeting and budgetary systems; mobilization of internal and external resources; financial management capacities; tax reforms and tax administration; the role of the State and private sector in development; and the peace-development link. (ii) Seminars and workshops. South-South Forum on Governance and Public Management Reform; International Forum on Government Re-engineering by the Use of Information Technology; conference on civil service codes; and workshops on the role of civil society in local governance and on decentralization and recentralization in countries with economies in transition. Subprogramme 9 Combating desertification, particularly in Africa Table 7A.24 Summary by object of expenditure (b) Substantive activities: Table 7A.25 Post requirements Programme: Combating desertification, particularly in Africa 1998 only 7A.84 The legislative authority for the activities under this subprogramme derives from General Assembly resolution 47/188 of 22 December 1992, whereby the Assembly initiated the intergovernmental process on the elaboration of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly Africa, and established the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee. 7A.85 In June 1994, the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee adopted the Convention, which entered into force on 26 December 1996, three months after it received 50 ratifications. The Convention established a Global Mechanism and a Committee on Science and Technology as a subsidiary body of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention. The Conference of the Parties is its supreme body, and has broad authority to make the decisions necessary to promote the effective implementation of the Convention. The Conference of the Parties has also the authority to appoint ad hoc panels and establish other subsidiary bodies as necessary. The first session of the Conference of the Parties took place from 29 September to 10 October 1997. At that session, the Conference of the Parties designated a permanent secretariat and made arrangements for its functioning. The permanent secretariat is responsible to the Conference of the Parties. 7A.86 By its resolution 51/180 of 16 December 1996, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General, subject to the decision of the Conference of the Parties, (a) to consider authorizing the secretariat established pursuant to Assembly resolution 47/188 to act as secretariat for the transition period following the first session of the Conference of the Parties until the permanent secretariat designated by the Conference of the Parties began operating, which should not be later than 31 December 1998; and (b) to maintain the current programme budget for the interim secretariat and the arrangements relating to extrabudgetary resources until the permanent secretariat began operating. 7A.87 Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/180, the resources proposed for the interim secretariat of the Convention represent the requirements for the activities to be undertaken in 1998 only. Any modification to this arrangement recommended by the Conference of the Parties at its first session and endorsed by the Assembly at its fifty-second session would be reflected in revised estimates and/or a statement of programme budget implications to be submitted to the Assembly at that session. 7A.88 In accordance with the provisions of the Convention, the principal goals of the permanent secretariat will be to facilitate the achievement of the objectives of the Convention, notably by: (a) Making effective arrangements for and providing services and documentation to sessions of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies; (b) Compiling, analysing and transmitting, in accordance with guidelines of the Conference of the Parties, reports submitted to it by parties and organizations; (c) Facilitating the provision of assistance to affected developing country parties, on request, particularly those in Africa, in the compilation and communication of information required under the Convention; (d) Deriving maximum benefit from the coordination of its activities with the secretariats of other relevant international bodies and conventions; (e) Facilitating the organization and functioning of consultative processes at the national, subregional and regional levels in various regions; (f) Providing administrative support in close consultation with the central administrative services of the United Nations. 7A.89 Subject to the decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its first session, the following activities will be undertaken in 1998: a. Substantive servicing. Ten meetings and informal consultations of the Second Committee; b. Parliamentary documentation. Report on the Convention (pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/180); (ii) Second session of the Conference of the Parties (1998) a. Substantive servicing of meetings. Ten meetings of the Conference of the Parties and 16 meetings of the subsidiary bodies and the working groups to be held in parallel with the Conference of the Parties; and 10 meetings each of the ad hoc panels on networking of institutions; benchmarks and indicators; and research priorities; b. Parliamentary documentation. Provisional agendas for the second session of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies; directory of non-governmental organizations recommended for accreditation; and seven reports on the first session of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies; rules of procedure; report on measures to resolve questions on implementation; benchmarks and indicators to measure progress in the implementation of the Convention; organization of scientific and technological cooperation; networking of institutions and agencies; and global mechanism; (i) Recurrent publications. Convention to Combat Desertification quarterly newsletter; (ii) Non-recurrent publications. Two reports/framework papers on Convention-related activities in various regions; (iii) Public information activities. Production of a video report on a topic related to desertification; (iv) Exhibits. Picture exhibit on a desertification theme; (v) Booklets, pamphlets, fact sheets, wall charts, information kits. Booklets, fact sheets and leaflets on the Convention; simplified guide on the Convention: “Down to Earth”; posters and flyers; and other promotional items to be used at various meetings, in particular on the World Day to Combat Desertification; (vi) Press releases and conferences. Press releases and press briefings during sessions of the Conference of the Parties and on the occasion of the World Day to Combat Desertification; (vii) Special events. Youth event and round-table discussion on the occasion of the World Day to Combat Desertification; (viii) Technical material for outside users. Development of an information database on parties to the Convention, including all organizations, participants and journalists who are actively involved in the promotion and implementation of the Convention; and a specialized reference unit on the Convention to house official documents and relevant reports and publications; (i) In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention and of its regional annexes on the role of the secretariat, assistance to and participation in the activities of national, regional, and interregional intergovernmental bodies outside the United Nations system are envisaged in 1998 to facilitate the implementation of the Convention as follows: a. Africa. Assistance in the preparation of regional and subregional national action programmes; substantive support to 10 workshops/seminars to enable the launching of consultative processes on the Convention; institutional support to strengthen the capacities of regional, subregional and national coordination bodies involved with the implementation of the Convention; substantive technical and financial assistance to develop ongoing pilot projects in Maghreb and Sahel border areas; substantive support to meetings of multidisciplinary scientific and technical consultative committees of the subregional organizations; and for the establishment of a desertification information system in the subregional organizations; b. Asia. Substantive support to 13 national awareness seminars; institutional support to strengthen the capacities of national coordination bodies involved with the implementation of the Convention; assistance in the elaboration of a subregional action programme as a follow-up to the Conference on the Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS); substantive support to the subregional expert group for CIS countries; assistance in project formulation as a follow-up to the subregional consultation for Western Asia; substantive support to the Asian national focal points meeting and to the regional expert group meeting on the regional action programme for Asia, including the determination of thematic areas; c. Latin America and the Caribbean. Substantive support to five national awareness workshops; workshops on the subregional action plan in the Chaco region (Bolivia, Paraguay, Brazil and Argentina), in the Caribbean and in Central America; the fourth annual regional meeting on the Convention; a regional symposium on drought; the establishment of a regional coordination unit on the Convention in Mexico; assistance to countries in the region on the preparation of their national action programmes; and assistance in launching campaigns in different countries in the region to ratify and implement the Convention; d. Northern Mediterranean. Substantive support to one national awareness seminar and assistance in promoting cooperation among countries of the region as well as in intensifying exchanges with neighbouring countries from the Maghreb, the Balkans and Eastern Europe; (ii) Facilitation of substantive support to interregional-level processes. Substantive support to the Africa/Latin America forum and to the Africa/Asia forum on the Convention; (iii) Participation in activities of non-governmental organizations. Facilitation of national-level non-governmental organization activities relating to the Convention, including the implementation of pilot projects, and facilitation of the exchange of non-governmental organizations’ experiences and information; (iv) Participation in activities of programmes and agencies of the United Nations system. Participation in meetings on other conventions, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in meetings of United Nations agencies and programmes such as the World Meteorological Organization, UNDP, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the Commission on Sustainable Development, the Global Environment Facility and UNEP and in the Inter-Agency Meeting to Coordinate Actions on the Convention. Table 7A.26 Summary by object of expenditure Table 7A.27 Post requirements Organizational unit: Programme support 7A.90 Programme support includes the Executive Office and the Information Support Unit. Executive Office 7A.91 The Executive Office comprises the functions of the former Executive Offices of the Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development, the Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis, and the Department for Development Support and Management Services, and the Financial Management and Budgetary Control Service and Project Personnel Management and Training Service of the Department for Development Support and Management Services. Its primary responsibility will be to: (a) ensure, under the guidance and supervision of the Head of the Department and in close consultation with the Director of the substantive divisions, that all administrative and financial aspects of programme implementation and technical cooperation activities are carried out as effectively as possible; and (b) assist the senior management of the Department in efficiently discharging their financial, personnel and general administrative responsibilities. 7A.92 The Executive Office includes: (a) The Personnel Section. This section provides advice on matters relating to administrative issues and staff welfare; provides administrative support to Department of Economic and Social Affairs staff at Headquarters and those assigned to technical cooperation projects in the field; recruits and appoints project personnel under the 200 series of the staff rules for Headquarters and field projects under delegated authority; coordinates with the Office of Human Resources Management on the recruitment of staff under the 100 and 300 series of staff rules and the administration of their entitlements and conditions of service under delegated authority; and implements the training components of technical cooperation projects, including fellowships, group training, study tours, seminars, in-service training and workshops; (b) The Budget and Finance Section. This section is responsible for the following activities: coordination of the formulation of the programme budget proposals of the Department for submission to the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts; authorization of expenditures against funds allotted in accordance with allotment advices provided against the regular budget, trust funds and overhead accounts; financial monitoring of recorded expenditures against those accounts; certification of all payments; preparation of special reports on revenue matters; providing advice to the Department on all financial aspects of the regular budget trust funds; (c) The Technical Cooperation Finance Section. This section is responsible for the financial management and budgetary control of all the technical cooperation activities executed by the department, including those financed by the regular programme of technical cooperation. It is also responsible for the financial administration of the United Nations Associate Expert Programme. Functions of the section include the issuance of allotment advices for all projects; forecasting of programme and project deliveries; submission of expenditure reports for the funding agencies and preparation of year-end financial and statistical reports for inclusion in reports for various legislative organs. 7A.93 The Office also provides support to the New York office of the regional commissions and to the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women. Information Support Unit 7A.94 Under the guidance of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Information Support Unit provides and uses information technology in order to support: (a) the needs of staff of the Department for electronic information services to facilitate both research and dissemination of documents; (b) participation of Member States, non-governmental organizations, civil society and other actors in the intergovernmental processes serviced by the Department; (c) the central policy and coordination role of the Department in the economic and social activities of the United Nations system, in particular through the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs; and (d) the Under-Secretary-General in discharging his functions as Programme Manager. 7A.95 During the biennium the Unit will focus on electronic information services, including: (a) coordinating, integrating and providing information technology services in the Department, as required, and serving as a resource and advisory unit on information activities; (b) global electronic dissemination of parliamentary information on behalf of the Department’s substantive units; (c) making operational the Integrated Meeting and Documentation Information System, including integration with other departmental on-line resources, in support of the coordination and planning function of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs; (d) facilitating participation of Member States in intergovernmental processes and monitoring of results; and (e) participating in the development of information technology standards, policies and guidelines at the organizational and inter-agency levels, including representing the Department on the Information Technology Coordinating Committee of the Secretariat and its working groups, the working groups of the Information Systems Coordination Committee of the Administrative Committee on Coordination and the Joint United Nations/OECD Committees on the Macrothesaurus. Notes a Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/51/6/Rev.1 and Corr.1). 