%%%OBSERVER STATUS|

Sixty-third session Request for the inclusion of an item in the provisional agenda of the sixty-third session Observer status for the South Centre Letter dated 19 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General The Permanent Mission of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations has the honour to request, pursuant to rule 13 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the inclusion in the provisional agenda of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly of an additional item, entitled "Observer status for the South Centre". The request is made on behalf of the Executive Director of the South Centre. An explanatory memorandum (annex I) in support of the above request and a draft resolution (annex II) are attached to the present letter pursuant to rule 20 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. I also have the honour to request that the present letter be circulated as a document of the General Assembly. (Signed) Augustine P. Mahiga Ambassador Explanatory memorandum 1. The South Centre is an intergovernmental organization of developing countries (currently with 51 member States), with its offices in Geneva. The 1994 Intergovernmental Agreement to Establish the South Centre is currently deposited with the Secretary-General pursuant to his treaty depository functions under the Charter of the United Nations. A copy of the Agreement, as well as other information about the South Centre, is available from the South Centre website at http://www.southcentre.org. 2. According to the Agreement, the South Centre has the following among its central objectives: :: To promote South solidarity, South consciousness and mutual knowledge and understanding among the countries and peoples of the South; :: To promote various types of South-South cooperation and action, South-South links, networking and information exchange; :: To contribute to South-wide collaboration in promoting common interests and coordinated participation by developing countries in international forums dealing with South-South and North-South matters, as well as with other global concerns; :: To foster convergent views and approaches among countries of the South with respect to global economic, political and strategic issues related to evolving concepts of development, sovereignty and security; :: To contribute to better mutual understanding and cooperation between the South and the North on the basis of equity and justice for all, and to this end to the democratization and strengthening of the United Nations and its family of organizations. 3. Broadly, the Centre works to assist in developing the points of view of the South on major policy issues relating to, inter alia, trade, innovation and access to knowledge (including intellectual property), global governance, financing for development, labour and employment (including migration), and environment. Through its policy research, the South Centre seeks to generate ideas and action-oriented proposals for consideration by developing country Governments, institutions for South-South cooperation, intergovernmental organizations of the South, multilateral institutions, developed country partners, and non-governmental organizations and the global community at large. 4. The South Centre also seeks to foster improved North-South dialogue and interaction on a fair and equitable basis on key global issues in the belief that a mutual spirit of cooperation and understanding on common global problems is required for common global action thereon. In order to meet those objectives, and within the limits of its capacity and mandate, the Centre also seeks to respond to requests for policy advice and technical support from developing countries in the context of international negotiations and discussions in various international forums such as the World Trade Organization, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), and various bodies and specialized agencies of the United Nations system such as the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Human Rights Council and the Economic and Social Council 5. The South Centre currently has observer status with the Economic and Social Council, pursuant to Council decision 2006/244. It also has observer status in other specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system such as WIPO, UNCTAD and the World Trade Organization. 6. The South Centre's three current substantive programmes relate substantively to the major areas of work of the United Nations and the agenda of the General Assembly. The global governance for development programme undertakes policy research and provides technical support to developing countries in the areas of global institutional governance, financing for development and environment, with the objective of supporting the ability of the global system for multilateral governance and cooperation in those areas to support the development objectives of developing countries in an integrated manner; the trade for development programme supports, through policy research and technical advice, developing countries in international and regional trade negotiations, covering a broad range of thematic areas of work including trade in agricultural goods, trade in services, trade in nonagricultural goods, commodities and economic diversification; and the innovation and access to knowledge and intellectual property programme seeks to bring economic, political legal, scientific and related research, as well as policy analysis, to bear on the ongoing debate and formulation of policy responses to the development challenges facing developing countries including the least developed countries with respect to knowledge and technology. The aim is to contribute to the development, coordinated use and/or improvement of the capacities of these countries and their institutions to integrate the development dimension into their policies on innovation, access to knowledge and intellectual property. 7. The South Centre considers the United Nations to be one of its major partners, especially in the context of promoting and supporting the development objectives and aspirations of the South. In that regard, the work of the General Assembly, as the highest governing body of the United Nations, is of great relevance to the South and, therefore, of prime importance to the South Centre. Draft resolution Observer status for the South Centre in the General Assembly The General Assembly, Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the South Centre, 1. Decides to invite the South Centre to participate in the sessions and work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer; 2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution. 