%%%POVERTY MITIGATION|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|INTERNATIONAL DECADES|PARTNERSHIP|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|POVERTY|HUNGER|CIVIL SOCIETY|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|DEVELOPMENT PLANS|DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|ECONOMIC GROWTH|DONOR COUNTRIES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|

Sixty-third session * A/63/150. Item 56 (a) of the provisional agenda* Eradication of poverty and other development issues Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017) Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report is submitted in compliance with General Assembly resolution 62/205 on the proclamation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017). The report provides recommendations on how to make the Second Decade effective in support of poverty eradication-related internationally agreed development goals. Page Introduction Evaluation of the implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006) Lesson learned from current international decades Synopsis of views on the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017) Role of the United Nations system Conclusions and recommendations 1. In its resolution 62/205, the General Assembly proclaimed the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017) in order to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the internationally agreed development goals related to poverty eradication, including the Millennium Development Goals. It reiterated that eradicating poverty was the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in particular for developing countries. The Assembly urged all Governments, the international community, including the United Nations system, and all other actors to continue to pursue seriously the objective of poverty eradication. 2. In the same resolution, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit to it a report containing recommendations on how to make the Second Decade effective, in support of the poverty eradication-related internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. The present report responds to this request. 3. The report briefly summarizes the conclusion of the review of the first Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006); highlights lessons learned from current international decades proclaimed by the General Assembly; summarizes inputs received from Governments and civil society on how to make the Second Decade effective; and examines the role of the United Nations systems in scaling up poverty eradication efforts in support of the Second Decade. The report concludes with a number of recommendations for consideration by the General Assembly. II. Evaluation of the implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006) 4. The Secretary-General submitted to the Commission for Social Development a review of the first Decade (E/CN.5/2006/3) and to the General Assembly a comprehensive report evaluating its achievements (A/62/267). The evaluation also offered an opportunity to address the progress made in the fight against poverty at the midpoint of the Millennium Development Goals. 5. Poverty retreated globally over the course of the Decade, but much remains to be done. This progress at the global level was largely a result of successful poverty eradication efforts in China, but progress was very slow in some parts of the world. A somewhat similar assessment of the situation was made in 2000 at the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly and again at the 2005 World Summit. This suggests that the magnitude and complexity of the challenge to eradicate poverty calls for a much longer time frame, beyond 2015. 6. By the end of the Decade, poverty eradication had been adopted as an overarching theme of all global summits and conferences and had been firmly anchored at the core of the United Nations development agenda. Many developing countries had prioritized the goal of the eradication of poverty by setting poverty reduction targets and formulating and implementing national poverty reduction plans. 7. The mixed results in achieving poverty reduction have underscored the need for a better understanding of the nature and range of the deep-rooted obstacles that countries face in their efforts to reduce poverty. It has become clear that national development strategies need to be broad and inclusive, and should adopt an integrated and holistic approach that can address poverty in all its dimensions: access to health services, education, food, productive employment and decent work and financial resources; gender equality; and the empowerment and participation of all disadvantaged groups, including the poor, in the development process. Strategic action includes pragmatic fiscal policies and sound monetary policies that promote macroeconomic stability while stimulating public and private investment, employment creation and growth. While such strategies are gaining support, their operationalization remains a challenge. 8. It has also become evident that, without support from the donor community, national capacity-building and mobilization of national resources cannot be achieved by countries that experience serious difficulties in reducing poverty. Unfortunately, repeated commitment to align official development assistance (ODA) with national efforts to reduce poverty has been limited to debt relief, and spending on core development programmes remained constant over the Decade. 9. It is equally important for the international community to contribute to national efforts by creating a global economic environment that promotes economic growth and employment creation in developing countries. III. Lessons learned from current international decades 10. Currently, eight international decades proclaimed by the General Assembly are in effect. Three decades related to culture and education are in the domain of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO): the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development, which began on 1 January 2005 (resolution 59/237); the United Nations Literacy Decade, which began on 1 January 2003 (resolution 56/116); and the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World (2001-2010) (resolution 53/25). In the area of health, the World Health Organization plays a leading role in the Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa (2001-2010) (resolution 55/284). In addition, the United Nations Secretariat reports on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism (2001-2010) (resolution 55/146). 11. In addition to the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017), two more decades are being coordinated by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat. These are the Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People (2005-2014) (resolution 59/174) and the International Decade for Action "Water for Life", 2005-2015 (resolution 58/217). The report briefly reviews the objectives, activities, plans of action and arrangements for inter-agency engagement, to identify elements that may be useful in the context of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. International Decade for Action "Water for Life", 2005-2015 12. World Water Day, 22 March 2005, marked the official commencement of the "Water for Life" Decade. The primary goal of the Decade is to promote efforts to fulfil international commitments made on water and water-related issues by 2015. Relevant commitments include the targets of reducing by half the proportion of people without access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. The goal for all countries to stop the unsustainable exploitation of water resources and to develop integrated water resources management and water efficiency plans as agreed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development is also an important focus of the Decade. Furthermore, special emphasis is placed on ensuring the involvement of women in these development efforts. 13. The Decade is coordinated by UN-Water, a system-wide inter-agency mechanism of all relevant agencies, departments and programmes involved with water-related issues. The chair of the inter-agency mechanism rotates among the participating agencies. It is currently with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs functioning as its secretariat. 14. A wide range of activities is being organized by UN-Water, its member organizations, as well as national, regional and non-governmental actors. No dedicated trust fund has been set up to support activities organized under the "Water for Life" Decade. However, a centrally maintained calendar of events is maintained by UNESCO and is publicly accessible. 15. Each country is expected to take its own approach to organize activities around the Decade, and activities aimed at promoting public awareness are encouraged to use a dedicated logo developed for the Decade. No internationally agreed plan of action for the Decade has been developed and, as its stated objective implies, activities under the Decade are carried out on a voluntary basis. While the Decade was proclaimed by the General Assembly and policy measures related to water discussed during the thirteenth session of the Commission for Sustainable Development in 2005, no recurrent discussion or evaluation of its activities by an intergovernmental body has been planned. Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People (2005-2014) 16. The General Assembly decided that the goals of the Second Decade should be the further strengthening of international cooperation to resolve the problems faced by indigenous people in the six areas of culture, education, health, human rights, the environment, and social and economic development. The Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs was appointed Coordinator for the Second Decade and he works closely with the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, as well as the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Issues, on activities implemented under the Decade. A specific Voluntary Fund in support of those activities was also established for the Decade. 17. A detailed draft programme of action for the Second Decade, covering a comprehensive set of activities in the six areas mentioned above, was developed by the Secretariat on the basis of inputs from the Permanent Forum and the InterAgency Support Group and adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/142. The Assembly also adopted "Partnership for action and dignity" as the official theme for the Second Decade. 18. The Programme of Action for the Second Decade (A/60/270, sect. II), supported in part by the Voluntary Fund, contains five detailed objectives: promoting non-discrimination and inclusion; promoting full and effective participation; redefining equitable and culturally appropriate development policies; adopting targeted policies and programmes; and developing strong monitoring mechanisms and enhancing accountability for the protection of indigenous peoples. The Programme of Action includes recommendations for activities at the international and national levels, including activities that could be undertaken by organizations of indigenous peoples. Some key lessons 19. From the two decades reviewed above, and on the basis of the experience of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, one important lesson that emerges is that a dedicated inter-agency mechanism is required to develop, support and monitor the activities that are being implemented and to fully support national ownership of the Second Decade. In the current institutional framework to support the internationally agreed development goals, poverty is generally considered an overarching theme. However, unlike other critical issues that are mainstreamed in United Nations work for economic and social development, such as gender and sustainable development, no dedicated inter-agency mechanism currently exists to address the primary challenge of reducing poverty. The Second Decade can provide an important opportunity to address this gap. 20. A plan of action that provides for coherence and continuity of activities as well as inclusiveness of participation has proven critical in ensuring a strong focus on implementation of the activities of the Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People. Such a plan of action in support of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty could be developed by an inter-agency group in consultation with all stakeholders and submitted to the General Assembly. IV. Synopsis of views on the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017) Views of Governments 21. A communication was sent to all Member States in early 2008 requesting the views of Governments on how to make the Second Decade effective, to strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting international cooperation for development and to achieve the integration of developing countries into the world economy and ensure that the benefits of globalization are fairly distributed. Views were also solicited on how the Second Decade could be used to inject new momentum into the global partnership for poverty eradication. Responses were received from the following Member States: Cambodia, El Salvador, Germany, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Portugal, South Africa, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe. 22. Cambodia stated that poverty eradication and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals is a shared responsibility of both developed and developing countries. No meaningful progress has occurred in achieving the ODA target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national income of developed countries, while the rapidly changing global economic situation is having a vast impact on the poor. Cambodia prepared its National Strategic Development Plan, 2006-2010, with a propoor and pro-rural focus, through an extensive process of consultation. It is vitally necessary to target interventions at the grass-roots level that have a direct impact on productivity and livelihoods. 23. El Salvador called for an integrated approach and stressed the importance of strengthening the various measures taken so far while addressing impediments to reducing poverty. Piecemeal interventions cannot succeed in reducing poverty. Combining short-term alleviation measures with structural measures in the areas of education, water and sanitation, food security, microcredit and agricultural productivity, among others, is necessary. 24. Germany viewed its development policy as part of a global effort aimed at reducing poverty worldwide, building peace and realizing democracy, promoting equitable forms of globalization and protecting the natural environment. Germany contributes to these goals by supporting the implementation of nationally owned development strategies. It coordinates its development efforts with that of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the European Union with a view to supporting coherent, comprehensive and integrated efforts in the fight against poverty. 25. Mali adopted, in May 2002, a strategic framework for the fight against poverty. As a result, the poverty rate declined from 64 per cent of the total population in 2001 to 59 per cent in 2006. The Second Decade should aim at reducing the gap between developed countries and developing countries and achieving the Millennium Development Goals. It should contribute to reinforcing the leadership role of the United Nations in the promotion of international cooperation and ensure the integration of developing countries in the global economy. The Government of Mali will seize the opportunity of the Second Decade to further promote the role of agriculture, the private sector and civil society, and its international partnerships and to step up its overall efforts to eradicate poverty. 26. Malta welcomed the Second Decade and stressed that future initiatives should focus on the root causes of poverty as well as on issues that undermine the progress achieved. Actions dealing with women and children should be strengthened, particularly in the areas of education, training and skill development. Malta also welcomed initiatives aimed at raising development awareness and emphasized the value of partnership and solidarity in helping to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The United Nations should support and publicize those efforts through the mass media and information and communications technology. Such campaigns are essential in order to more fully engage the private sector and civil society in development issues, thus inducing them to contribute more to the eradication of poverty. 27. Mexico also welcomed the launching of the Second Decade because it provides an opportunity to reinforce the global alliances for development and the preparation of innovative policies based on new realities. The Decade should be used to promote fair globalization and promote new sources of finance for development. More developed countries should also use the Decade to honour their commitments to increase ODA to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income. The Decade should also give new impetus to addressing Africa's development needs as well as those of middle-income countries. 28. Portugal contended that the Millennium Development Goals should remain the basis for poverty eradication efforts pursued by the United Nations system and the international community, with a particular focus on sub-Saharan Africa and keeping in mind the close link between poverty eradication and peace and security. The challenge of economic disparities and inequalities in middle-income countries also needs to be addressed. Promoting aid effectiveness and efficiency should be the key priorities of the Second Decade, as they are for Portugal. This includes promoting country ownership, achieving aid complementarities among donors, and establishing monitoring and evaluating tools. 29. South Africa emphasized that during the period from 2008 to 2017, the community of nations should ensure that countries eradicate absolute poverty and substantially reduce overall poverty worldwide. South Africa is of the view that poverty eradication requires freedom, peace, safety and security, democracy and good governance. Eradication of poverty also requires establishing an international trade system that is fair and just. Socio-economic development in Africa needs to be owned and driven by the continent itself, and the New Partnership for Africa's Development is one of the many important vehicles for achieving that objective. 30. The United Arab Emirates stated that a fresh approach is needed to meet the internationally agreed development targets. Promoting and achieving further system-wide coherence is particularly important in the areas of poverty, health and education. 31. Viet Nam indicated that the following actions are necessary to make the Second Decade effective: stepping up economic development; increasing investments to narrow the development gap between geographic areas and social groups; improving social protection systems; and harmonizing environmental concerns with economic development, employment creation and poverty reduction. Viet Nam called for closer coordination and alignment of United Nations country programmes with national development objectives. The United Nations should also promote frequent policy dialogues between the United Nations resident agencies and Governments. 32. Zambia observed that the first Decade had been useful in raising awareness of the challenge of poverty eradication at the global level. Meanwhile, however, poverty levels had increased in many countries. In order for the Second Decade to be effective, all ODA commitments must be fulfilled. The international community should also act quickly to curb the international food crisis. Zambia called for an early conclusion of the Doha Round negotiations so as to establish a fair and just international trading system. Developed countries should transfer appropriate technologies to developing countries so that developing countries can benefit from international trade. The United Nations needs to achieve greater coherence and effectiveness in its development activities and allocate appropriate resources to that effect. Partnership between Governments, civil society and the private sector and improved efficiency in Governments' action should also be encouraged. 33. Zimbabwe expressed the view that the Second Decade can be made effective by strengthening the follow-up and monitoring mechanisms that will allow Member States to assess progress towards the implementation of all internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. In this regard, Zimbabwe proposed that the heads of United Nations agencies responsible for development be afforded an opportunity to report annually to the Second Committee of the General Assembly on the specific activities they have undertaken to assist developing countries to achieve those goals. United Nations agencies could also highlight the challenges they face, and a theme, or thematic clusters, could be chosen for reporting on progress to the Assembly each year. Visions of civil society 34. The New York-based Subcommittee for the Eradication of Poverty of the NGO Committee for Social Development of the Conference of NGOs in Consultative Status with the United Nations (CONGO) organized a number of consultations on the Second Decade during the 2008 sessions of the Commission for Social Development, the Commission on Sustainable Development and the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. The constituencies of the member non-governmental organizations were also consulted by e-mail. 35. In the view of the Subcommittee, the commitments of the first Decade have failed to mobilize sufficient change and action. In spite of rapid economic growth in many regions, inequalities grew larger and poverty continued to threaten the rights and dignity of people in all regions of the world. 36. The Subcommittee deems it necessary that people living in poverty and their organizations be fully involved in the setting of targets and in the design, implementation, monitoring and assessment of all poverty eradication initiatives, including those to be undertaken within the framework of the Second Decade. It suggests holding a five-year high-level review of the Second Decade focusing on the participation of people living in poverty. Regular assessment of the participation of people living in extreme poverty in poverty eradication programmes could be organized at the regional level with the participation of all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. 37. The Subcommittee, in stressing that extreme poverty is both a cause and a consequence of violations of human rights, suggests that the theme for the Second Decade should recognize the link between extreme poverty and human rights. Substantive areas that could be considered for a programme of work for the Decade could include: working towards an agreed definition of extreme poverty; highlighting the importance of quality education; addressing the causes of poverty in the context of intersectoral strategies; making health care accessible and affordable; integrating a gender dimension into poverty eradication policies; and reducing military expenditures in order to increase resources for development. 38. In addition to consultations with the NGOs represented in the Subcommittee, a number of other large NGOs involved in poverty alleviation activities were also contacted to seek their views on the Second Decade. Of those organizations, Heifer International indicated that the Second Decade might benefit by placing a stronger emphasis on rural poverty and sustainable agriculture. It also highlighted the need to better understand how rural development is affected by climate change, international food trade and food market regulatory frameworks. V. The role of the United Nations system 39. Since the adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration, poverty eradication has become the central objective of development in the United Nations. The 2005 World Summit further reaffirmed "that development is a central goal in itself and that sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental aspects constitutes a key element of the overarching framework of United Nations activities". At the Summit, world leaders recommitted themselves to eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development and global prosperity for all, and underlined the need for urgent action on all sides, including more ambitious national development strategies and efforts backed by increased international support, to achieve further progress towards poverty eradication in all regions of the world. 40. Among the commitments resulting from the 2005 Summit is the resolve "[to] ensure that the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies support the efforts of developing countries through the common country assessment and United Nations Development Assistance Framework process, enhancing their support for capacity-building". World leaders reaffirmed "the need for the United Nations to play a fundamental role in the promotion of international cooperation for development and the coherence, coordination and implementation of development goals and actions agreed upon by the international community", and resolved "to strengthen coordination within the United Nations system in close cooperation with all other multilateral financial, trade and development institutions in order to support sustained economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development". 41. Intergovernmental mechanisms at the global and regional levels, including those of United Nations regional commissions, should be effectively utilized to ensure successful implementation of the Second Decade. The organizations of the United Nations system, including the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Development Programme and the regional commissions, and relevant international and regional organizations should, within their respective mandates, provide necessary support to the Second Decade. 42. The intergovernmental processes of the United Nations offer unparalleled opportunities for global dialogue on the effectiveness of, and the lessons learned from, our collective efforts to achieve the internationally agreed development goals related to poverty eradication, including the Millennium Development Goals. Such dialogue lays the foundation for consensus-building at the global level that is needed for effective international cooperation for poverty eradication. In this regard, the recently established Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council could play an important role in enhancing the coherence and effectiveness of development cooperation efforts, particularly in relation to global poverty eradication. 43. The 2005 Summit called for drawing on the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions, among others, to ensure follow-up to the outcomes of major United Nations conferences and summits, including the internationally agreed development goals. The Commission for Social Development has, in the past, fulfilled a critical function in the international policy debate on poverty as part of its responsibility to follow up on the 1995 World Summit for Social Development. It is well suited as a forum for policy guidance and further strengthening of efforts for the Second Decade, and for monitoring the implementation of the Second Decade within the framework of follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development. 44. In addition to intergovernmental dialogue and monitoring, a dedicated interagency mechanism is required to develop, support and monitor the implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. In this regard, the United Nations system has already stepped up efforts to coordinate its activities to strive for system-wide coherence and to strengthen its leadership role in the global fight against poverty, in response to the mandates and commitments emanating from major international conferences and summits, including the Millennium Summit of the United Nations and the 2005 World Summit. Existing mechanisms for inter-agency coordination have been further strengthened while new initiatives such as "delivering as one" are being put in place. These provide a solid foundation for enhancing the leadership role of the United Nations system in the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. 45. In carrying out their respective mandates, the funds and programmes of the United Nations system and the specialized agencies should come together and explicitly lend their support for an effective Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty. Coherence and cooperation in support of the Decade can be achieved through existing inter-agency coordination mechanisms such as the Chief Executives Board by making the Decade a rallying point for inter-agency cooperation. Member States may wish to reflect on the role of the Board and to address the issue of identifying an efficient and coordinated mechanism in support of the Second Decade within the existing institutional set-up. 46. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs, as the Secretariat of the Chief Executives Board and the lead entity of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs, should play a critical role in implementing, coordinating and monitoring system-wide efforts during the Second Decade. The General Assembly may wish to invite the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs to lead these efforts and serve as the coordinator for the Second Decade. VI. Conclusions and recommendations 47. The Second Decade should be seen as a framework for reflection and action to boost efforts aimed at achieving the internationally agreed development goals related to poverty eradication. The Decade provides an opportunity to strengthen the social institutions and implement public policies that are necessary to generate development, such as effective institutions for the provision of public goods to the general population and the productive sector; pro-employment growth for decent work in a fair global economic environment; social protection and integration; and an effective international partnership. 48. On the basis of a review of practical examples and the experience of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, an observation relevant to successful implementation of the Second Decade is that national ownership of activities in support of the Decade would be vital for its success and, thus, should be encouraged and supported by the international community. 49. Achievements and failures in fighting poverty during the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty point to the critical importance of productive employment and decent work as a pathway to successful poverty reduction. This point was reaffirmed by the 2005 World Summit, the ministerial declaration adopted at the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council in 2006 as well as in its resolution 2008/18 on promoting full employment and decent work for all. As the ministerial declaration stated, "[o]pportunities for men and women to obtain productive work in conditions of freedom, equity, security and human dignity are essential to ensuring the eradication of hunger and poverty, the improvement of the economic and social well-being for all, the achievement of sustained economic growth and sustainable development of all nations, and a fully inclusive and equitable globalization". 50. Social protection is one of the four strategic objectives of the decent work agenda of the International Labour Organization, which has been endorsed by the Economic and Social Council. It is integral to the global efforts to eradicate poverty as access to some basic social protection will help the poor avoid destitution and the near poor from falling into poverty when faced with loss of income, or health or other emergencies. Striving to ensure basic economic security for all in the face of growing job insecurity should be part and parcel of collective efforts to make the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty a success. 51. At the dawn of the Second Decade, the theme for the first Decade has become reality. Eradicating poverty is now universally perceived as an ethical, social, political and economic imperative of humankind. Furthermore, Governments have committed themselves to a large array of internationally agreed development goals that account for the complexity and the multi-dimensionality of poverty. The onus is now on Governments, civil society, including the private sector, and international organizations to respond effectively to this moral obligation. 52. The General Assembly may consider adopting an overall action theme for the Second Decade that would convey a sense of urgency towards implementing the commitments made to eradicate poverty and to halve poverty by 2015. 53. The General Assembly may wish to integrate the observance of the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty into the plan of action for the Second Decade to further enhance the useful role the observance can play in raising public awareness and mobilizing all stakeholders in the fight against poverty, as has been recognized by the Assembly. 54. Experiences also show that a pragmatic plan of action in support of the Second Decade will be critically important to ensure successful implementation. Such a plan should focus on the complementarities of efforts made in support of the Decade to existing national poverty eradication strategies and programmes and make maximum use of existing inter-agency mechanisms to support these activities. This plan of action would include a programme of substantive work spanning the analytical, normative and operational work of the United Nations in the area of poverty eradication. Such a plan would also highlight opportunities for collaboration between various other stakeholders, such as those in the area of poverty research (the International Poverty Centre, the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, the World Institute for Development Economics Research, the International Food Policy Research Institute and others), as well as NGOs and civil society organizations that have been actively engaged in poverty eradication at the national and community levels. 55. The plan of action for the Second Decade could use the follow-up activities to the 2005 World Summit as its starting point. The Summit recognized the need to accelerate progress immediately in countries where current trends make the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, especially poverty eradication, unlikely. In response, world leaders resolved "to urgently identify and implement country-led initiatives with adequate international support, consistent with long-term national development strategies that promise immediate and durable improvements in the lives of people and renewed hope for the achievement of the development goals". The Second Decade should build on the implementation, support for and monitoring of such initiatives to generate greater momentum for global action towards poverty eradication. 56. The General Assembly may wish to request the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and civil society, to prepare a plan of action and to submit it to the Assembly at its sixty-third session under the agenda item entitled "Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017)". 