%%%INDICTMENTS|PRESIDENTS|SUDAN|ARREST|CRIMINAL PROCEDURE|

Sixty-third session Item 117 (r) of the provisional agenda* Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations: cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference * A/63/150. Identical letters dated 8 August 2008 from the Chargé d' affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly I have the honour to transmit herewith the final communiqué of the emergency expanded ministerial meeting of the Executive Committee of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on the latest developments in the Sudan, which took place in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on 4 August 2008 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would arrange for this letter and its annex to be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under item 117 (r) of the provisional agenda, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Coly Seck Chargé d'affaires a.i. [Original: English and French] Final Communiqué of the expanded ministerial meeting of the Executive Committee on the latest developments in the Sudan Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 3 Chaaban 1429 (4 August 2008) An emergency ministerial meeting of the Executive Committee of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) convened on Monday, 4 August 2008, at the General Secretariat in Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, to discuss the attempt by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to seek the indictment of President Omar Hassan Al-Bashir. The meeting, after extensive deliberations in which it recalled previous CFM resolutions and summit decisions on the Darfur conflict, agreed on the following: 1. The meeting expressed its full solidarity with the Sudan under the leadership of President Omar Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir and stated its unflinching support for the various endeavours to achieve genuine national reconciliation, lasting peace and stability within the context of a sovereign and united country. In this context, the meeting appealed to the Sudanese parties and other stakeholders to recommit themselves to the revival of the peace process in Darfur and deal constructively with various initiatives in this regard. 2. The meeting reiterated its respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of the Sudan, and called on all sections of the international community to do the same. 3. The meeting considered the recent application by the International Criminal Court Prosecutor for the indictment of President Omar Hassan AlBashir, as unwarranted and unacceptable, and expressed its deep concern that this action could seriously undermine the ongoing efforts aimed at facilitating the early resolution of the conflict in Darfur and the promotion of long-lasting peace and reconciliation in the Sudan. The meeting also expressed its deep concern that this action could further lead to greater destabilization for the country and the entire region. 4. The meeting urged the Security Council to suspend indefinitely the move by the Prosecutor directed against President Omar Hassan Al-Bashir and, in this respect decided that OIC should coordinate its efforts with the African Union, the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement and other political groupings to support steps in the United Nations and elsewhere aimed at defusing this dangerous situation and preventing its recurrence. In this context, the meeting instructed the OIC Group in New York to evolve best ways and means of tackling the issue during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly. 5. The meeting reaffirmed that any kind of selectivity and double standards in the application of principles of criminal justice and putting an end to impunity for crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity and war crimes will undermine vitality and may negatively affect the credibility of the International Criminal Court. 6. The meeting stressed that, in accordance with the Rome Statute, the International Criminal Court can only be complementary to national legal systems, which have the primary responsibility of investigating or prosecuting cases over which they have jurisdiction. 7. The meeting called on OIC member States and the international community to intensify their engagement for the peacebuilding efforts in Darfur. In this regard, it urged them to urgently contribute to reinforce the operations of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), whose mandate has just been extended by the Security Council, as well as invest massively in support of improved humanitarian conditions, reconstruction and development in Darfur. 8. The meeting pledged its firm support for the newly appointed joint United Nations/African Union chief mediator on the Darfur conflict, Djibril Bassole, and urged the parties to extend full cooperation for the success of his mission. 9. The meeting noted with satisfaction the progress being made in the implementation of the Sudan/Chad Agreement brokered by the Chairman of the 11th session of the OIC summit, President Maitre Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal, and urged the two OIC member States to continue to respect their obligations, to promote good neighbourliness and facilitate the speedy resolution of the Darfur conflict within the framework of the Dakar Agreement of 13 March 2008. It also welcomed the recent efforts of President Abdoulaye Wade and the Libyan Leader Muammar Al-Gaddafi, which led to the restoration of diplomatic relations between the Sudan and Chad. 10. The meeting welcomed the joint efforts of the Government of the Sudan, the OIC Secretary-General and the IDB President to organize an OIC donors conference, which indicate the serious commitment of the Government of the Sudan towards achieving peace and development in Darfur, and called upon member States to participate effectively and contribute generously at the conference. 11. The meeting appealed to UNAMID and humanitarian aid agencies to remain focused on their mandate and continue to deliver their valuable assistance to the needy people of Darfur. 12. The meeting requested the OIC Secretary-General to transmit this final communiqué to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Presidents of the Security Council and of the General Assembly, through the OIC Ambassadors Group in New York, for circulation as an official document. 