%%%RACIAL DISCRIMINATION|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|TREATIES|

Sixty-third session * A/63/150. Item 65 (a) of the provisional agenda* Elimination of racism and racial discrimination: elimination of racism and racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance Financial situation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination Report of the Secretary-General 1. Pursuant to article 8, paragraph 6, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX), annex), States parties shall be responsible for the expenses of the members of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination while they are in performance of Committee duties. 2. In its resolution 47/111, the General Assembly welcomed the decision taken at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention in January 1992 to amend article 8 of the Convention and requested the Secretary-General to take the appropriate measures to provide for the financing of the Committee from the regular budget of the United Nations, beginning with the budget for the biennium 19941995, and to take the necessary measures to ensure that the Committee met as scheduled until the amendment entered into force. 3. Acting in his capacity as depositary, the Secretary-General communicated the amendment to all States parties on 1 March 1993 (see annex I). It will be recalled that, at their Fourteenth Meeting, the States parties had decided that the amendment would enter into force when accepted by a two-thirds majority of States parties that had so notified the Secretary-General as depositary. As at 1 June 2008, notifications of acceptance had been received from 43 States parties to the Convention. 4. In section II of its resolution 61/148, the General Assembly strongly urged States parties to the Convention to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment to the Convention concerning the financing of the Committee and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment; requested the Secretary-General to continue to ensure adequate financial arrangements and to provide the necessary support, including an adequate level of Secretariat assistance, in order to ensure the functioning of the Committee and to enable it to cope with its increasing amount of work; and also requested him to invite those States parties that were in arrears to pay the amounts in arrears, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-third session. 5. Financing for the annual sessions of the Committee in 2007 and 2008 was provided from the regular budget, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 47/111. Consequently, no State party assessments were made in those two years. However, a number of States parties are still in arrears as a result of the nonpayment of previous assessments. As at 30 June 2008, the total arrears outstanding amounted to $141,809.82 (see annex II). International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination: approval by the General Assembly of the proposed amendment to article 8 1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, acting in his capacity as depositary, and with reference to depositary notification C.N.285.1991.TREATIES-4 of 20 December 1991, communicates the following: 2. It will be recalled that the States parties to the above-mentioned Convention, at the twenty-second meeting of the Fourteenth Meeting of the States Parties, held on 15 January 1992, decided as follows: 1. To replace paragraph 6 of article 8 of the Convention with the paragraph "The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall provide the necessary staff and facilities for the effective performance of the functions of the Committee under the Convention"; 2. To add a new paragraph, as article 8, paragraph 7, as follows: "The members of the Committee established under the present Convention shall, with the approval of the General Assembly, receive emoluments from United Nations resources on such terms and conditions as the General Assembly may decide"; 4. That the amendment shall enter into force when it has been approved by the General Assembly and accepted by a two-thirds majority of States parties which shall have so notified the Secretary-General as depositary. 3. The General Assembly endorsed the amendment at its forty-seventh session (resolution 47/111). In accordance with the above-quoted paragraph 4, it will enter into force when it is accepted by the required number of States parties which shall have so notified the Secretary-General. Status of contributions to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination as at 30 June 2008 (United States dollars) State party Contributions payable as at 31 January 1993 assessments Total collections from 1993 to 2006 for 1993 and prior yearsa 30 June 2008 Afghanistan Algeria Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Australia Austria Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bolivia Botswana Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Cyprus Czechoslovakiab Democratic Republic of the Congoc Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guinea Guyana Haiti Holy See Hungary Iceland India Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Israel Italy Jamaica Jordan Kuwait Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Luxembourg Madagascar Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Syrian Arab Republic Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania Uruguay Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Yemen Zambiad Zimbabwe Total 141 809.82e Former Yugoslavia a In accordance with records of the Contributions Service as at 30 June 2008. Amounts reflect total collections, including overpayments. b An amount of $502.00, which represents the surplus of the 1991 contribution made by the former Czechoslovakia, has been reimbursed to the Governments of the Czech Republic ($334.00) and the Slovak Republic ($168.00). c Effective 17 May 1997, Zaire was renamed Democratic Republic of the Congo. d An amount of $1,471.28 has been reimbursed to the Government of Zambia. e Excludes credits/overpayment amounts held in suspense account. 