%%%OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|REGIONAL COOPERATION|POVERTY MITIGATION|FOOD SHORTAGE|CONFERENCES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|HUNGER|DISASTER RELIEF|WOMEN'S STATUS|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|DRUG CONTROL|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|OBSERVER STATUS|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|ENVIRONMENT|HUMAN RIGHTS|ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS|ELECTION OF MEMBERS|APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS|FUNCTIONAL COMMISSIONS|SUBSIDIARY BODIES|

Sixty-third session * A/63/150 and Corr.1. ** The present report is a preliminary version of those sections of the report of the Economic and Social Council relating to the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2008 and the substantive session of 2008. The section relating to the resumed substantive session will be issued as an addendum to the present report. The entire report will be issued in final form as Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/63/3/Rev.1). The resolutions and decisions adopted by the Council at the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2008 and the substantive session of 2008 are being issued initially in documents E/2008/INF/2 and Add.1. Those adopted at the resumed substantive session will be issued in document E/2008/INF/2/Add.2. The resolutions and decisions will be issued in final form as Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 1 (E/2008/99). Item 43 of the provisional agenda* Report of the Economic and Social Council Report of the Economic and Social Council for 2008** Contents Chapter Page Matters calling for action by or brought to the attention of the General Assembly Special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Special meeting on the global food crisis High-level segment High-level policy dialogue with the international financial and trade institutions on current developments in the world economy Development Cooperation Forum Annual ministerial review on the theme "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development" Thematic discussion on the theme "Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges" General debate of the high-level segment Ministerial declaration of the high-level segment submitted by the President of the Council Coordination segment The role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council Operational activities segment Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation Follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme Humanitarian affairs segment Special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance General segment Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 Coordination, programme and other questions Reports of coordination bodies Proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 International cooperation in the field of informatics Long-term programme of support for Haiti Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system Ad hoc advisory groups on African countries emerging from conflict Tobacco or health Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227, 52/12 B, 57/270 B and 60/265, including 61/16 Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations Regional cooperation Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan Non-governmental organizations Economic and environmental questions Sustainable development Science and technology for development Statistics Human settlements Environment Population and development Public administration and development International cooperation in tax matters Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions Cartography Women and development Social and human rights questions Advancement of women Social development Crime prevention and criminal justice Narcotic drugs United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action Human rights Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Genetic privacy and non-discrimination United Nations research and training institutes Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments Organizational matters Organizational session Resumed organizational session Substantive session Annexes Agendas of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2008 and the substantive session of 2008 Intergovernmental organizations designated by the Council under rule 79 of the rules of procedure for participation in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of their activities Composition of the Council and its subsidiary and related bodies Chapter I 1. In 2008, the Economic and Social Council adopted resolutions and decisions that call for action by, or are to be brought to the attention of, the General Assembly. The relevant paragraphs of those resolutions and decisions are summarized below. Tobacco or health (item 7 (g)) Smoke-free United Nations premises 2. By its decision 2008/231, the Council, recalling its resolution 2006/42 of 27 July 2006 on smoke-free United Nations premises, recommended that the General Assembly, at its sixty-third session, consider the recommendation set out in that resolution on the implementation of a complete ban on smoking at all United Nations indoor premises, at Headquarters as well as at regional and country offices throughout the United Nations system, and the implementation of a complete ban on sales of tobacco products at all United Nations premises. Regional cooperation (item 10) Restructuring of the conference structure of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 3. By its resolution 2008/7, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the resolution contained therein on the restructuring of the conference structure of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, as set out in annex I to the resolution. 4. In the same resolution, the Council also endorsed annexes II, III and IV to the resolution on the conference structure of the Commission; on issues to be addressed by the committees subsidiary to the Commission; and on the terms of reference of the Advisory Committee of Permanent Representatives and Other Representatives Designated by Members of the Commission. Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan (item 11) 5. By its resolution 2008/31, the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session, through the Economic and Social Council, a report on the implementation of the resolution and to continue to include in the report of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority an update on the living conditions of the Palestinian people, in collaboration with relevant United Nations agencies. Human settlements (item 13 (d)) 6. By its decision 2008/239, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda (E/2008/64) and decided to transmit the report to the General Assembly for consideration at its sixty-third session. Advancement of women (item 14 (a)) Agreed conclusions on financing gender equality and the empowerment of women 7. By its decision 2008/235, the Council decided to transmit to the General Assembly the agreed conclusions contained therein, adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-second session, as an input into the preparations for, and outcome of, the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, to be held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008. Social development (item 14 (b)) Social dimensions of the New Partnership for Africa's Development 8. By its resolution 2008/17, the Council requested the Secretary-General to continue to take measures to strengthen the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, and requested the Office to collaborate with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat and to include the social dimensions of the New Partnership in its comprehensive reports to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session. Crime prevention and criminal justice (item 14 (c)) Preparations for the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 9. By its resolution 2008/22, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained therein. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (item 14 (e)) Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 10. By its decision 2008/255, the Council recommended that the General Assembly, at its sixty-third session, decide on the question of enlarging the membership of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from 76 to 78 States. United Nations research and training institutes (item 15) United Nations Institute for Training and Research 11. By its resolution 2008/35, the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session on the issue of financing the core diplomatic training activities of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research. 1 Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 1822 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex. 1. In accordance with paragraph 2 (a) of General Assembly resolution 61/16 and paragraph 88 of annex I to Assembly resolution 50/227, the Council held a special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its 4th and 5th meetings, on 14 April 2008. An account of the proceedings is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.4 and SR.5). For its consideration, the meeting had before it a note by the Secretary-General on coherence, coordination and cooperation in the context of the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,1 including new challenges and emerging issues (E/2008/7). 2. At the 4th meeting, on 14 April, the President of the Council made an opening statement. 3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations addressed the meeting. 4. At the same meeting, the following representatives of major institutional stakeholders made statements: Petko Draganov (Bulgaria), President, Trade and Development Board, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; Ricardo Ochoa, Chief, International Affairs, Ministry of Finance of Mexico, on behalf of the Chairman, Development Committee; Murilo Portugal, Deputy Managing Director, International Monetary Fund; and Willy Alfaro, Director, External Relations Division, World Trade Organization. 5. Also at the same meeting, the Council heard a presentation by Zia Qureshi, Senior Adviser to the Chief Economist, World Bank, on the Global Monitoring Report 2008. 6. After the presentation, the Council adjourned its plenary meeting and proceeded with the holding of round tables A, B and C. Round tables 7. Round table A, on the theme "New initiatives on financing for development", was co-chaired by Marc Bichler, Director for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Action, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, and Chair, United Nations Advisers Group on Inclusive Financial Sectors; and Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations. The lead discussant was Philippe Douste-Blazy, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Innovative Financing for Development, and Chair, Executive Board of the International Drug Purchase Facility. 8. Round table B, on the theme "Supporting development efforts and enhancing the role of middle-income countries, including in the area of trade", was co-chaired by Marisol Argueta de Barillas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador, and Juan Pablo de Laiglesia, Director, Agency for International Development Cooperation of Spain. The lead discussant was Lakshmi Puri, Acting Deputy Secretary-General and Director, Division on International Trade in Goods and Services and Commodities, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 9. Round table C, on the theme "Supporting development efforts of the least developed countries, including through trade capacity-building", was co-chaired by Håkon A. Gulbrandsen, State Secretary for International Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway, and Ismat Jahan, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations. The lead discussant was Cheick Sidi Diarra, Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States. Exchange of views among participants 10. At its 5th meeting, on 14 April, the Council resumed the special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and held a thematic debate on "Building and sustaining solid financial markets: challenges for international cooperation". The panellists were Joaquin Almunia, European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs; Jomo Kwame Sundaram, Assistant Secretary-General for Economic Development; and Christopher Towe, Deputy Director, Monetary and Capital Markets Department, International Monetary Fund. 11. At the same meeting, after the statements by the panellists, an interactive debate ensued, during which statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America and Brazil, and by the observers for Slovenia (as President, Economic and Financial Council, European Union), Antigua and Barbuda, Guinea (on behalf of the Acting Chairman, States Members of the United Nations that are members of the African Group) and Norway. 12. Also at the same meeting, a statement was made by the representative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 13. At the same meeting, statements were made by the Executive Director, World Bank, and the Executive Director, International Monetary Fund. 14. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of civil society (European Network on Finance and Development and New Rules for Global Finance Coalition). 15. At the same meeting, the Council held a special event on "Financing of climate change mitigation and adaptation" with the participation of the following panellists: Olav Kjørven, Assistant Administrator and Director, Bureau for Development Policy, United Nations Development Programme; Tariq Banuri, Senior Fellow and Director, Future Sustainability Programme, Stockholm Environment Institute; and Lucio Monari, Sector Manager, Sustainable Development Vice-Presidency, World Bank. 16. Also at the same meeting, following the statements by the panellists, an interactive dialogue ensued, during which statements were made by the representatives of the United Kingdom, Belarus, Barbados, Japan, Indonesia, Portugal, Benin and Brazil, as well as by the observers for Australia, Antigua and Barbuda and India. 17. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the Dean, Board of Directors, World Bank. 18. Also at the same meeting, a statement was made by a representative of civil society (Stamp Out Poverty). 19. The proceedings of the special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development were summarized by the President of the Council (A/63/80-E/2008/67). Closing of the meeting 20. At the 5th meeting, on 14 April, the President of the Council made a statement and declared the special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development closed. 1. The Council held a special meeting on the global food crisis at its 7th to 9th meetings, on 20 to 22 May 2008. An account of the proceedings is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.7-SR.9). 2. At its 7th meeting, on 20 May, the Council heard video-recorded messages by Bingu wa Mutharika, President of Malawi, and Gordon Brown, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 3. At the same meeting, the President of the Council made an introductory statement. 4. Also at the same meeting, the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session made a statement. 5. At the same meeting, the Deputy Secretary-General addressed the Council. 6. Also at the same meeting, the President of the Security Council for May 2008 (United Kingdom) made a statement. 7. At the same meeting, the Council heard a keynote address by Joachim von Braun, Director-General of the International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C. 8. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by Miguel Ángel Moratinos, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain; Rama Yade, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Human Rights of France; and Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, who read the message from Inácio Lula da Silva, President of Brazil. 9. At the same meeting, the Council heard statements by Jeffrey Sachs, Director of The Earth Institute, Columbia University; Robert Glasser, Secretary-General of CARE International; and James Borel, who spoke on behalf of the International Chamber of Commerce. 10. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by Byron Blake, Deputy Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda to the United Nations (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China); Sanja Štiglic, Permanent Representative of Slovenia to the United Nations (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union); Sirodjidin Aslov, Permanent Representative of Tajikistan to the United Nations (also on behalf of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan); Ismat Jahan, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations (on behalf of the least developed countries); Claude Heller, Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Rio Group); Robert Hill, Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations; Munir Akram, Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations; Heraldo Muñoz, Permanent Representative of Chile to the United Nations; Peter Maurer, Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations; and Prasad Kariyawasam, Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka to the United Nations. 11. At the same meeting, a statement was made by Joe Donnelly of Caritas Internationalis, a non-governmental organization in general consultative status with the Council. 12. At its 8th meeting, on 21 May, the Council heard statements by Yukio Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations; Camillo Gonsalves, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations; R.M. Marty M. Natalegawa, Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations; Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations; John McNee, Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations; Habib Mansour, Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations; Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations; Johan Løvald, Permanent Representative of Norway to the United Nations; Saviour F. Borg, Permanent Representative of Malta to the United Nations; Claudia Blum, Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United Nations; Rosemary Banks, Permanent Representative of New Zealand to the United Nations; María Rubiales de Chamorro, Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations; Hilario G. Davide, Jr., Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations; Jorge Arturo Reina, Permanent Representative of Honduras to the United Nations; Carmen Maria Gallardo Hernández, Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the United Nations; Youcef Yousfi, Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations; Raymond Wolfe, Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations; Byrganym Aitimova, Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the United Nations; Hjálmar W. Hannesson, Permanent Representative of Iceland to the United Nations; Alpha Ibrahima Sow, Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United Nations; Steve Dick Tennyson Matenje, Permanent Representative of Malawi to the United Nations; Hoang Chi Trung, Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations; Enriquillo del Rosario Ceballos, Deputy Permanent Representative and Chargé d'affaires of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations; Ileana Nuñez Mordoche, Deputy Permanent Representative and Chargé d'affaires of Cuba to the United Nations; Jean Olinger, Counsellor and Deputy Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations; Luc Joseph Okio, Minister Counsellor and Chargé d'affaires of the Republic of the Congo to the United Nations; Javier Loayza Barea, Deputy Permanent Representative of Bolivia to the United Nations; Kim Bong-Hyun, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations; Manuel Ney Monteiro Cardoso Jr., Counsellor and Chargé d'affaires of Cape Verde to the United Nations; and Liu Zhenmin, Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations. 13. At its 9th meeting, on 22 May, the Council heard statements by Hamidon Ali, Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations; Eladio Loizaga, Permanent Representative of Paraguay to the United Nations; George Talbot, Chargé d'affaires, Permanent Mission of Guyana to the United Nations; Chirachai Punkrasin, Deputy Permanent Representative of Thailand to the United Nations; Jean-Marie Ehouzou, Permanent Representative of Benin to the United Nations; Aura Mahuampi Rodríguez de Ortiz, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations; Hamid Chabar, Deputy Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations; Olivier Belle, Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations; Akee K. A. Khoc, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations; Günther Otto Frommelt, Deputy Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the United Nations; Ilan Simon Fluss, Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations; Bature Lawal, Permanent Mission of Nigeria to the United Nations; Robert S. Hagen, United States Mission to the United Nations; Sergey Kononuchenko, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations; William Exantus, Permanent Mission of Haiti to the United Nations; Jasem Ibrahim J. M. Al-Najem, Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations; Pinehas Aluteni, Permanent Mission of Namibia to the United Nations; and Mohamed A. A. Alahraf, Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations. 14. At the same meeting, the representatives of the European Community, the Commonwealth Secretariat, the Intergovernmental Institution for the use of Micro-algae Spirulina against Malnutrition, and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies made statements. 15. Also at the same meeting, the representatives of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Bank, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the World Food Programme made statements. 16. At the same meeting, the representative of the United Nations Environment Programme made a statement. 17. The statement of the President of the Council on the occasion of the special meeting of the Council on the global food crisis was issued as document E/2008/66. 18. At the 9th meeting, the Vice-President of the Council (Belarus) made a concluding statement and declared the special meeting on the global food crisis closed. Opening of the session 1. The high-level segment of the substantive session of 2008 of the Council was held at its 12th to 20th meetings, from 30 June to 3 July 2008. An account of the proceedings is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.12-SR.20). 2. In its decision 2007/272, the Council decided that the theme for the 2008 annual ministerial review would be "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development" (item 2 (c)). 3. In its decision 2008/208, the Council decided that the theme for its 2008 thematic discussion would be "Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges" (item 2 (d)). 4. For the high-level segment, the Council had before it the following documents: (a) Note by the Secretary-General on the thematic discussion for the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2009 of the Economic and Social Council: selection of a theme (E/2008/10); (b) Note by the Secretary-General on the annual ministerial reviews for the high-level segments of the substantive sessions of 2010 and 2011 of the Economic and Social Council: selection of themes (E/2008/11); (c) Report of the Secretary-General entitled "Annual ministerial review: implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development" (E/2008/12); (d) World Economic and Social Survey 2008: Overcoming Economic Insecurity: overview (E/2008/50); (e) World economic situation and prospects as of mid-2008 (E/2008/57); (f) Report of the Secretary-General on the theme of the 2008 high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council: promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges (E/2008/68); (g) Report of the Secretary-General on trends and progress in international development cooperation (E/2008/69); (h) Relevant part of the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields (E/2008/15); (i) Relevant part of the report of the Committee for Development Policy on its tenth session (E/2008/33); (j) Letter dated 25 April 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/56); (k) Letter dated 23 May 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/70); (l) Letter dated 3 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/74); (m) Letter dated 29 May 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/75); (n) Letter dated 2 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the Lao People's Democratic Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/78); (o) Letter dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/79); (p) Letter dated 11 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/81); (q) Letter dated 17 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/85); (r) Letter dated 18 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Finland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/86); (s) Letter dated 13 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/87); (t) Note verbale dated 25 June 2008 from the Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/88); (u) Letter dated 23 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/89); (v) Statement submitted by Sulabh International, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/1); (w) Statement submitted by the Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/2); (x) Statement submitted by the World Jewellery Confederation, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/3); (y) Statement submitted by the Convention of Independent Financial Advisors, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/4); (z) Statement submitted by the United Nations Association of China, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/5); (aa) Statement submitted by Foundation for Subjective Experience and Research, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/6); (bb) Statement submitted by Help Handicapped International, an organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/7); (cc) Statement submitted by Association tunisienne des mères, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/8); (dd) Statement submitted by World Trade Centers Association, an organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/9); (ee) Statement submitted by World Family Organization, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/10); (ff) Statement submitted by Women's Federation for World Peace International, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/11); (gg) Statement submitted by Mulchand and Parpati Thadhani Foundation, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/12); (hh) Statement submitted by Ius Primi Viri International Association, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/13); (ii) Statement submitted by Mumbai Educational Trust, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/14); (jj) Statement submitted by Oasis Open City Foundation, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/15); (kk) Statement submitted by Legião da Boa Vontade, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/16); (ll) Statement submitted by People's Decade of Human Rights Education, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/17); (mm) Statement submitted by Droit à l'énergie-SOS futur, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/18); (nn) Statement submitted by Foundation for Research on Technology Migration and Integration, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/19); (oo) Statement submitted by International Union of Economists, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/20); (pp) Statement submitted by Goi Peace Foundation, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/21); (qq) Statement submitted by International Movement ATD Fourth World, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/22); (rr) Statement submitted by Fundación Diagrama, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/23); (ss) Statement submitted by AARP, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/NGO/24); (tt) Conference room paper entitled "How corporate philanthropy can contribute to advancing the Millennium Development Goals, particularly with regard to sustainable development" (E/2008/CRP.2); (uu) Conference room paper entitled "Summary of the special meeting of the Economic and Social Council on the global food crisis" (E/2008/CRP.3). 5. At the 12th meeting, on 30 June, the President of the Council opened the highlevel segment of the substantive session and made a statement. 6. At the same meeting, the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs read out a statement on behalf of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Achieving sustainable development 7. At its 12th meeting, on 30 June, the Council heard keynote addresses by Rajendra K. Pachauri, Chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and Nicholas Stern, author of the Stern Review, on the theme "Achieving sustainable development". 8. At the same meeting, after the keynote addresses, statements were made by the representatives of Pakistan, Indonesia and Austria, and by the observer for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). A. High-level policy dialogue with the international financial and trade institutions on current developments in the world economy 9. At its 12th meeting, on 30 June, the Council held a high-level policy dialogue on current developments in the world economy with the representatives of international financial and trade institutions. 10. At the same meeting, the Council heard opening remarks by the UnderSecretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs and statements by the following panellists: Supachai Panitchpakdi, Secretary-General, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; Murilo Portugal, Deputy Managing Director, International Monetary Fund; Justin Lin, Chief Economist, World Bank; and Valentine Rugwabiza, Deputy Director-General, World Trade Organization (see E/2008/SR.12). 11. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by the Chairman of the Committee for Development Policy and the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme. B. Development Cooperation Forum 12. The Council held the first biennial Development Cooperation Forum at its 13th and 14th meetings, on 30 June, and at its 16th meeting, on 1 July 2008. 13. At the 13th meeting, on 30 June, the President made a statement. 14. At the same meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs read out a statement on behalf of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and subsequently introduced the report under the item. 15. At the 16th meeting, on 1 July, the Assistant Secretary-General for Economic Development made a statement. 16. At same meeting, the President made a statement and declared closed the Development Cooperation Forum. 1. A new vision for development cooperation in the twenty-first century 17. At its 13th meeting, on 30 June, the Council heard a keynote address by the European Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid, Louis Michel, on the theme "A new vision for development cooperation in the twenty-first century". 18. At the same meeting, during the exchange of views, statements were made by the representatives of Pakistan and New Zealand, and by the observers for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). 19. Also at the same meeting, a statement was made by a representative of civil society (Society of Catholic Medical Missionaries). 20. The Council then adjourned its plenary meeting and proceeded by holding three parallel round tables. Round table 1.A Identifying gaps and obstacles: allocating more aid: where should it go? 21. Round table A was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), and moderated by the Minister of Economy and Finance of Niger, Ali Mahaman Lamine Zeine. 22. The Moderator made an opening statement. 23. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Sambou Wagué, Secretary-General, Ministry of Economy and Finance of Mali; Paul Collier, Professor and Director, Oxford University; and Richard L. Greene, Deputy Director of Foreign Assistance, United States Department of State. 24. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Indonesia, Barbados, the United States and China and the observers for Morocco, Rwanda, Norway and Nigeria. 25. A statement was also made by the representative of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 26. Statements were made by the representative of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 27. A member of the Committee for Development Policy also made a statement. 28. A statement was made by the representative of the Conference of NonGovernmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations. Round table 1.B Reviewing trends and progress: South-South and triangular development cooperation: what can development actors learn? 29. Round table B was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde), and moderated by the Minister for Foreign Trade and Development of Finland, Paavo Väyrynen. 30. The Moderator made an opening statement. 31. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Liu Guijin, Ambassador and Special Envoy on African Affairs of China; Karen Zelaya, Minister of International Cooperation of Honduras; and Masato Watanabe, Deputy DirectorGeneral, International Cooperation Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. 32. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, China, the Russian Federation, Saint Lucia and Japan, and the observers for Italy, Colombia, Guinea, India, the United Republic of Tanzania and Namibia. Round table 1.C Reviewing trends and progress: how are civil society and new actors enhancing impact at the country level? 33. Round table C was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Park In-kook (Republic of Korea), and moderated by the Executive Director, International Aid and Development Agency of New Zealand, Peter Adams. 34. The Moderator made an opening statement. 35. Presentations were made by the panellists: Kumi Naidoo, Secretary-General and Chief Executive Officer of CIVICUS: World Alliance for Civic Participation; Michel Kazatchkine, Executive Director, Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; Shona Grant, Director, Development Focus Area, World Business Council for Sustainable Development; and Peter Msolla, Minister of Communication, Science and Technology of the United Republic of Tanzania. 36. A statement was made by Catherine Bertini, representative of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, as lead discussant. 37. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of China and Indonesia and the observers for Kenya and France. 38. Statements were also made by the representatives of the following nongovernmental organizations and civil society: All India Shah Behram Baug Society; People's Movement for Human Rights Learning; Conference of NonGovernmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations; International Trade Union Confederation; and International Movement ATD Fourth World. 39. A statement was also made by the representative of the Catalan regional government (local government). 2. The changing landscape and dynamics of international development cooperation 40. At its 14th meeting, on 1 July, the Council heard keynote addresses by Trevor Manuel, Minister of Finance of South Africa and Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Doha Review Conference; and Supachai Panitchpakdi, Secretary-General, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, on the theme "The changing landscape and dynamics of international development cooperation". 41. At the same meeting, during the exchange of views, statements were made by the representative of Malaysia and by the observer for Guinea. 42. The Council then adjourned its plenary meeting and proceeded by holding two parallel round tables. Round table 2.A Identifying gaps and obstacles: are capacities ready for more aid at the country level? 43. Round table A was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), and moderated by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, Kemal Derviş. 44. The Moderator made an opening statement. 45. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Gérard Niyibigira, President, Economic and Social Council of Burundi and former Minister of Finance; John Rwangombwa, Secretary-General and Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning of Rwanda; and Ingrid Hoven, Director-General, Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development of Germany. 46. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Indonesia, the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Brazil, and the observers for Mexico, Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Norway, Namibia, Bangladesh and Belgium. 47. A statement was also made by the representative of the World Bank. 48. A statement was made by the representative of the Conference of NonGovernmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations. 49. Statements were also made by the representatives of the following nongovernmental organizations: United Cities and Local Governments; and Catalan Agency for Development Cooperation. Round table 2.B Exchanging lessons learned: how can development aid support national development strategies? 50. Round table B was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde), and moderated by the Minister for Development Cooperation of Belgium, Charles Michel. 51. The Moderator made an opening statement. 52. A statement was made by Bernard Petit, Deputy Director-General for Development of the European Commission, as lead discussant. 53. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Ali Mahaman Lamine Zeine, Minister of Economy and Finance of Niger; and Park Kang-ho, DirectorGeneral for Development Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea. 54. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of France, Japan, China, the Congo, El Salvador, Niger, Benin and Bolivia, and the observers for the Dominican Republic, Afghanistan, Nicaragua and Ethiopia. 55. A statement was also made by the representative of the International Organization for Migration. 56. A statement was made by the representative of the International Labour Organization. 57. Statements were also made by the representatives of the following nongovernmental organizations: International Movement ATD Fourth World and International Trade Union Confederation. Key policy messages and recommendations of the Rome Stakeholder Forum 58. Parallel to its 15th meeting, on 1 July, the Council heard a special presentation on the theme "Key policy messages and recommendations of the Rome Stakeholder Forum" moderated by Anders Johnson, Secretary-General of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. 59. Presentations were made by Gérald Tremblay, Mayor of Montreal and Chair of the Montreal Metropolitan Community of Canada, and Kumi Naidoo, SecretaryGeneral and Chief Executive Officer of CIVICUS: World Alliance for Civic Participation, as well as by the Moderator. Round table Identifying gaps and obstacles: aid effectiveness agenda: towards consensus at Accra and Doha 60. Parallel to its 15th meeting, on 1 July, and following the special presentation, the Council held a round table on the theme "Identifying gaps and obstacles: aid effectiveness agenda: towards consensus at Accra and Doha", chaired by the VicePresident of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), and moderated by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, Munir Akram, who made statements. 61. The Chairman and Moderator made opening statements. 62. Presentations were made by the following panellists: George Y. Gyan-Baffour, Deputy Minister of Finance and Economic Planning of Ghana (via teleconference); Eckhard Deutscher, Chair, Development Assistance Committee, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; Ramesh Singh, Chief Executive, Action Aid International; and Trevor Manuel, Minister of Finance of South Africa and Special Envoy for the Doha Review Conference. 63. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of the Netherlands, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Indonesia, Portugal, the United Kingdom, Japan and the United States, and the observers for Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Belgium, Antigua and Barbuda, Guinea, Denmark, Jamaica and Chad. 64. Statements were also made by the representatives of the following nongovernmental organizations: United Cities and Local Governments; and Society of Catholic Medical Missionaries (on behalf of the Conference of NonGovernmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations). C. Annual ministerial review on the theme "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development" 65. At its 17th meeting, on 2 July, the Council began its annual ministerial review on the theme "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development" and heard an opening statement by the President of the Council. 66. David Hales, President of the College of the Atlantic, served as moderator for the voluntary national presentations. 67. At the same meeting, the Council heard voluntary national presentations on the theme of the annual ministerial review by a team of representatives from Belgium: Charles Michel, Minister for Development Cooperation, and Ahn Le Dieu, former project manager of the Ho Chi Minh City Programme of Belgium. 68. The panellists responded to questions raised by the representatives of Malaysia and Benin, and by the observer for Viet Nam. 69. Also at the same meeting, the Council heard voluntary national presentations by a team of representatives from Chile: Paula Quintana, Minister of National Planning and Cooperation, and Leonardo Moreno, a representative of civil society. 70. The panellists responded to questions raised by the representatives of Uruguay, Pakistan and New Zealand, and by the observers for Mexico and Spain. 71. Also at its 17th meeting, the Council heard voluntary national presentations by a team of representatives from the United Kingdom: Andrew Steer, DirectorGeneral, Policy and Research, Department for International Development; and Maria Arce Moreira and Joanne Green, representatives of civil society. 72. The panellists responded to questions raised by the representatives of Malawi, Mozambique and Malaysia, and by the observers for Bangladesh, Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 73. At the same meeting, the Council heard a voluntary national presentation by Peter Msolla, Minister of Communication, Science and Technology of the United Republic of Tanzania. 74. The panellist responded to questions raised by the representative of Guyana, and by the observers for Denmark and Finland. 75. At its 19th meeting, on 3 July, the Council heard a voluntary national presentation by Bounkeut Sangsomsak, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Lao People's Democratic Republic. 76. The panellist responded to questions raised by the representatives of Sweden, Malaysia, Japan, Bolivia and New Zealand, and by the observer for Australia. 77. At the same meeting, the Council heard a voluntary national presentation by Jean-Louis Schiltz, Minister for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Affairs of Luxembourg. 78. The panellist responded to comments made and questions raised by the representatives of Cape Verde, Mauritania and Benin, and by the observer for Finland. 79. Also at the same meeting, the Council heard voluntary national presentations by a team of representatives from Kazakhstan: Nurlan Danenov, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs; Yuri Shokamanov, Executive Secretary, Agency of Statistics; Bulat Bekniyazov, Director, Department of Multilateral Relations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and Raushan Sarsembaeva, a representative of civil society. 80. The panellists responded to questions raised by the representatives of the Russian Federation, the United States, Belarus and Japan, and by the observer for Afghanistan. 81. Also at the same meeting, the Council heard a voluntary national presentation by Paavo Väyrynen, Minister for Foreign Trade and Development of Finland. 82. The panellist responded to questions raised by the representatives of the United Kingdom and Malaysia, and by the observers for the United Republic of Tanzania, Guinea, Ethiopia and Namibia. The role of ecosystem services in sustainable development 83. In parallel with its 18th meeting, on 2 July, the Council held a round table on the theme "The role of ecosystem services in sustainable development", which was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), and moderated by the Executive Director, United Nations Environment Programme, Achim Steiner, and later by the Chair, Commission on Ecosystem Management, World Conservation Union, Hillary Masundire. 84. An opening statement was made by the Moderator. 85. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Ahmed Djoghlaf, Executive Secretary, Convention on Biological Diversity; Hillary Masundire, Chair, Commission on Ecosystem Management, World Conservation Union; Magnus Ngoile, Director-General, National Environment Management Council, United Republic of Tanzania; Jorge Mario Rodríguez, Director, National Forestry Financing Fund, Costa Rica; and Dane Gobin, Director-General, Iwokrama International Centre for Rainforest Conservation and Development of Guyana. 86. A statement was made by Anna Tibaijuka, Executive Director of UN-Habitat, as lead discussant. 87. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Indonesia and Brazil, and the observer for Israel. 88. A statement was made by the representative of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 89. Statements were also made by the observers of the following nongovernmental organizations: Stakeholder Forum for a Sustainable Future and International Women's Anthropology Conference. D. Thematic discussion on the theme "Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges" 90. Following its 19th meeting, on 3 July, the Council held two parallel panel discussions in the context of its thematic discussion on the theme "Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges". Panel discussion A Bioenergy, sustainable livelihoods and rural poor 91. The panel discussion was chaired by Anthony Severin, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs of Saint Lucia, and moderated by Abdoulie Janneh, Executive Secretary, Economic Commission for Africa. 92. An opening statement was made by the Moderator. 93. A statement was made by Cheick Sidi Diarra, Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, as lead discussant. 94. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Alexander Mueller, Assistant Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Sonja Vermeulen, Programme Director, Business and Sustainable Development, International Institute for Environment and Development; Lionel López, Director, Technoserve, Guatemala; and Suzanne Hunt, bioenergy expert and independent consultant. 95. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of the Czech Republic, Indonesia and Brazil, and the observers for Germany, Italy, the United Republic of Tanzania and Jamaica. 96. Statements were also made by the representatives of the following nongovernmental organizations: International Trade Union Confederation; All India Women's Fund Association; Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resources Management; Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations; and World Hunger Year. Panel discussion B Harnessing the current boom in agricultural commodities for poverty eradication and sustainable development: the case of small-scale farmers 97. The panel discussion was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), and moderated by the Assistant Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Annika Söder. 98. Opening statements were made by the Chairman and the Moderator. 99. A statement was made by Anna Tibaijuka, Executive Director of UN-Habitat, as lead discussant. 100. Presentations were made by the following panellists: Frank Tumpale Mwenifumbo, Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food Security of Malawi; Robert Watson, Chief Scientific Adviser, Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs of the United Kingdom; Steven Schonberger, Lead Operations Officer in Agriculture and Rural Development, World Bank; Sandra Polaski, Senior Associate and Director, Trade, Equity and Development, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Washington, D.C.; and James Borel, Group Vice-President responsible for DuPont Crop Protection and Pioneer Hi-Bred. 101. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Indonesia and France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), and the observers for Australia, Ethiopia (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the African Group), the United Republic of Tanzania and Guinea. 102. Statements were also made by the representatives of the World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and by the observer for the Common Fund for Commodities. 103. Statements were made by the representatives of the following nongovernmental organizations: United Church of Christ Board for World Ministries (on behalf of the Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations); International Partners for Sustainable Agriculture; and Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resources Management. E. General debate of the high-level segment 104. At its 15th and 18th meetings, on 1 and 2 July, the Council held its general debate on the Development Cooperation Forum (item 2 (b)) and the themes of the annual ministerial review (item 2 (c)) and the thematic discussion (item 2 (d)) (see E/2008/SR.15 and SR.18). 105. At the 15th meeting, on 1 July, the President of the Council made a statement. 106. At the same meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs made an introductory statement. 107. Also at the same meeting, the Chairman of the Committee for Development Policy made a statement. 108. At the same meeting, the Council heard statements by Andrei Stratan, Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs and European Integration, Republic of Moldova; Marisol Argueta de Barillas, Minister for Foreign Affairs, El Salvador; Abdulla Shahid, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Maldives; Edmundo Orellana Mercado, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Honduras (on behalf of the Central American Integration System); Nikolay Zaychenko, Minister of Economy, Belarus; Paula Quintana, Minister of National Planning and Cooperation, Chile; Charles Michel, Minister for Development Cooperation, Belgium; Osman Mohamed Osman, Minister for Economic Development, Egypt; Fatima Bint Mohammed Al-Balooshi, Minister of Social Development, Bahrain; Denis Lowe, Minister of Social Care, Constituency Empowerment and Urban Development, Barbados; Nurlan Danenov, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kazakhstan; A. Yakovenko, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, Russian Federation; Margarita R. Songco, Deputy Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority, Philippines; Valdrak Jaentschek Ludwing, Vice-Minister for Economic Relations and Cooperation, Nicaragua; Lazare Makayat-Safouesse, Deputy Secretary-General, Department of Foreign Affairs, Republic of the Congo; Rosalina Ynoa González, Director-General for Multilateral Cooperation, Ministry of Economy and Planning, Dominican Republic; Conrod Hunte, Deputy Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda to the United Nations (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China); Jean-Maurice Ripert, Head of Delegation, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union); Robert Hill, Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations (on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand); Anders Lidén, Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United Nations; Zalmay Khalilzad, Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations; María Fernanda Espinosa, Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the United Nations; Hjálmar W. Hannesson, Permanent Representative of Iceland to the United Nations; and Habib Mansour, Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations. 109. Also at the same meeting, a statement was made by the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 110. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the following non-governmental organizations: Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations, International Movement ATD Fourth World and IUS PRIMI VIRI International Association. 111. At its 18th meeting, on 2 July, the Council continued its general debate and heard statements by Antonio Rivas, Vice-Minister of External Relations, Paraguay; Rita Kieber-Beck, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Liechtenstein; Manouchehr Mottaki, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Islamic Republic of Iran; Mahamoud G. I. Elwarfally, Secretary-General of National Planning, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya; Yasuhide Nakayama, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, Japan; Alberto Osvaldo Naranjo Paz, Vice-Minister, Ministry of Agriculture, Cuba; Witold Waszczykowski, UnderSecretary of State, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Poland; Frank Mwenifumbo, Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food Security, Malawi; Martin Dahinden, DirectorGeneral, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, Switzerland; Peter Katjavivi, Director-General, National Planning Commission, Namibia; Munir Akram, Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations; Negash Kebret Botora, Chargé d'affaires a.i., Permanent Mission of Ethiopia to the United Nations (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the African Group); Ismat Jahan, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations (on behalf of the least developed countries); Hamidon Ali, Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations; Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations; Claudia Blum, Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United Nations; Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations; Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem Mohamad, Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations; Jorge Voto-Bernales, Permanent Representative of Peru to the United Nations; R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa, Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations; Hugo Siles Alvarado, Permanent Representative of Bolivia to the United Nations; Abderrahim Ould Hadrami, Permanent Representative of Mauritania to the United Nations; Filipe Chidumo, Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations; Özhan Üzümcüoğlu, Deputy Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations; Bashar Ja'afari, Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations; Liu Zhenmin, Acting Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations; Nor-Eddine Benfreha, Minister Plenipotentiary, Permanent Mission of Algeria to the United Nations; Daniel Carmon, Chargé d'affaires a.i., Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations; George Talbot, Chargé d'affaires a.i., Permanent Mission of Guyana to the United Nations; Kim Bong-hyun, Acting Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations; and Archbishop Celestino Migliore, Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations. 112. At the same meeting, a statement was made by Ivan Piperkov, former Chairperson of the Commission on Population and Development. 113. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by Ndioro Ndiaye, Deputy Director-General, International Organization for Migration; José Mucio Moneiro Filho, President, International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions; and Remigio M. Maradona, Director-General, Intergovernmental Institution for the Use of Micro-algae Spirulina Against Malnutrition. 114. At the same meeting, statements were made by Annika Soeder, Assistant Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 115. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the following non-governmental organizations: All India Shah Behram Baug Society; Legiaõ da Boa Vontade; World Family Organization; and Fundación Diagrama. F. Ministerial declaration of the high-level segment submitted by the President of the Council Action taken by the Council 116. At its 20th meeting, on 3 July, the President of the Council introduced the draft ministerial declaration of the high-level segment entitled "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development" (E/2008/L.10). 117. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft ministerial declaration as orally corrected. 118. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Belarus, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Bolivia, the United States and Cuba, as well as by the observers for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Nicaragua. 119. The text of the ministerial declaration read as follows: "Ministerial declaration "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development "We, the Ministers and Heads of Delegations participating in the highlevel segment of the substantive session of 2008 of the Economic and Social Council, held in New York from 30 June to 3 July 2008, "Having considered the themes of the high-level segment, `Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development' and `Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges', "Conscious of the multiple, interrelated and mutually reinforcing challenges confronting the international community and their relationship to the themes chosen for the substantive session of 2008 of the Economic and Social Council and the need for a concerted and prompt response, "Welcoming the holding of the first Development Cooperation Forum and the second annual ministerial review, "Underscoring the need for coherence and coordination to enhance effectiveness and efficiency in addressing the current challenges and committed to ensuring that the Economic and Social Council discharges in a dynamic manner the responsibilities assigned to it by the Charter of the United Nations and reinforced in the 2005 World Summit Outcome and General Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the Council, "Reaffirming the commitments to the global partnership for development as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (`Johannesburg Plan of Implementation'), "Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General prepared for consideration at the high-level segment and the deliberations held in the highlevel segment, "Have adopted the following declaration: "1. We recognize that we meet at a critical juncture in our efforts to realize the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. We further recognize that we face multiple challenges in our efforts to achieve these goals, including financial instability and uncertainty, slowing global economic growth, and rising food and fuel prices, as well as the impacts of environmental degradation and the impacts of climate change. All of these challenges require early concerted action. We are concerned about the negative impacts of these risks on sustained economic growth and sustainable development, particularly in developing countries. We are also concerned that these risks might further widen inequalities both among and within nations. "2. We therefore call for urgent individual and collective actions, both short and long term, to stem the impacts of these risks and place the global economy on a firm sustainable foundation. We need to ensure that our development gains are not reversed and that our future efforts are not undermined. We are determined to take concerted actions to promote progress towards the realization of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. "3. We reaffirm that development is a central goal by itself and that sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions constitutes a key element of the overarching framework of United Nations activities. We recognize that development, peace and security, and human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. "4. We call for the full implementation of the global partnership for development and commitments made by all countries and request the Economic and Social Council to continue to review the progress made in the implementation of the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, and their follow-up processes, in the economic, social and related fields, including the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals. "5. We take note with appreciation of the voluntary initiative of the Government of Bahrain to hold regional consultations on the annual ministerial review of the Economic and Social Council at Manama on 1 and 2 June 2008 and the holding of high-level symposiums by the Governments of Austria, Egypt and Italy, in Vienna, Cairo and Rome, in preparation for the Development Cooperation Forum. "6. We welcome the enhanced participation of various stakeholders, including from civil society and the private sector, and recognize the need to continue to encourage and facilitate their engagement in efforts to achieve sustainable development. "7. We welcome the voluntary national presentations made by Belgium, Chile, Finland, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Luxembourg, Kazakhstan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United Republic of Tanzania. "8. We reiterate our commitment to ensuring the achievement of sustainable development in all countries, integrating economic growth, social development and environmental protection, and to making that goal the central objective of national development strategies and international cooperation. We call on countries that have not yet developed policy frameworks for integrating economic, social and environmental objectives to consider adopting and implementing such frameworks. We recognize that a facilitative international environment and appropriate international cooperation is important in this regard. "9. We recognize the importance of strengthening indicators that integrate the three pillars of sustainable development. "10. We reaffirm our commitment to promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women, recognizing that they are key actors in development, and to identifying and accelerating concrete actions towards that end. "11. We recognize the increasing rate of deterioration of the global environment in many important areas, the continued challenges of environmental protection and the serious implications for sustainable development, and strongly stress the need to address critical issues of long-term global sustainability, taking into account the principles contained in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, including, inter alia, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. "12. We reiterate the commitments made at the World Summit on Sustainable Development to pursue a more efficient and coherent implementation of the three objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the achievement by 2010 of a significant reduction in the current rate of loss of biological diversity, which will require action at all levels, including the implementation of national biodiversity strategies and action plans and the provision of new and additional financial and technical resources to developing countries. "13. We resolve to support and strengthen the implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, with a view to addressing causes of desertification and land degradation, as well as poverty resulting from land degradation, through, inter alia, the mobilization of adequate and predictable financial resources, the transfer of technology and capacity-building at all levels. "14. We acknowledge that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest possible cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and appropriate international response, in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and their social and economic conditions. "15. We reaffirm our commitment to the ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, as contained in article 2 thereof, namely, to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that prevents dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. Such a level should be achieved within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. "16. We remain deeply concerned that all countries, in particular developing countries including least developed countries and small island developing States and African countries, face increased risks from the negative effects of climate change and we further stress the need to urgently address adaptation needs relating to such effects. "17. We reaffirm that responses to climate change should be coordinated with social and economic development in an integrated manner, with a view to avoiding adverse impact on the latter, taking into full account the legitimate priority needs of developing countries for the achievement of sustained economic growth and the eradication of poverty. "18. We welcome the decisions adopted during the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 3 to 15 December 2007, including the Bali Action Plan, which launched a comprehensive process aimed at enabling the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action, now, up to and beyond 2012, in order to reach an agreed outcome and adopt a decision at the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties. We take note of the work under way in the open-ended ad hoc working group of the parties to the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change established under decision 1/CMP.1. "19. We call for efforts by all countries to promote sustainable management of all types of forests. We recognize the need for the provision by the international community of increased support for the efforts of developing countries towards the promotion of sustainable forest management. "20. We stress the importance of diversifying energy supply by developing advanced, cleaner, more efficient, affordable and cost-effective energy technologies, including fossil fuel technologies and renewable energy technologies, hydro included, and their transfer to developing countries on concessional terms as mutually agreed, and, with a sense of urgency, of substantially increasing the global share of renewable energy sources with the objective of increasing its contribution to total energy supply. "21. We emphasize that it is essential to address the challenges and opportunities posed by biofuels, in view of the world's food security, energy and sustainable development needs. "22. We express our concern at the current situation of soaring food prices and underline that the global food crisis poses a serious challenge to the fight against poverty and hunger as well as to the efforts by developing countries to attain food security and achieve the objectives of reducing by half the number of undernourished people by no later than 2015 and other internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. We reiterate that the global food crisis has multiple and complex causes and that its consequences require a comprehensive and coordinated response in the short, medium and long term by national Governments and the international community. "23. The global food situation calls for a strong commitment from Governments as well as from all other stakeholders. We call upon all donors and the United Nations system to increase their assistance to developing countries, in particular least developed countries and those that are most negatively affected by high food prices. We welcome the holding of the High-level Conference on World Food Security: The Challenges of Climate Change and Bioenergy in Rome from 3 to 5 June 2008 and note the importance of the implementation of its outcome. We also welcome the convening of a special meeting of the Economic and Social Council on the global food crisis from 20 to 22 May 2008. We take note of the recent establishment by the Secretary-General of the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis and encourage its continued engagement with Member States. "24. We reiterate the urgency of accelerating progress in the implementation of the priorities for action in water, sanitation and human settlements agreed at the thirteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development by providing access to safe drinking water and sanitation services, building partnerships for capacity-building and technology transfer, improving the efficiency of water utilities, engaging stakeholders in the implementation process, strengthening monitoring and reporting and implementing integrated water resources management, through raising public awareness; and integrating water and sanitation strategies into national development plans, mobilizing adequate financial resources and using available financial resources more efficiently and ensuring targeted, effective implementation by all relevant actors, including incorporation of a gender perspective and effective monitoring of implementation, in order to reach the 2015 objective of halving the proportion of people who are unable to access or afford safe drinking water and the proportion of people without access to basic sanitation. "25. We recognize the important role of cities and other urban areas and the challenges of urbanization. We therefore call for promoting sustainable urbanization, improving lives of slum-dwellers and encouraging practical solutions to these challenges. "26. We reaffirm the importance of investing in infrastructure for rural development and agriculture. We further recognize the importance of nonfarming economic activities in eradicating poverty in rural areas. In this regard, we recognize the in-depth discussion at the sixteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development and we look forward to recommendations of the Commission at its seventeenth session that will advance rural development. "27. We recognize that agriculture plays a crucial role in addressing the needs of a growing global population and is inextricably linked to poverty eradication, especially in developing countries. Integrated and sustainable agriculture and rural development approaches are therefore essential to achieving enhanced food security and food safety in an environmentally sustainable way. "28. We recognize the crucial importance of enhanced access of the rural poor, women and men, to productive assets, in particular land and water, and stress that priority attention should be given to the adoption of policies and the implementation of laws that guarantee well-defined and enforceable land- and water-use rights and promote legal security of tenure, while recognizing the existence of different national laws and/or systems of land access and tenure. "29. We call for the full, timely and effective achievement of the goals and targets of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010, the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries, the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States so as to address the special needs of least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. "30. We recognize that poverty and inequality are a concern for all countries regardless of their level of development. We also recognize that middle-income countries are still faced with significant areas of poverty and that efforts to address these challenges should be supported. "31. We emphasize the need for continued, coordinated and effective international support for achieving the development goals in countries emerging from conflict and in those recovering from natural disasters. "32. We remain concerned that many countries in Africa are currently not on track to achieve, by 2015, any of the goals set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration and, in this regard, emphasize that concerted efforts and continued support are required to fulfil the commitments to address the special needs of Africa. We welcome the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation with the New Partnership for Africa's Development and the progress made by the African countries in fulfilling their commitments in respect of the implementation of the New Partnership. In this regard, we look forward to the convening of the high-level meeting on the theme: `Africa's development needs: implementation of various commitments, challenges and the way forward', scheduled for 22 September 2008, which will review the implementation of all commitments made by and to Africa with a view to comprehensively addressing the special development needs of the continent. "33. We call upon all countries to promote good governance, which is essential for sustainable development, and reaffirm that sound economic policies, solid democratic institutions responsive to the needs of the people and improved infrastructure are the basis for sustained economic growth, poverty eradication and employment-creation and that freedom, peace and security, domestic stability, respect for human rights, including the right to development, the rule of law, gender equality and market-oriented policies and an overall commitment to just and democratic societies, are also essential and mutually reinforcing. "34. We reaffirm that good governance at the international level is fundamental for achieving sustainable development; that in order to ensure a dynamic and enabling international economic environment, it is important to promote global economic governance through addressing the issue of the international finance, trade, technology and investment patterns that have an impact on the development prospects of developing countries; and that, to that end, the international community should take all necessary and appropriate measures, including ensuring support for structural and macroeconomic reform, achieving a comprehensive solution to the external debt problem and increasing the market access of developing countries. "35. We reaffirm the commitments made in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration and the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 to meaningfully integrate the developing and the least developed countries into the multilateral trading system and call for the successful and early conclusion of the Doha Round of trade negotiations, with the full realization of the development dimensions of the Doha Work Programme. "36. We call for the early conclusion and successful development-oriented outcome of the Doha Round of trade negotiations, adhering fully to the agreed mandate in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, within the framework adopted by the General Council of the World Trade Organization in its decision of 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. "37. We reaffirm our commitment to promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, access to, and the development, transfer and diffusion of, environmentally sound technologies and corresponding know-how, in particular to developing countries and countries with economies in transition, on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed, as set out in chapter 34 of Agenda 21. "38. We recognize that appropriate, affordable and sustainable agricultural technologies can play an important role in helping Member States alleviate poverty, eradicate hunger and mitigate the global food crisis, and call upon the international community to make greater efforts to promote development and transfer of appropriate technologies. "39. We strongly stress that increased financial resources should be mobilized for meeting the priority objectives of sustainable development. "40. We reaffirm that each country must take primary responsibility for its own development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized in the achievement of sustainable development. We also recognize that national efforts should be complemented by supportive global programmes, measures and policies aimed at expanding the development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into account national conditions and ensuring respect for national ownership, strategies and sovereignty. "41. We reiterate that in our common pursuit of growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development, a critical challenge lies in ensuring the necessary internal conditions for mobilizing domestic savings, both public and private, sustaining adequate levels of productive investment and increasing human capacity. A crucial task is to enhance the efficacy, coherence and consistency of macroeconomic policies. An enabling domestic environment is vital for mobilizing domestic resources, increasing productivity, reducing capital flight, encouraging the private sector, and attracting and making effective use of international investment and assistance. Efforts to create such an environment should be supported by the international community. "42. We acknowledge efforts by developed countries to increase resources for development, including commitments by some developed countries to increase official development assistance. However, we note with concern the overall decline in official development assistance in 2006 and 2007, and call for the fulfilment of all official development assistance-related commitments, including the commitments made by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance by 2015 and to reach the target of at least 0.5 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance by 2010, as well as the target of 0.15-0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to least developed countries, and urge those developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts in this regard in accordance with their commitments. "43. We welcome the efforts of some developed countries, which are on target to meet the commitments made in terms of increased official development assistance. "44. We further welcome recent efforts and initiatives to enhance the quality of aid and to increase its impact, including the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, and resolve to take concrete, effective and timely action in implementing all agreed commitments on aid effectiveness, with clear monitoring and deadlines, including through further aligning assistance with countries' strategies, building institutional capacities, reducing transaction costs and eliminating bureaucratic procedures, making progress on untying aid, enhancing the absorptive capacity and financial management of recipient countries and strengthening the focus on development results. "45. We also emphasize the special importance of a timely, effective, comprehensive and durable solution to the debt problems of developing countries, since debt financing and debt relief can contribute to economic growth and development. "46. We welcome the fact that the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative have enabled heavily indebted poor countries to increase their expenditures on health, education and other social services consistent with national priorities, development plans and internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals." Closure of the high-level segment 120. At the 20th meeting, on 3 July, the President of the Council made a concluding statement and declared the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2008 of the Council closed. The role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council 1. The Council considered agenda item 4 at its 22nd to 25th and 43rd meetings, on 7, 8, 9 and 24 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.22, 23, 24, 25 and 43). The Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16 (A/63/83-E/2008/77); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the role of the United Nations system in implementing the Ministerial Declaration of the high-level segment of the 2007 substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/21). 2. At the 22nd meeting, on 7 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde) made an opening statement. 3. At the 22nd and 24th meetings, on 7 and 8 July, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, made an introductory statement. Panel discussion Working towards food security: the United Nations system approach 4. At the 22nd meeting, on 7 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "Working towards food security: the United Nations system approach". Opening remarks were made by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde). 5. The following panellists made presentations: John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, in his capacity as Coordinator of the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis; Themba Masuku, Director, Liaison Office, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Allan Jury, Director, Division of External Relations, World Food Programme; Julia Howard, Executive Director, Partnership to Cut Hunger and Poverty in Africa; and Christopher Delgado, Adviser, Agriculture and Rural Development, World Bank. 6. The panellists responded to comments made by the representatives of Malaysia, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), the Russian Federation, Indonesia, Brazil, the Philippines, El Salvador and the Republic of Korea, and by the observer for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). Rural development and the challenges of social welfare: a country-level perspective 7. At the 23rd meeting, on 8 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "Rural development and the challenges of social welfare: a country-level perspective". Opening remarks were made by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde). 8. Presentations were made by Bunmi Makinwa, Director, Africa Division, United Nations Population Fund; and Allan Jury, Director, Division of External Relations, World Food Programme. 9. The panellists responded to comments made by the representatives of the United States, the Republic of Korea, Bolivia, the Philippines, Algeria and Mozambique, and by the observer for the United Republic of Tanzania. Dialogue with the Chairpersons of the functional commissions The role of the Economic and Social Council in addressing violence against women in all its forms and manifestations 10. At its 24th meeting, on 8 July, the Council held a dialogue with the chairpersons of the functional commissions on the theme "The role of the Economic and Social Council in addressing violence against women in all its forms and manifestations". The round table was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde) and moderated by the Chairperson of the Commission on the Status of Women, Olivier Belle (Belgium). 11. Presentations were made by the following panellists: the Chairperson of the Commission on Population and Development (via video link); the Vice-Chairperson of the Commission on Social Development; and by the Chairperson of the Statistical Commission. 12. The Chairpersons of the functional commissions responded to comments made by the representatives of the Philippines, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), El Salvador, the Congo, Indonesia, Belarus, Brazil, the Republic of Korea, the United States and the Netherlands. Round table discussion Coherence: strengthening the normative and operational link in the work of the United Nations on rural employment 13. At its 25th meeting, on 9 July, the Council held a round table discussion on the theme "Coherence: strengthening the normative and operational link in the work of the United Nations on rural employment". The round table was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde) and moderated by Assane Diop, Executive Director, Social Protection Sector, International Labour Organization (ILO). 14. Presentations were made by Tareq Md. Ariful Islam, Vice-Chairman, Commission for Social Development; Olivier Belle, Chairman, Commission on the Status of Women; Juan Eduardo Eguiguren, Chairman, Commission on Science and Technology for Development; José Eduardo Dantas Ferreira Barbosa, President, Executive Board, World Food Programme; and Zdzislaw Rapacki, Chairman, Governing Council, ILO. 15. The panellists responded to comments made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), El Salvador and New Zealand, and by the observer for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). 16. Under agenda item 4, the Council adopted resolutions 2008/28 and 2008/29 and decision 2008/252. The role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration on strengthening efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger, including through the global partnership for development, adopted at the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council 17. At its 43rd meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "The role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration on strengthening efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger, including through the global partnership for development, adopted at the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council" (E/2008/L.22). 18. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as orally corrected. See Council resolution 2008/28. 19. After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of European Union) (see E/2008/SR.43). Role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16 20. At its 43rd meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16" (E/2008/L.29). 21. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/29. 22. Also at the same meeting, after the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of Iceland, in his capacity as Facilitator of draft resolutions E/2008/L.22 and L.29. Document considered by the Council in connection with item 4 23. At its 43rd meeting, on 24 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/21). See Council decision 2008/252. 1. The Council considered agenda item 3 at its 26th to 29th and 34th meetings, on 10, 11 and 18 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.26-29 and 34). 2. At the 26th meeting, on 10 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), opened the operational activities segment and made a statement. 3. At the same meeting, the Deputy Secretary-General made a keynote address in which she also introduced the documents under the sub-item 3 (a). A. Follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council 4. The Council considered agenda item 3 (a) at its 26th, 27th and 34th meetings, on 10 and 18 July 2008. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on comprehensive statistical analysis of the financing of operational activities for development of the United Nations system for 2006 (A/63/71-E/2008/46); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the management process for the implementation of General Assembly resolution 62/208 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system (E/2008/49); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on the functioning of the resident coordinator system, including costs and benefits (E/2008/60); (d) Letter dated 11 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/63/85-E/2008/83); (e) Conference room paper entitled "Actions taken by the executive boards and governing bodies of the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies in the area of simplification and harmonization of the United Nations development system" (E/2008/CRP.4). 5. At its 26th meeting, on 10 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "The United Nations system in a changing aid environment: implications and comparative advantages", under the chairmanship of the Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), who also made a statement. 6. Following a statement by the Moderator, the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa, presentations were made by the following panellists: Francis K. Butagira, Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations; Aiichiro Yamamoto, Resident Representative, Japan International Cooperation Agency; Thoraya Obaid, Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund; and Bruce Jenks, Assistant Administrator and Director of the Partnerships Bureau of the United Nations Development Programme. 7. The Director of the Investments Centre Division of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations also made a statement, as lead discussant. 8. The panellists and the lead discussant responded to comments made by the representatives of Benin, the Republic of Korea, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Saint Lucia, Malaysia, Japan, Brazil and China, and by the observers for Belgium, Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), the United Republic of Tanzania and Nigeria. 9. At the same meeting, the Moderator made concluding remarks. 10. At its 27th meeting, on 10 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "Strengthening United Nations development system's responsiveness to the different needs of programme countries". 11. The Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), opened the panel discussion and made a statement. 12. Following a statement by the moderator, the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs, presentations were made by the following panellists: José Luís Gutteres, Vice-Prime Minister, Timor-Leste; Henrique Banze, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mozambique; Rodolfo Pastor Fasquelle, Coordinator of the Social Cabinet and Minister of Culture, Arts and Sports, Honduras; and Jan Vandemoortele, Senior Adviser on Policy, Division on Policy and Practice, United Nations Children's Fund (former United Nations System Resident Coordinator in Pakistan). 13. The panellists responded to comments made by the representatives of France, Cape Verde, Malaysia, the Niger and Benin, and by the observers for Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania. 14. A statement was made by the representative of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization. 15. The Vice-President and the Moderator made concluding remarks. 16. Under agenda item 3 (a), the Council adopted resolution 2008/2. Under agenda item 3 as a whole, the Council adopted decision 2008/215. Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 62/208 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities or development of the United Nations system 17. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 62/208 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities or development of the United Nations system" (E/2008/L.12). 18. At the same meeting, the observer for Switzerland made a statement and orally corrected the text as follows: in paragraph 7, the words "paragraph 141" were replaced by the words "paragraph 142"; and in paragraph 11, after the word "Maputo", the word "Mozambique" was inserted. 19. Also at the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as orally corrected. See Council resolution 2008/2. 20. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Japan, as well as by the observer for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). Documents considered by the Council in connection with agenda item 3 21. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, under agenda item 3 as a whole, the Council decided to take note of the following documents (see Council decision 2008/215): (a) Actions taken by the executive boards and governing bodies of the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies in the area of simplification and harmonization of the United Nations development system (E/2008/CRP.4). 1 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 15 (E/2007/35). 2 To be issued in Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 14 (E/2008/34/Rev.1). 3 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 16 (E/2008/36). (b) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund on its work during 2007 (E/2007/35);1 (c) Report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/5); (d) Annual report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/6-E/ICEF/2008/3 and Corr.1); (e) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the annual report of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme for 2007 (E/2008/14); (f) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on the work of its 2008 first regular session (E/2008/34 (Part I)-E/ICEF/2008/7 (Part I));2 (g) Addendum to the report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on the work of its first regular session of 2008: Joint meeting of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme (E/2008/34 (Part I)/Add.1-E/ICEF/2008/7 (Part I)/Add.1);2 (h) Report of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme on the first and second regular sessions and annual session of 2007 (E/2008/36);3 (i) Extract from the report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on its 2008 annual session (3-5 June 2008) (E/2008/L.8). 22. At the 34th meeting, on 18 July, a statement was made by the representative of Benin. B. Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme 23. The Council considered agenda item 3 (b), at its 28th meeting, on 11 July 2008. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund on its work during 2007 (E/2007/35);1 (b) Report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/5); (c) Annual report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2008/6-E/ICEF/2008/3 and Corr.1); (d) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the annual report of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme for 2007 (E/2008/14); (e) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on the work of its 2008 first regular session (E/2008/34 (Part I)-E/ICEF/2008/7 (Part I));2 (f) Addendum to the report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on the work of its first regular session of 2008: Joint meeting of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme (E/2008/34 (Part I)/Add.1-E/ICEF/2008/7 (Part I)/Add.1);2 (g) Report of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme on the first and second regular sessions and annual session of 2007 (E/2008/36);3 (h) Extract from the report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on its 2008 annual session (3-5 June 2008) (E/2008/L.8). 24. At its 28th meeting, on 11 July, under the chairmanship of the Vice-President of the Council, Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus), the Council held a panel discussion with heads of United Nations funds and programmes. The Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, Sha Zukang, who served as moderator, also made a statement. 25. Presentations were made by Kemal Dervis, Administrator, United Nations Development Programme; Ann M. Veneman, Executive Director, United Nations Children's Fund; Thoraya Obaid, Executive Director, United Nations Population Fund; and John Powell, Deputy Executive Director, World Food Programme. 26. The panellists responded to comments made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Guyana, the Russian Federation, Belarus, Japan and Algeria, and by the observer for Nigeria. 27. Under sub-item 3 (b), the Council adopted decision 2008/215. 1. The Council considered agenda item 5 at its 30th to 33rd, 42nd and 45th meetings, held on 15 to 17 July and on 24 and 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (see E/2008/SR.30-33, 42 and 45). The Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations (A/63/81-E/2008/71); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster (A/63/84-E/2008/80). 2. At the 30th meeting, on 15 July 2008, the Vice-President of the Council, Park In-kook (Republic of Korea) opened the segment and made a statement. At the same meeting, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator made an introductory statement. Disaster risk reduction and preparedness: addressing the humanitarian consequences of natural disasters, including the impact of climate change 3. At its 31st meeting, on 16 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "Disaster risk reduction and preparedness: addressing the humanitarian consequences of natural disasters, including the impact of climate change". The Vice-President of the Council, Park In-kook (Republic of Korea), chaired the panel discussion and made an opening statement. 4. The moderator, Catherine Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, made an introductory statement. 5. The following panellists made presentations: Barbara Carby, Director of Hazard Management, the Cayman Islands; Madeleen Helmer, Head of the Climate Center at the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies; Mostafa Mohaghegh, Head of the Regional Office for West Asia and North Africa at the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction; Walter Kaelin, Representative of the Secretary-General on the human rights of internally displaced persons; and Phil Bloomer, Campaigns and Policy Director at Oxfam, Great Britain. 6. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the delegations of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and the Republic of Korea and the representatives of the World Meteorological Organization, the World Health Organization and the International Organization for Migration. Humanitarian challenges related to global food aid, including enhancing international efforts and cooperation in this field 7. At its 33rd meeting, on 17 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "Humanitarian challenges related to global food aid, including enhancing international efforts and cooperation in this field". The Vice-President of the Council, Park In-kook (Republic of Korea), chaired the panel discussion and made an opening statement. 8. The moderator, John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, made an introductory statement. 9. The following panellists made presentations: John M. Powell, Deputy Executive Director of the World Food Programme; Ismat Jahan, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations; Louise Cord, Sector Manager of the Poverty Reduction Group at the World Bank; Jama Gulaid, Representative of the United Nations Children's Fund in Swaziland; and Jim Butler, Deputy Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 10. The panellists engaged in a dialogue with the delegations of Brazil, Malaysia, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Australia, the Philippines, Finland, Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and the Republic of Korea and the delegations of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the World Meteorological Organization and the representative of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa. 11. Under agenda item 5, the Council adopted resolution 2008/36 and decision 2008/259. Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations 12. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Brazil, also on behalf of the Republic of Korea, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations" (E/2008/L.28). 13. At its 45th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it draft resolution E/2008/L.28. At the same meeting, the representative of Brazil orally revised paragraph 11 of the draft resolution by replacing the words "the independent study on the use of foreign military assets in disaster relief mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General" with the words "the report of the Secretary-General on the use of foreign military assets in disaster relief". 14. The representative of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) requested a vote on the draft resolution. 15. Also at the 45th meeting, draft resolution E/2008/L.28, as orally revised, was adopted by a vote by show of hands of 38 to none, with 13 abstentions. See Council resolution 2008/36. 16. Before the draft resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the Republic of Korea, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Japan; after it was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Liechtenstein, the United States of America, Canada, the Russian Federation, Brazil, Uruguay, New Zealand and Pakistan, and by the observers for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), the Syrian Arab Republic and Mexico. Document considered by the Council under agenda item 5 17. At the 45th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President, Park Inkook (Republic of Korea), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of emergency relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster (A/63/84-E/2008/80). See Council decision 2008/259. A. Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits 1. The Council considered agenda item 6 at its 34th, 35th, 38th, 42nd and 44th meetings, on 18, 22, 24 and 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary record (E/2008/SR.34, 35, 38, 42 and 44). 2. At the 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), opened the general segment of the substantive session of the Council of 2008. 3. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council discussed agenda item 6 jointly with item 8 (Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227, 52/12 B, 57/270 B and 60/265, including 61/16). The Council was informed that the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/3-E/2008/77) related to the items was introduced under agenda item 4 (Coordination segment), on 8 July. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary record. 4. The Council considered agenda item 6 (b) (Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010) at its 35th and 44th meetings, on 18 and 25 July 2008. 5. Under item 6 as a whole, the Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16 (A/63/83E/2008/77) (see also under agenda items 4, 7 (f), 8, 13 and 14); (b) Summary of the President of the Economic and Social Council of the special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (New York, 14 April 2008) (A/63/80-E/2008/67); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 (A/63/77E/2008/61). 1. Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development 6. The Council had before it the summary of the President of the Economic and Social Council of the special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (New York, 14 April 2008) (A/63/80E/2008/67). 7. Under agenda item 6 (a), the Council adopted resolution 2008/14. 8. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the representative of Mexico entitled "Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development" (E/2008/L.16). The representative of Mexico orally revised the draft resolution by replacing, in paragraph 2, the words "and the outcome of the Doha Review Conference" with the words "following the outcome of the Doha Review Conference". 9. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the observer for Guinea. 10. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, following a statement by the representative of Mexico, the Council adopted draft resolution E/2008/L.16, as orally revised. See Council resolution 2008/14. 2. Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 20012010 11. For its consideration of item 6 (b), the Council had before it the annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 (A/63/77E/2008/61). 12. Under agenda item 6 (b), the Council adopted resolution 2008/37. Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 13. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marie Hoscheit (Luxembourg), entitled "Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010", which was contained in an informal paper. 14. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the representative of Benin. 15. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Kenya, in his capacity as facilitator of the draft resolution, made a statement and orally revised the draft resolution. 16. Also at the 44th meeting, statements were made by the observers for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Bangladesh, after which the Council decided to defer action on the draft resolution to its next meeting. 17. At its 45th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution entitled "Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010" (E/2008/L.38). See Council resolution 2008/37. B. Coordination, programme and other questions 18. The Council considered agenda item 7 at its 34th, 36th, 38th to 40th and 44th meetings, on 18, 21, 22, 23 and 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.34, 36, 38-40 and 44). 19. At the 34th meeting, on 18 July, an introductory statement was made by the Special Assistant of the Office of the Chief Information Technology Officer (under agenda item 7 (c)). 20. At the 36th meeting, on 21 July, an introductory statement was made by the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs, Department of Economic and Social Affairs (under agenda items 7 (a) and 7 (b)). At the same meeting, an oral presentation was made by the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services. 21. At the 39th meeting, on 22 July 2008, an introductory statement was made by the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti and Permanent Representative to the United Nations, John McNee (Canada) (under agenda item 7 (d)). At the same meeting, an introductory statement was made by the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau and Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa) (under agenda item 7 (f)). 22. At the 40th meeting, on 23 July, an introductory statement was made by the Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Division for the Advancement of Women (under agenda items 7 (e), 13 (k) and 14 (a)). An inclusive and coherent approach to climate change: the role of the United Nations system 23. At its 36th meeting, on 21 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "An inclusive and coherent approach to climate change: the role of the United Nations system". The panel discussion was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), who made an opening statement. 24. The following panellists made presentations: Robert Orr, Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Planning, Executive Office of the Secretary-General; and Thomas Stelzer, Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 25. An interactive dialogue ensued, in which statements were made by the representatives of El Salvador, the United States, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Indonesia, the Republic of Korea and Poland, and by the observer for Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China). 26. Statements were also made by the representatives of the World Meteorological Organization, United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the World Bank. 27. The representative of the United Nations Environment Programme also made a statement. 28. The panellists responded to comments and questions addressed to them, after which the Vice-President made concluding remarks. The Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission 29. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the theme "The Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission". The panel discussion was chaired by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), who made an opening statement. 30. The following panellists made presentations: Dumisani Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations; Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations; and Nikhil Seth, Director, Office of Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 31. Statements were made by the representatives of Portugal, Angola, Benin, Indonesia, Cape Verde, El Salvador and the Netherlands. 32. The panellists and the Vice-President made concluding remarks. 1. Reports of coordination bodies 33. The Council considered agenda item 7 (a) jointly with item 7 (b) (Proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011) at its 36th meeting, on 21 July. 34. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (a), the Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on its fortyeighth session (A/63/16); (b) Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2007/08 (E/2008/58). 35. Under agenda item 7 (a), the Council adopted decision 2008/221. Documents considered by the Council in connection with agenda item 7 (a) 36. At its 36th meeting, on 21 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the following documents (see Council decision 2008/221): (b) Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2008-2009 (E/2008/58). 2. Proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 37. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (b), the Council had before it the relevant programmes of the proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 (relevant fascicles of A/63/6). 38. No action was taken by the Council under the item. 3. International cooperation in the field of informatics 39. The Council considered agenda item 7 (c) jointly with item 13 (b) (Science and technology for development) at its 34th meeting, on 18 July. 40. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (c), the Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on international cooperation in the field of informatics (E/2008/65). 41. Under agenda item 7 (c), the Council adopted resolution 2008/6. The need to harmonize and improve United Nations informatics systems for optimal utilization and accessibility by all States 42. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "The need to harmonize and improve United Nations informatics systems for optimal utilization and accessibility by all States" (E/2008/L.18). 43. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/6. 4. Long-term programme of support for Haiti 44. The Council considered agenda item 7 (d) at its 39th and 40th meetings, on 22 and 23 July. 45. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (d), the Council had before it the report of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti (E/2008/90). 46. Under agenda item 7 (d), the Council adopted resolution 2008/10. 1 In accordance with rule 72 of the rules of procedure of the Economic and Social Council. 47. At the 39th meeting, on 22 July, the representative of Canada, on behalf of Benin, Brazil, Canada, Chile,1 Haiti, Spain,1 and Trinidad and Tobago,1 introduced a draft resolution entitled "Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti" (E/2008/L.15). 48. At the 40th meeting, on 23 July, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of programme budget implications relating to the draft resolution. 49. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/10. 50. Also at the same meeting, after the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of Haiti. 5. Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system 51. The Council considered agenda item 7 (e) jointly with items 14 (a) (Advancement of women) and 13 (k) (Women and development) at its 40th meeting, on 23 July. 52. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (e), the Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes of the United Nations system (E/2008/53) (see also under agenda item 14 (a)). 53. No action was taken by the Council under the item. 6. Ad hoc advisory groups on African countries emerging from conflict 54. The Council considered agenda item 7 (f) at its 39th and 44th meetings, on 22 and 25 July. 55. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (f), the Council had before it the report of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau (E/2008/55) and the updated report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16 (A/63/83-E/2008/77). 56. Under agenda item 7 (f), the Council adopted resolution 2008/30. Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau 57. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Ad Hoc Advisory Group on GuineaBissau" (E/2008/L.34). 58. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/30. 7. Tobacco or health 59. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, the Council considered agenda item 7 (g) jointly with items 14 (i) (Genetic privacy and non-discrimination) and 15 (United Nations research and training institutes), and heard an introductory statement by the Director of the Tobacco-Free Initiative of the World Health Organization. 60. For its consideration of agenda item 7 (g), the Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Task Force on Tobacco Control (E/2008/59). 61. Under agenda item 7 (g), the Council adopted decisions 2008/231 and 2008/232. 62. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it a draft decision submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Smoke-free United Nations premises" (E/2008/L.19). 63. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2008/231. 64. After the adoption of the draft decision, a statement was made by the representative of Canada, also on behalf of Australia and New Zealand. Report of the Secretary-General on the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Task Force on Tobacco Control 65. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made by the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Task Force on Tobacco Control (E/2008/59). See Council decision 2008/232. 66. At the same meeting, the Council decided to request that the Secretary-General submit a report on the work of the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Task Force on Tobacco Control to the Council at its substantive session of 2010 (see para. 65 above). C. Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227, 52/12 B, 57/270 B and 60/265, including 61/16 67. The Council considered agenda item 8 jointly with item 6 (Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits) at its 34th meeting, on 18 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary record (E/2008/SR.34). 68. For its consideration of item 8, the Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including 61/16 (A/63/83-E/2008/77) (see also agenda items 4, 6, 7 (f), 13 and 14). 69. No action was taken by the Council under the item. D. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations 70. The Council considered agenda item 9 at its 38th and 42nd meetings, on 22 and 24 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.38 and 42). 71. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council discussed agenda item 9 jointly with items 10 (Regional cooperation) and 11 (Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan). For its consideration of item 9, the Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (A/63/61); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people (A/63/75-E/2008/52); (c) Report of the President of the Council on consultations with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: information submitted by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system on their activities with regard to the implementation of the Declaration (E/2008/47). 72. At the 38th meeting, on 22 July, the representative of the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process made an introductory statement. 73. Under agenda item 9, the Council adopted resolution 2008/15 and decision 2008/243. Support to Non-Self-Governing Territories by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations 74. At the 38th meeting, on 22 July, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of Algeria, Bolivia, Burundi,1 Chile,1 Congo, Cuba, Namibia,1 Nigeria,1 Pakistan, Saint Kitts and Nevis,1 Saint Lucia, the Solomon Islands,1 South Africa,1 the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,1 the United Republic of Tanzania,1 and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)1 introduced a draft resolution entitled "Support to Non-Self-Governing Territories by the specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations" (E/2008/L.17). Subsequently, Angola, China and Dominica1 joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 2 The representatives of Belarus and Mauritania subsequently stated that, had their delegations been present during the vote, they would have voted in favour of the draft resolution. 75. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution E/2008/L.17 by a roll-call vote of 27 to none, with 20 abstentions. See Council resolution 2008/15. The voting was as follows:2 In favour: Algeria, Angola, Barbados, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Congo, Cuba, El Salvador, Haiti, Indonesia, Iraq, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mozambique, New Zealand, Niger, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Uruguay. Against: None. Abstaining: Austria, Canada, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Iceland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Moldova, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 76. Statements before the vote were made by the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Russian Federation, Bolivia, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), the United States of America and New Zealand. Document considered by the Council under agenda item 9 77. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people (A/63/75E/2008/52). See Council decision 2008/243. E. Regional cooperation 78. The Council considered agenda item 10 at its 21st, 38th and 40th meetings, on 7, 22 and 23 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.21, 38 and 40). 79. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council discussed agenda item 10 jointly with items 9 and 11. For its consideration of item 10, the Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields (E/2008/15); (b) Addendum to the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields: matters calling for action by the Economic and Social Council or brought to its attention (E/2008/15/Add.1); (c) Addendum to the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields: matters calling for action by the Economic and Social Council or brought to its attention (E/2008/15/Add.2); (d) Economic situation in the Economic Commission for Europe region: Europe, North America and the Commonwealth of Independent States in 2007-2008 (E/2008/16); (e) Overview of the economic and social conditions in Africa 2008 (E/2008/17); (f) Summary of the Economic and Social Survey of Asia and the Pacific 2008 (E/2008/18); (g) Latin America and the Caribbean: economic situation and outlook, 20072008 (E/2008/19); (h) Summary of the survey of economic and social developments in the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia region, 2007-2008 (E/2008/20). 80. At the 38th meeting, on 22 July, the representative of the Regional Commissions New York Office made an introductory statement. Dialogue with the Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions Regional dimensions of the themes of the high-level segment of 2008 81. At its 21st meeting, on 7 July, the Council held a dialogue with the Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions. The President of the Council opened the dialogue and the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs made a statement as Convener of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs. 82. Presentations were made by Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific; Abdoulie Janneh, Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa; Marek Belka, Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Europe; Alicia Bárcena, Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean; and Bader Omar AlDafa, Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia. 83. The Executive Secretaries engaged in a dialogue with the delegations of Ethiopia (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the African Group), Malaysia, the Republic of Korea, Brazil, Saint Lucia, Paraguay (also on behalf of the landlocked developing countries), the Russian Federation, the Philippines, Kenya, Indonesia, Jamaica, New Zealand, Barbados, the Sudan, Kazakhstan and Japan. 84. Under agenda item 10, the Council adopted resolutions 2008/7, 2008/8 and 2008/9 and decision 2008/234. Recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields 85. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution recommended by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, entitled "Restructuring of the conference structure of the Commission" (see E/2008/15/Add.1, chap. I.A). 86. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of programme budget implications relating to the draft resolution. 87. Also at the same meeting, the Council recommended the draft resolution for adoption by the General Assembly. See Council resolution 2008/7. Admission of the Sudan as a member of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia 88. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution recommended by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, entitled "Admission of the Sudan as a member of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia" (see E/2008/15/Add.1, chap. I.B). See Council resolution 2008/8. Venue of the thirty-third session of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 89. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution recommended by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, entitled "Venue of the thirty-third session of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean" (see E/2008/15/Add.2, chap. I). See Council resolution 2008/9. Documents considered by the Council in connection with regional cooperation 90. At its 40th meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council took note of the following documents (see Council decision 2008/234): (d) The economic situation in the Economic Commission for Europe region: Europe, North America and the Commonwealth of Independent States in 2007-2008 (E/2008/16); F. Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan 91. The Council considered agenda item 11 at its 38th, 43rd and 44th meetings, on 22, 24 and 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.38, 43 and 44). 92. At its 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council discussed agenda item 11 jointly with items 9 (Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations) and 10 (Regional cooperation). For its consideration of item 11, the Council had before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting a report prepared by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (A/63/74-E/2008/13). 93. At the same meeting, the representative of the Regional Commissions New York Office made an introductory statement. 94. Under agenda item 11, the Council adopted resolution 2008/31 and decision 2008/253. 3 In accordance with General Assembly resolution 52/250. 95. At the 43rd meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Algeria, also on behalf of Bahrain,1 Cuba, Djibouti,1 Egypt,1 Iraq, Jordan,1 Kiribati,1 Lebanon,1 Mauritania, Morocco,1 Qatar,1 Saudi Arabia, South Africa,1 the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates,1 Yemen1 and Palestine,3 introduced a draft resolution entitled "Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan" (E/2008/L.26) and orally corrected operative paragraph 12 by inserting the word "mother" before the word "homeland". Subsequently, Indonesia and Malaysia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 96. At the 44th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of Algeria orally revised the draft resolution as follows: (a) After the sixteenth preambular paragraph, the following new preambular paragraph was inserted: "Emphasizing the importance of the safety and well-being of all civilians, and calling for the cessation of all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction, and all firing of rockets,"; (b) In the nineteenth preambular paragraph, after the words "damaged institutions", the words "and promote good governance" were inserted, and at the end of the paragraph the words "and to ameliorate economic and social conditions" were added; (c) At the end of paragraph 5, the words "and expresses deep concern at any actions that threaten the integrity of the border crossings and the distribution of fuel" were added. 97. At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft resolution E/2008/L.26, as orally revised, by a roll-call vote of 49 to 2, with 2 abstentions. See Council resolution 2008/31. The voting was as follows: Algeria, Angola, Austria, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Congo, Cuba, Czech Republic, El Salvador, France, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Moldova, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay. Canada, United States of America. Cameroon, Japan. 98. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Algeria and the United States of America; after the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Canada and Japan and by the observers for Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. The observer for Palestine also made a statement. At a subsequent meeting, the representative of Mauritania made a statement. Document considered by the Council in connection with agenda item 11 99. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the note by the Secretary-General (A/63/74-E/2008/13). See Council decision 2008/253. G. Non-governmental organizations 100. The Council considered agenda item 12 at its 37th and 38th meetings, on 21 and 22 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.37 and 38). The Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its 2008 regular session (E/2008/32 (Part I)); 4 The complete report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its 2008 resumed session will be issued as Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 12 (E/2008/32 (Part II)). (b) Excerpt from the report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its resumed 2008 session (E/2008/L.9).4 101. At the 37th meeting, on 21 July, the representative of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) introduced a draft decision entitled "Application of the non-governmental organization Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales" (E/2008/L.13). 102. At the same meeting, the representative of the United States introduced a draft decision entitled "Application of the non-governmental organization Human Rights Foundation for consultative status with the Economic and Social Council" (E/2008/L.14). 103. Under agenda item 12, the Council adopted resolutions 2008/4 and 2008/5 and decisions 2008/222 to 2008/230. Recommendations contained in the report of the Committee on NonGovernmental Organizations on its 2008 regular session Measures to improve the quadrennial reporting procedures 104. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution recommended by the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, entitled "Measures to improve the quadrennial reporting procedures" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/4. Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations 105. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, following a statement by the Secretary of the Council, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Committee, entitled "Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/222. Application of Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales 106. At its the 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council had before it draft decision II recommended by the Committee, entitled "Application of Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.B). 107. At the same meeting, the Council rejected the draft decision by a vote by show of hands of 20 to 22, with 9 abstentions. 108. Statements were made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), the Russian Federation, Bolivia and the United States, as well as by the observers for Egypt and Spain. 109. The representative of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) made an explanation of vote before the vote. Application of American Sports Committee 110. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft decision III recommended by the Committee, entitled "Application of American Sports Committee" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/223. Report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its 2008 regular session 111. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft decision IV recommended by the Committee, entitled "Report of the Committee on NonGovernmental Organizations on its 2008 regular session" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/224. Recommendations contained in the excerpt of the report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its resumed 2008 session Strengthening of the Non-Governmental Organization Section of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat 112. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee, entitled "Strengthening of the Non-Governmental Organization Section of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat" (see E/2008/L.9, chap. I.A). 113. At the same meeting, following a statement by the Secretary of the Council, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/5. 114. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Committee, entitled "Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations" (see E/2008/L.9, chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/225. Application of the non-governmental organization Human Rights Foundation for consultative status with the Economic and Social Council 115. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council had before it draft decision II recommended by the Committee, entitled "Application of the non-governmental organization Human Rights Foundation for consultative status with the Economic and Social Council" (see E/2008/L.9, chap. I.B). 116. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision by a vote by show of hands of 29 to 19, with 3 abstentions. See Council decision 2008/226. 117. Before the vote, statements were made by the observers for Ecuador, Nicaragua, Qatar and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. 118. Statements were made by the representatives of Belarus, the Sudan, the United States, Algeria, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Bolivia, China, Angola and Cuba in explanation of the vote before the vote. 119. Statements were made by the representatives of Saint Lucia and Cuba in explanation of the vote after the vote. Complaint against the non-governmental organization World Union for Progressive Judaism 120. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft decision III recommended by the Committee, entitled "Complaint against the non-governmental organization World Union for Progressive Judaism" (see E/2008/L.9, chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/227. Dates of and provisional agenda for the 2009 session of the Committee on NonGovernmental Organizations 121. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, after a statement by the Secretary orally amending the dates of the 2009 session, the Council adopted draft decision IV recommended by the Committee, entitled "Dates of and provisional agenda for the 2009 session of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations" (see E/2008/L.9, chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/228. Report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its resumed 2008 session 122. At its 37th meeting, on 21 July, the Council decided to defer the consideration of pending issues under agenda item 12 until its resumed substantive session. See decision 2008/229. Motion in connection with draft decision II recommended by the Committee in its report on its 2008 regular session, entitled "Application of Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales" 123. At the 37th meeting, on 21 July, statements were made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Benin, Cape Verde, Pakistan, Saint Lucia, New Zealand, the Netherlands and Mauritania, as well as by the observer for Spain. 124. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the Secretary of the Council. 125. Also at the same meeting, the representatives of Saudi Arabia moved, under rule 57 of the rules of procedure, to reconsider draft decision II, entitled "Application of Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.B). 126. Statements opposing the motion were made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and the Netherlands. 127. The representative of Saudi Arabia requested a roll-call vote on the motion. 128. The motion to reconsider draft decision II was adopted, by a vote of 27 to 23, with 3 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Congo, Cuba, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iraq, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Niger, Pakistan, Paraguay, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan. Austria, Brazil, Canada, Czech Republic, El Salvador, France, Greece, Iceland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Moldova, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. Barbados, Mozambique, Philippines. 129. At the 38th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it draft decision II recommended by the Committee, entitled "Application of Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales" (see E/2008/32 (Part I), chap. I.B). 130. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the representative of Malaysia. 131. Also at the same meeting, the Council rejected draft decision II, by a vote of 20 to 22, with 8 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Benin, Cameroon, China, Congo, Indonesia, Iraq, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Niger, Pakistan, Paraguay, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan. Austria, Brazil, Canada, Cape Verde, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Iceland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Moldova, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. Barbados, El Salvador, Guyana, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Mozambique, Philippines, Saint Lucia. 132. Statements were made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and the Sudan. 133. Statements were made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Algeria in explanation of the vote before the vote. 134. A statement was made by the observer for Spain after the vote. 135. Also at the 38th meeting, on 22 July, following the rejection of draft decision II, the Council adopted the draft decision entitled "Application of the nongovernmental organization Federación Estatal de Lesbianas, Gays, Transexuales y Bisexuales" (E/2008/L.13) by a roll-call vote of 22 to 19, with 10 abstentions. See Council decision 2008/230. The voting was as follows: Algeria, Belarus, Benin, Cameroon, China, Congo, Indonesia, Iraq, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Niger, Pakistan, Paraguay, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan. Angola, Barbados, El Salvador, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Mozambique, Philippines, Saint Lucia. 136. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the Sudan, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Benin. 137. Also at the same meeting, the representative of the United States made a statement by which he withdrew the draft decision entitled "Application of the nongovernmental organization Human Rights Foundation for consultative status with the Economic and Social Council" (E/2008/L.14). H. Economic and environmental questions 138. The Council considered agenda item 13 at its 34th, 40th, 41st, 42nd and 44th meetings, on 18, 23, 24 and 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.34, 40, 41, 42 and 44). 139. At the 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council discussed agenda item 13 (b) (Science and technology for development) jointly with item 7 (c) (International cooperation in the field of informatics) and heard an introductory statement by the Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary-General and Chief Information Technology Officer, Executive Office of the Secretary-General. 140. At the 40th meeting, on 23 July, the Council discussed agenda item 13 (k) (Women and development) jointly with items 7 (e) (Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system) and 14 (a) (Advancement of women), and heard an introductory statement by the Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. 141. At the 41st meeting, on 23 July, introductory statements were made by the representative of the Committee for Development Policy (under item 13 (a) (Sustainable development)); the Director, Office of Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination (under item 13 (e) (Environment)); and the Director of the New York Office of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (under item 13 (d) (Human settlements)). 142. In consideration of agenda item 13, as a whole, the Council had before it the updated report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions 50/227, 52/12 B and 57/270 B and 60/265 (A/62/89-E/2007/76) (see also under items 4, 6, 7 (f), 8 and 14). 1. Sustainable development 143. The Council considered item 13 (a) at its 41st meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the following documents: 5 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 9 (E/2008/29). 6 Ibid., Supplement No. 13 (E/2008/33). (a) Report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its sixteenth session (E/2008/29);5 (b) Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its tenth session (E/2008/33);6 144. Under agenda item 13 (a), the Council adopted resolution 2008/12 and decision 2008/237. Recommendation contained in the report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its sixteenth session Report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its sixteenth session and provisional agenda for the seventeenth session of the Commission 145. At the 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted a draft decision recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its sixteenth session and provisional agenda for the seventeenth session of the Commission" (see E/2008/29, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/237. Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its tenth session 146. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its tenth session" (E/2008/L.23). 147. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/12. 2. Science and technology for development 148. The Council considered agenda item 13 (b) jointly with item 7 (c) (International cooperation in the field of informatics) at its 34th meeting, on 18 July. It had before it the following documents: 7 Ibid., Supplement No. 11 (E/2008/31). (a) Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its eleventh session (E/2008/31);7 (b) Report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels (A/63/72-E/2008/48). 149. Under agenda item 13 (b), the Council adopted resolution 2008/3 and decisions 2008/216, 2008/217, 2008/218, 2008/219 and 2008/220. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its tenth session Assessment of the progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society 150. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution recommended by the Commission, entitled "Assessment of the progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society" (see E/2008/31, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/3. Participation of non-governmental organizations and civil society entities in the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development at its twelfth and thirteenth sessions 151. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission, entitled "Participation of non-governmental organizations and civil society entities in the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development at its twelfth and thirteenth sessions" (see E/2008/31, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/217. Participation of academic entities in the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development 152. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission, entitled "Participation of academic entities in the work of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development" (see E/2008/31, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/218. Report of the Secretary-General on science, technology and innovation to be submitted to the Commission on Science and Technology for Development at its twelfth session 153. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted draft decision III recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Secretary-General on science, technology and innovation to be submitted to the Commission on Science and Technology for Development at its twelfth session" (see E/2008/31, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/219. Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its eleventh session and provisional agenda and documentation for the twelfth session of the Commission 154. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted draft decision IV recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its eleventh session and provisional agenda and documentation for the twelfth session of the Commission" (see E/2008/31, chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/220. Document considered by the Council in connection with the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society 155. At its 34th meeting, on 18 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels (A/63/72-E/2008/48), relating to the role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Council (agenda item 4). See Council decision 2008/216. 3. Statistics 8 Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (E/2008/24). 156. The Council considered agenda item 13 (c) at its 41st meeting on 23 July. It had before it the report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-ninth session (E/2008/24).8 157. Under agenda item 13 (c), the Council adopted decision 2008/238. Recommendation contained in the report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-ninth session Report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-ninth session and provisional agenda and dates for the fortieth session of the Commission 158. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-ninth session and provisional agenda and dates for the fortieth session of the Commission" (see E/2008/24, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/238. 4. Human settlements 159. The Council considered agenda item 13 (d) at its 41st meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda (E/2008/64). 160. Under agenda item 13 (d), the Council adopted decision 2008/239. 161. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council had before it a draft decision submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Human settlements" (E/2008/L.24). 162. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2008/239. 5. Environment 163. The Council considered agenda item 13 (e) at its 41st meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the following documents: 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third session, Supplement No. 25 (A/63/25). (a) Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its tenth special session (A/63/25);9 (b) Report of the Secretary-General on products harmful to health and the environment (A/63/76-E/2008/54). 164. Under agenda item 13 (e), the Council adopted resolution 2008/13 and decision 2008/242. Protection against products harmful to health and the environment 165. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Protection against products harmful to health and the environment" (E/2008/L.21). 166. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/13. Document considered by the Council in connection with the environment 167. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its tenth special session. See Council decision 2008/242. 6. Population and development 10 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 5 (E/2008/25). 11 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (E/2008/44). 168. The Council considered agenda item 13 (f) at its 41st meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the report of the Commission on Population and Development on its forty-first session (E/2008/25).10 169. Under agenda item 13 (f), the Council adopted decision 2008/240. Recommendation contained in the report of the Commission on Population and Development on its forty-first session Report of the Commission on Population and Development on its forty-first session and provisional agenda for its forty-second session 170. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission on Population and Development on its forty-first session and provisional agenda for its forty-second session" (see E/2008/25, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/240. 7. Public administration and development 171. The Council considered agenda item 13 (g) at its 44th meeting, on 25 July. It had before it the report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its seventh session (E/2008/44).11 172. Under agenda item 13 (g), the Council adopted resolution 2008/32 and decision 2008/254. 173. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft decision submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its seventh session and provisional agenda for its eighth session" (E/2008/L.30). 174. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2008/254. Report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its seventh session 175. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its seventh session" (E/2008/L.33). 176. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/32. 8. International cooperation in tax matters 177. The Council considered agenda item 13 (h) at its 42nd meeting, on 24 July. It had before it the following documents: 12 Ibid., Supplement No. 25 (E/2008/45). (a) Report of the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters on its third session (E/2008/45);12 (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the report on financing of the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (E/2008/4). 178. Under agenda item 13 (h), the Council adopted resolution 2008/16. Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters 179. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters" (E/2008/L.27). 180. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/16. 181. The Council considered agenda item 13 (i) at its 41st meeting, on 23 July. 182. No proposals were submitted under agenda item 13 (i). 10. Cartography 183. The Council considered agenda item 13 (j) at its 41st meeting, on 23 July. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Ninth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names (E/CONF.98/136); (b) Report of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names on the work of its twenty-fourth session (New York, 20 and 31 August 2007) (E/2007/89). 184. Under agenda item 13 (j), the Council adopted decisions 2008/241 and 2008/242. Tenth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names and twenty-fifth session of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names 185. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, the Council had before it a draft decision submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Tenth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names and twenty-fifth session of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names" (E/2008/L.25). 186. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision. See Council decision 2008/241. Document considered by the Council in connection with cartography 187. At its 41st meeting, on 23 July, on the proposal of the President, the Council decided to take note of the report of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names on the work of its twenty-fourth session (E/2007/89). See Council decision 2008/242. 11. Women and development 13 Ibid., Supplement No. 7 (E/2008/27). 188. The Council considered item 13 (k) jointly with items 7 (e) (Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system) and 14 (a) (Advancement of women) at its 40th meeting, on 23 July, and jointly with item 14 (a) at its 44th meeting, on 25 July. It had before it the relevant sections of the report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its fifty-second session (E/2008/27).13 189. No action was taken by the Council under the agenda item. I. Social and human rights questions 190. The Council considered social and human rights questions (agenda item 14) at its 39th, 40th, 42nd, and 44th meetings, from 22 to 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.39, 40, 42 and 44). 191. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, the Council discussed agenda item 14 (i) jointly with agenda items 7 (g) (Tobacco or health) and 15 (United Nations research and training institutes) and heard an introductory statement by the Director of the Office of Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination. 192. At its 40th meeting, on 23 July, the Council discussed agenda item 14 (a) (Advancement of women) jointly with items 7 (e) (Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system) and 13 (k) (Women and development) and heard an introductory statement by the Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. 193. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council discussed agenda items 14 (b) through 14 (h). The Council heard an introductory statement by the Director of the New York Office of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (item 14 (g)); an oral report by the Deputy Director of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, on behalf of the High Commissioner (item 14 (e)); and a statement by the President of the International Narcotics Control Board (item 14 (d)). 194. Under agenda item 14 as a whole, the Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16 (A/63/83-E/2008/77) (see also items 4, 6, 7 (f), 8 and 13). 195. Under agenda item 14 as a whole, the Council adopted resolution 2008/33 and decision 2008/256. Strengthening coordination of the United Nations and other efforts in fighting trafficking in persons 196. At the 44th meeting, on 25 July, the representative of Belarus, also on behalf of China, Ecuador,1 Japan, Kazakhstan, Mexico,1 the Philippines and the Russian Federation, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Strengthening coordination of the United Nations and other efforts in fighting trafficking in persons" (E/2008/L.31), and orally revised it as follows: (a) At the end of the eleventh preambular paragraph, the words "that fosters all forms of exploitation of persons, especially women and children, and that thus promotes trafficking" were added; (b) In paragraph 1, the words "as well as within the United Nations system" were replaced with the words "as well as the United Nations system"; (c) In paragraph 3, the words "against human trafficking" were replaced with the words "against trafficking in persons"; (d) In paragraph 9, after the words "United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking", the term "UN.GIFT" was inserted; (e) In paragraph 11, before the word "Parties", the word "States" was inserted. 197. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of programme budget implications relating to the draft resolution. 198. Also at the same meeting, the Council adopted draft resolution E/2008/L.31, as orally revised. See Council resolution 2008/33. 199. After the draft resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representative of the United States and the observer for Kyrgyzstan (see E/2008/SR.44). Document considered by the Council under agenda item 14 200. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, in the light of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/16 (A/63/83-E/2008/77). See Council decision 2008/256. 1. Advancement of women 201. The Council considered agenda item 14 (a) at its 40th, 41st and 44th meetings on 23 and 25 July. It had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its fifty-second session (E/2008/27); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes of the United Nations system (E/2008/53) (see also under agenda item 7 (e)); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on future work to strengthen the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2008/62); (d) Report of the Executive Board of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on the work of its fifth session (E/2008/73); (e) Note by the Secretariat on the results of the fortieth session of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (E/2008/91). 202. Under agenda item 14 (a), the Council adopted resolutions 2008/11 and 2008/34 and decisions 2008/235 and 2008/236. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its fifty-second session Agreed conclusions on financing gender equality and the empowerment of women 203. At its 40th meeting, on 23 July, the Council decided to transmit to the General Assembly, as an input into the preparations for and outcome of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus (to be held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008), the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women entitled "Financing for gender equality and the empowerment of women" (see E/2008/27, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/235. Situation of and assistance to Palestinian women 204. At its 40th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution recommended by the Commission, entitled "Situation of and assistance to Palestinian women", (see E/2008/27, chap. I.B) by a roll-call vote of 25 to 2, with 17 abstentions. See Council resolution 2008/11. The voting was as follows: Algeria, Angola, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Congo, Cuba, El Salvador, Haiti, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mozambique, New Zealand, Pakistan, Paraguay, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan. Austria, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Moldova, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 205. At the same meeting, before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representative of the United States and by the observer for Israel. After the adoption of the draft resolution, the observer for Palestine made a statement. 206. At the 41st meeting, on 23 July, statements were made by the representatives of Uruguay and the Philippines regarding the vote on the draft resolution that had been adopted. Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its fifty-second session and provisional agenda and documentation for the fifty-third session of the Commission 207. At the 40th meeting, on 23 July, the Secretary of the Council orally corrected the documentation listed in the report of the Commission on its fifty-second session as follows: (a) In chapter I.C, paragraph 3 (c), under "Documentation", the title "Report of the Secretary-General on ending female genital mutilation" was deleted; (b) In chapter I.C, paragraph 4, under "Documentation", after the title "Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the list of confidential communications concerning the status of women" the title "Report of the Secretary-General on the future work of the Working Group" was inserted. 208. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its fifty-second session and provisional agenda and documentation for the fifty-third session of the Commission", as orally corrected (see E/2008/27, chap. I.C). See Council decision 2008/236. 209. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), under agenda item 14 (a), entitled "Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system" (E/2008/L.32). See Council resolution 2008/34. 210. At the same meeting, after the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union). Documents considered by the Council in connection with agenda item 14 (a) 211. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), the Council decided to take note of the following documents (see Council decision 2008/256): (a) Report of the Secretary-General on future work to strengthen the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2008/62); (b) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on the work of its fifth session (E/2008/73); (c) Note by the Secretariat on a report on the results of the fortieth session of the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (E/2008/91). 14 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 6 (E/2008/26). 212. The Council considered agenda item 14 (b) at its 42nd meeting, on 24 July. It had before it the report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-sixth session (E/2008/26).14 213. Under agenda item 14 (b), the Council adopted resolutions 2008/17, 2008/18, 2008/19, 2008/20 and 2008/21 and decision 2008/244. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-sixth session 214. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission, entitled "Social dimensions of the New Partnership for Africa's Development" (see E/2008/26, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/17. Promoting full employment and decent work for all 215. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission, entitled "Promoting full employment and decent work for all" (see E/2008/26, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/18. Future organization and methods of work of the Commission for Social Development 216. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission, entitled "Future organization and methods of work of the Commission for Social Development" (see E/2008/26, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/19. Further promotion of equalization of opportunities by, for and with persons with disabilities and protection of their human rights 217. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission, entitled "Further promotion of equalization of opportunities by, for and with persons with disabilities and protection of their human rights" (see E/2008/26, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/20. Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda 218. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution V recommended by the Commission, entitled "Mainstreaming disability in the development agenda" (see E/2008/26, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/21. Report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-sixth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-seventh session of the Commission 219. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-sixth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-seventh session" (see E/2008/26, chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/244. 220. At the same meeting, before the draft decision was adopted, the representative of Cuba made a statement. 3. Crime prevention and criminal justice 15 Ibid., Supplement No. 10 (E/2008/30). 221. The Council considered agenda item 14 (c) at its 42nd meeting, on 24 July. It had before it the report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its seventeenth session (E/2008/30).15 222. Under agenda item 14 (c), the Council adopted resolutions 2008/22, 2008/23, 2008/24, and 2008/25 and decisions 2008/245 and 2008/246. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its seventeenth session 223. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of programme budget implications in connection with the report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (see E/2008/30, chap. I). 224. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council recommended the adoption by the General Assembly of the draft resolution recommended by the Commission, entitled "Preparations for the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice" (see E/2008/30, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/22. Protection against trafficking in cultural property 225. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission, entitled "Protection against trafficking in cultural property" (see E/2008/30, chap. I.B). See Council resolution 2008/23. Strengthening prevention of urban crime: an integrated approach 226. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission, entitled "Strengthening prevention of urban crime: an integrated approach" (see E/2008/30, chap. I.B). See Council resolution 2008/24. International cooperation in preventing and combating illicit international trafficking in forest products, including timber, wildlife and other forest biological resources 227. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission, entitled "International cooperation in preventing and combating illicit international trafficking in forest products, including timber, wildlife and other forest biological resources" (see E/2008/30, chap. I.B). See Council resolution 2008/25. Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its seventeenth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the eighteenth session of the Commission 228. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its seventeenth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the eighteenth session of the Commission" (see E/2008/30, chap. I.C). See Council decision 2008/245. 229. At the same meeting, before the draft decision was adopted, the representative of Cuba made a statement. Appointment of members of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute 230. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission, entitled "Appointment of members of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute" (see E/2008/30, chap. I.C). See Council decision 2008/246. 4. Narcotic drugs 16 Ibid., Supplement No. 8 (E/2008/28). 17 Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2007 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.08.XI.1). 231. The Council considered agenda item 14 (d) at its 42nd meeting, on 24 July. It had before it the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its fifty-first session (E/2008/28)16 and the report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2007.17 232. Under agenda item 14 (d), the Council adopted resolutions 2008/26 and 2008/27 and decisions 2008/247 and 2008/248. Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its fifty-first session 233. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of programme budget implications in connection with the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (see E/2008/28, chap. I). Promoting sustainability and integrality in alternative development as an important part of drug control strategy in States where illicit crops are grown to produce drugs 234. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission, entitled "Promoting sustainability and integrality in alternative development as an important part of drug control strategy in States where illicit crops are grown to produce drugs" (see E/2008/28, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/26. 235. The observer for Thailand made a statement. Provision of international assistance to the most affected States neighbouring Afghanistan 236. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission, entitled "Provision of international assistance to the most affected States neighbouring Afghanistan" (see E/2008/28, chap. I.A). See Council resolution 2008/27. Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its fifty-first session and provisional agenda and documentation for the fifty-second 237. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its fifty-first session and provisional agenda and documentation for the fifty-second session of the Commission" (see E/2008/28, chap. I.B). See Council decision 2008/247. 238. At the same meeting, before the draft decision was adopted, the representative of Cuba made a statement. Report of the International Narcotics Control Board 239. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission, entitled "Report of the International Narcotics Control Board" (see E/2008/28, chap. I, B). See Council decision 2008/248. 5. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 240. The Council considered agenda item 14 (e) at its 42nd and 44th meetings, on 24 and 25 July. It had before it the following documents: (a) Letter dated 29 February 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2008/63); (b) Letter dated 30 May 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Moldova to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2008/84). 241. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Deputy Director of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees delivered an oral report on behalf of the High Commissioner for Refugees on the coordination aspects of the work of the Office. 242. Under agenda item 14 (e), the Council adopted decisions 2008/255 and 2008/256. 243. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the observer for Moldova,1 on behalf also of Djibouti,1 introduced a draft decision entitled "Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" (E/2008/L.11). 244. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision E/2008/L.11. See Council decision 2008/255. Oral report on the coordination aspects of the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 245. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council decided to take note of the oral report on the coordination aspects of the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, delivered at the 42nd meeting of the Council, on 24 July. See Council decision 2008/256. 6. Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 246. No proposals were submitted under agenda item 14 (f). 7. Human rights 247. The Council considered agenda item 14 (g) at its 42nd and 44th meetings, on 24 and 25 July. The Council had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (A/63/41);18 18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/63/41). 19 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 2 (E/2008/22). (b) Report of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth sessions (E/2008/22);19 (c) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (E/2008/76). 248. Under agenda item 14 (g), the Council adopted decision 2008/256. Documents considered by the Council under agenda item 14 (g) 249. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council decided to take note of the following reports (see Council decision 2008/256): 8. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 250. The Council considered sub-item 14 (h) at its 42nd and 44th meetings, on 24 and 25 July. It had before it the report of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues on its seventh session (E/2008/43). 251. Under agenda item 14 (h), the Council adopted decisions 2008/249, 2008/250, 2008/251 and 2008/256. Recommendations contained in the report of the Forum on its seventh session 252. At the 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement of programme budget implications in connection with the report of the Forum (see E/2008/43, chap. I). International expert group meeting on the implementation of article 42 of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 253. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Forum, entitled "International expert group meeting on the implementation of article 42 of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" (see E/2008/43, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/249. 254. At the same meeting, before the draft decision was adopted, the representative of the United States made a statement. Venue and dates for the eighth session of the Forum 255. At its 42nd meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Forum, entitled "Venue and dates of the eighth session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues" (see E/2008/43, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/250. Provisional agenda and documentation for the eighth session of the Forum 256. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision III recommended by the Forum, entitled "Provisional agenda and documentation for the eighth session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues" (see E/2008/43, chap. I.A). See Council decision 2008/251. 257. At the same meeting, before the draft decision was adopted, the representative of the United States made a statement; after the adoption of the draft decision, the representative of Canada made a statement. Report of the Forum on its seventh session 258. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council decided to take note of the report of the Forum on its seventh session (E/2008/43). See Council decision 2008/256. 9. Genetic privacy and non-discrimination 259. The Council considered agenda item 14 (i) at its 39th meeting, on 22 July. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on genetic privacy and nondiscrimination (E/2008/51). 260. Under agenda item 14 (i), the Council adopted decision 2008/233. 261. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted a draft decision submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "Genetic privacy and non-discrimination" (E/2008/L.20). See Council decision 2008/233. J. United Nations research and training institutes 262. The Council considered agenda item 15 at its 39th and 44th meetings, on 22 and 25 July 2008. An account of the discussion is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.39 and 44). 263. At its 39th meeting, on 22 July, the Council discussed agenda item 15 jointly with items 7 (g) (Tobacco or health) and 14 (i) (Genetic privacy and nondiscrimination). For its consideration of the agenda item, the Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (E/2008/72). 264. At the same meeting, the Head of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, New York Office, made an introductory statement. 265. Under agenda item 15, the Council adopted resolution 2008/35. 266. At its 44th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg), on the basis of informal consultations, entitled "United Nations Institute for Training and Research" (E/2008/L.37). 267. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution. See Council resolution 2008/35. Chapter IX 1. The Council considered the question of elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments at its organizational and resumed organizational sessions (agenda item 4) and at its substantive session (agenda item 1). The question was considered by the Council at its 1st, 2nd, 6th, 11th, 29th and 32nd meetings, on 14 January, 5 February, 29 April, 20 June and 11 and 16 July 2008. An account of the proceedings is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2008/SR.1, 2, 6, 11, 29 and 32). For its consideration of the question, the Council had before it the following documents: (a) Provisional annotated agenda for the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2008 (E/2008/2 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1); (b) Note by the Secretary-General on the appointment of a member to the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (E/2008/9); (c) Note by the Secretary-General on the appointment of three new members to the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (E/2008/9/Add.1); (d) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of members of the functional commissions of the Council (E/2008/9/Add.2); (e) Note by the Secretary-General on the nomination of 20 members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (E/2008/9/Add.3); (f) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 21 members of the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (E/2008/9/Add.4); (g) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of nine members of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (E/2008/9/Add.5 and Add.13); (h) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 11 members of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund (E/2008/9/Add.6); (i) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 11 members of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund (E/2008/9/Add.7); (j) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of six members of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme (E/2008/9/Add.8); (k) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of five members of the Programme Coordination Board of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (E/2008/9/Add.9); (l) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 19 members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (E/2008/9/Add.10); (m) Note by the Secretary-General on the elections of nine members of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: biographical information on candidates (E/2008/9/Add.11); (n) Note by the Secretary-General on an application for membership in the Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (E/2008/9/Add.12); (o) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of a member to the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (E/2008/9/Add.14). 2. Under the item on elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments, the Council adopted decisions 2008/201 A, B, C, D and E. Chapter X 1. The Council held its organizational session for 2008 at United Nations Headquarters on 14 January, 5 and 8 February (1st to 3rd meetings); its special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at United Nations Headquarters on 14 April 2008 (4th and 5th meetings); its resumed organizational session at United Nations Headquarters on 29 April, 12 and 20 June (6th, 10th and 11th meetings); its special meeting on the global food crisis at United Nations Headquarters from 20 to 22 May 2008 (7th to 9th meetings); its substantive session at United Nations Headquarters from 30 June to 25 July 2008 (12th to 45th meetings); and its resumed substantive session at United Nations Headquarters from _ to _ ( ____ to ____ meetings). A. Organizational session Opening of the Council 2. At its 1st meeting, on 14 January 2008, the President of the Council for 2007, Dalius Čekuolis (Lithuania), opened the meeting and made a statement. 3. At the same meeting, following his election by acclamation, the President of the Council for 2008, Léo Mérorès (Haiti), made a statement. 4. Also at the same meeting, the Secretary-General of the United Nations addressed the Council. Election of the Bureau 5. At its 1st meeting, on 14 January, pursuant to paragraph 2 (k) of its resolution 1988/77, the Council elected by acclamation the following persons as Vice-Presidents of the Council for 2008: Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde); Kim Hyun Chong (Republic of Korea); Andrei Dapkiunas (Belarus); and Jean-Marc Hoscheit (Luxembourg). 6. At its 10th meeting, on 12 June, the President of the Council made a statement that, in accordance with rule 22 of the rules of procedure of the Economic and Social Council, the Group of Asian States had endorsed the candidacy of Park Inkook, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations in New York, to continue with the unexpired term of Kim Hyun Chong, who had to return to his capital. The Council then elected by acclamation Park In-kook as a Vice-President of the Council for the remainder of its 2008 session. Agenda 7. At its 1st meeting, on 14 January, the Council adopted the provisional agenda of its organizational session for 2008 (E/2008/2) (see annex I). 8. At its organizational session for 2008, the Council adopted eight decisions concerning organizational matters. See Council decisions 2008/202 to 2008/209. Report of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its thirtysixth and thirty-seventh sessions 9. At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February, the Council decided to take note of the report of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its thirty-sixth and thirty-seventh sessions (E/2007/22). See Council decision 2008/202. Proposed date of the special high-level meeting of the Economic and Social Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 10. At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February, the Council decided that its special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development would be held at United Nations Headquarters on 14 April 2008. See Council decision 2008/203. Provisional agenda for the substantive session of 2008 of the Economic and 11. At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February, the Council, having considered its proposed basic programme of work for 2008 and 2009 (E/2008/1), approved the proposed provisional agenda and documentation for the substantive session of the Council for 2008 (E/2008/1, sect. I), as orally corrected (see annex I). See Council decision 2008/204. Basic programme of work of the Economic and Social Council for 2008 12. At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February, the Council, having considered its proposed basic programme of work for 2008 and 2009 (E/2008/1), decided to take note of the list of questions for inclusion in the programme of work of the Council for 2008 and documentation for each agenda item (E/2008/1, sect. II). See Council decision 2008/205. Working arrangements for the substantive session of 2008 of the Economic and Social Council 13. At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February, the Council decided on the following working arrangements for its substantive session of 2008 (see Council decision 2008/206): (a) The high-level segment would be held from 30 June to 3 July 2008; (b) Dialogue with the Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions would be held on 7 July 2008; (c) The coordination segment would be held from 7 to 9 July 2008; (d) The operational activities segment would be held from 10 to 14 July 2008; (e) The humanitarian affairs segment would be held from 15 to 17 July 2008; (f) The general segment would be held from 18 to 24 July 2008; (g) The conclusion of the work of the Council would be held on 25 July 2008. Operational activities segment of the 2008 substantive session of the Economic and Social Council 14. At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February, the Council decided that the work of the operational activities segment of its substantive session of 2008 should be devoted to the progress on and implementation of General Assembly resolution 62/208 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system. See Council decision 2008/207. Theme for the 2008 thematic discussion of the Economic and Social Council 15. At its 3rd meeting, on 8 February, the Council, recalling its decision 2007/213, in which it decided to include a discussion on promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development as part of the work of its substantive session of 2008, decided that the theme for the 2008 thematic discussion of the high-level segment would be "Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges". See Council decision 2008/208. Theme for the item on regional cooperation of the 2008 substantive session of the Economic and Social Council 16. At its 3rd meeting, on 8 February, the Council decided that the theme for the item on regional cooperation of the 2008 substantive session would be "The regional dimension of the themes of the high-level segment for 2008". See Council decision 2008/209. B. Resumed organizational session 17. At its resumed organizational session for 2008, the Council had before it the agenda and related documentation of its resumed organizational session (E/2008/2/Add.1 and Corr.1, E/2008/9 and Add.1-13). 18. At its resumed organizational session for 2008, the Council adopted one resolution and four decisions concerning organizational matters. See Council resolution 2008/1 and decisions 2008/210 to 2008/213. Venue and dates of the twenty-fifth session of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia 19. At its 6th meeting, on 29 April, having considered the letter dated 27 February 2008 from the Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia informing the Council of the offer of the Government of Yemen to host the twenty-fifth session of the Commission, the Council expressed its gratitude to the Government of Yemen for its generous offer and approved the holding of the twenty-fifth session of the Commission in Sana'a from 26 to 29 May 2008. See Council resolution 2008/1. Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies: revised draft annex relating to the World Tourism Organization 20. At its 6th meeting, on 29 April, the Council decided to take note of resolution 545 (XVII) of the General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization and to recommend the revised draft annex contained in the resolution to the World Tourism Organization for final approval. See Council decision 2008/210. Report of the Secretary-General on financing of the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters 21. At its 6th meeting, on 29 April, the Council decided to defer its consideration of the report to its substantive session of 2008. See Council decision 2008/211. Economic and Social Council event to discuss relief to development 22. At its 6th meeting, on 29 April, the Council decided, with regard to the event to discuss relief to development, that (see Council decision 2008/212): (a) The theme of the event would be "Coordination in the transition phase between emergency relief and sustainable recovery"; (b) The event would be an informal activity held on the morning of 15 July 2008; (c) The event would consist of one panel discussion and there would be no negotiated outcome. Theme for the humanitarian affairs segment of the 2008 substantive session of the Economic and Social Council 23. At its 6th meeting, on 29 April, the Council decided that the theme for the humanitarian affairs segment of its substantive session of 2008 would be "Building capabilities and capacities at all levels for timely humanitarian assistance, including disaster risk reduction" and that it would convene two panels, on the themes "Disaster risk reduction and preparedness: addressing the humanitarian consequences of natural disasters, including the impact of climate change" and "Humanitarian challenges related to global food aid, including enhancing international efforts and cooperation in this field". See Council decision 2008/213. C. Substantive session 24. At its substantive session of 2007, the Council adopted three decisions concerning organizational matters. See Council decisions 2008/214, 2008/257 and 2008/258. Agenda and organization of work 25. At its 12th meeting, on 30 June, the Council considered the agenda and organization of work for its substantive session of 2008. It had before it the following documents: (a) Annotated provisional agenda for the substantive session of 2008 (E/2008/100); (b) Proposed programme of work for the substantive session of 2008 (E/2008/L.5); (c) Note by the Secretariat on the status of documentation for the substantive session of 2008 (E/2008/L.6); (d) Conference room paper entitled "Updated status of documentation for the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council for 2008" (E/2008/CRP.1). 26. At the same meeting, the Council adopted the agenda for its substantive session of 2008 (see annex I) and approved the programme of work of the session. See Council decision 2008/214. Requests from non-governmental organizations to be heard by the Council 27. At its 12th meeting, on 30 June, the Council, upon the recommendation of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, approved the requests made by non-governmental organizations (see E/2008/82) to be heard by the Council at its substantive session of 2008 under agenda item 2. See Council decision 2008/214. Theme for the 2009 thematic discussion of the Economic and Social Council 28. At its 45th meeting, on 25 July, the Council decided to adopt the following theme for its 2009 thematic discussion: "Current global and national trends and their impact on social development, including public health". See Council decision 2008/257. Multi-year programme of work for the 2010 and 2011 annual ministerial reviews of the Economic and Social Council 29. At its 45th meeting, on 25 July, the Council decided to adopt the following themes for its annual ministerial-level substantive reviews for 2010 and 2011 (see Council decision 2008/258): Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to gender equality and empowerment of women Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to education Agenda of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions of 2008 Adopted by the Council at its 1st meeting, on 14 January 2008 1. Election of the Bureau. 2. Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters. 3. Basic programme of work of the Council. 4. Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments. Agenda of the substantive session of 2008 Adopted by the Council at its 13th meeting, on 2 July 2007 1. Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters. 2. High-level segment: (a) High-level policy dialogue with international financial and trade institutions on current developments in the world economy; (b) Development Cooperation Forum; (c) Annual ministerial review: Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development; (d) Thematic discussion: Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development, taking into account current challenges. 3. Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: (a) Follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council; (b) Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme. 4. The role of the United Nations system in implementing the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Council. 5. Special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance. 6. Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits: (a) Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development; (b) Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010. 7. Coordination, programme and other questions: (a) Reports of coordination bodies; (b) Proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011; (c) International cooperation in the field of informatics; (d) Long-term programme of support for Haiti; (e) Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system; (f) Ad hoc advisory groups on African countries emerging from conflict; (g) Tobacco or health. 8. Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227, 52/12 B, 57/270 B and 60/265, including 61/16. 9. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations. 10. Regional cooperation. 11. Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan. 12. Non-governmental organizations. 13. Economic and environmental questions: (a) Sustainable development; (b) Science and technology for development; (c) Statistics; (d) Human settlements; (e) Environment; (f) Population and development; (g) Public administration and development; (h) International cooperation in tax matters; (i) Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions; (j) Cartography; (k) Women and development. 14. Social and human rights questions: (a) Advancement of women; (b) Social development; (c) Crime prevention and criminal justice; (d) Narcotic drugs; (e) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; (f) Comprehensive implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action; (g) Human rights; (h) Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues; (i) Genetic privacy and non-discrimination. 15. United Nations research and training institutes. a The text of rule 79, entitled "Participation of other intergovernmental organizations", reads as follows: "Representatives of intergovernmental organizations accorded permanent observer status by the General Assembly and of other intergovernmental organizations designated on an ad hoc or a continuing basis by the Council on the recommendation of the Bureau may participate, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of the activities of the organizations". b Superseding the Organization of African Unity. Intergovernmental organizations designated by the Council under rule 79 of the rules of procedurea for participation in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of their activities Organizations and other entities accorded permanent observer status by the General Assembly African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (General Assembly resolution 36/4) African Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 42/10) African Unionb (General Assembly resolution 2011 (XX) and Assembly decision 56/475) Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (General Assembly resolution 43/6) Andean Community (General Assembly resolution 52/6) Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization (General Assembly resolution 35/2) Asian Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 57/30) Association of Caribbean States (General Assembly resolution 53/5) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (General Assembly resolution 61/44) Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 54/5) Caribbean Community (General Assembly resolution 46/8) Central American Integration System (General Assembly resolution 50/2) Collective Security Treaty Organization (General Assembly resolution 59/50) Common Fund for Commodities (General Assembly resolution 60/26) Commonwealth of Independent States (General Assembly resolution 48/237) Commonwealth Secretariat (General Assembly resolution 31/3) Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (General Assembly resolution 54/10) Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (General Assembly resolution 56/92) Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia (General Assembly resolution 62/77) Council of Europe (General Assembly resolution 44/6) Customs Cooperation Council (General Assembly resolution 53/216) East African Community (General Assembly resolution 58/86) Economic Community of Central African States (General Assembly resolution 55/161) Economic Community of West African States (General Assembly resolution 59/51) Economic Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 48/2) Energy Charter Conference (General Assembly resolution 62/75) Eurasian Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 62/76) Eurasian Economic Community (General Assembly resolution 58/84) European Community (General Assembly resolution 3208 (XXIX)) GUAM (General Assembly resolution 58/85) Hague Conference on Private International Law (General Assembly resolution 60/27) Holy See (General Assembly resolution 58/314) Ibero-American Conference (General Assembly resolution 60/28) Indian Ocean Commission (General Assembly resolution 61/43) Inter-American Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 55/160) International Centre for Migration Policy Development (General Assembly resolution 57/31) International Committee of the Red Cross (General Assembly resolution 45/6) International Criminal Court (General Assembly resolution 58/318) International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) (General Assembly resolution 51/1) International Development Law Organization (General Assembly resolution 56/90) International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (General Assembly resolution 49/2) International Hydrographic Organization (General Assembly resolution 56/91) International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (General Assembly resolution 58/83) International Organization for Migration (General Assembly resolution 47/4) International Organization of la Francophonie (General Assembly resolution 33/18) International Seabed Authority (General Assembly resolution 51/6) International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (General Assembly resolution 51/204) International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (General Assembly resolution 54/195) Inter-Parliamentary Union (General Assembly resolution 57/32) Islamic Development Bank Group (General Assembly resolution 61/259) Italian-Latin American Institute (General Assembly resolution 62/74) Latin American Economic System (SELA) (General Assembly resolution 35/3) Latin American Integration Association (General Assembly resolution 60/25) Latin American Parliament (General Assembly resolution 48/4) League of Arab States (General Assembly resolution 477 (V)) OPEC Fund for International Development (General Assembly resolution 61/42) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (General Assembly resolution 53/6) Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (General Assembly resolution 48/5) Organization of American States (General Assembly resolution 253 (III)) Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (General Assembly resolution 59/52) Organization of the Islamic Conference (General Assembly resolution 3369 (XXX)) Pacific Islands Forum (General Assembly resolution 49/1) Palestine (General Assembly resolution 52/250) Partners in Population and Development (General Assembly resolution 57/29) Permanent Court of Arbitration (General Assembly resolution 48/3) Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and Bordering States (General Assembly resolution 62/73) Shanghai Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 59/48) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (General Assembly resolution 59/53) Southern African Development Community (General Assembly resolution 59/49) Sovereign Military Order of Malta (General Assembly resolution 48/265) Organizations designated by the Economic and Social Council Participation on a continuing basis African Regional Centre for Technology (Council decision 1980/151) Asian and Pacific Development Centre (Council decision 2000/213) Asian Productivity Organization (APO) (Council decision 1980/114) Council of Arab Economic Unity (Council decision 109 (LIX)) Global Water Partnership (Council decision 2005/233) Helsinki Commission (Council decision 2003/312) Institution for the Use of Micro-alga Spirulina against Malnutrition (Council decision 2003/212) Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (Council decision 2006/204) Intergovernmental Forum on Mining, Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development (Council decision 2006/244) International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions (IAESCSI) (Council decision 2001/318) International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (Council decision 1997/215) International Centre for Public Enterprises in Developing Countries (ICPE) (Council decision 1980/114) Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Council decision 2003/221) Latin American Energy Organization (OLADE) (Council decision 1980/114) Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture (Council decision 1986/156) Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Council decision 109 (LIX)) Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment (Council decision 1992/265) South Centre (Council decision 2006/244) Union économique et monétaire ouest africaine (Council decision 2005/233) Union of Economic and Social Councils of Africa (Council decision 1996/225) World Deserts Foundation (Council decision 2004/231) Participation on an ad hoc basis African Accounting Council (Council decision 1987/161) African Cultural Institute (Council decision 1987/161) Arab Security Studies and Training Centre (Council decision 1989/165) Council of Arab Ministers of the Interior (Council decision 1987/161) International Bauxite Association (Council decision 1987/161) International Civil Defence Organization (Council decision 109 (LIX)) Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences (Council decision 239 (LXII)) Economic and Social Council (54 members; three-year term) Membership in 2008 Membership in 2009a Term expires on 31 December Algeria Angola Barbados Austria Belarus Bolivia Brazil Benin Cameroon Canada Cape Verde China Congo El Salvador Iceland Indonesia Cuba Iraq Czech Republic Kazakhstan Luxembourg France Malawi Greece Malaysia Guinea-Bissau Moldova . Guyana Mozambique Haiti Netherlands New Zealand Niger Pakistan Japan Philippines Poland Liechtensteinb Republic of Korea. Romania Madagascar Russian Federation Saint Lucia 2 Somalia Mauritania Sudan Moldova Sweden United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Uruguay Paraguay Portugal Republic of Korea Saint Lucia Saudi Arabia Sri Lanka a The remaining 18 seats are to be filled by the General Assembly at its sixty-third session. b Elected by the General Assembly at its 46th plenary meeting, on 8 November 2007, to replace Germany, which resigned effective 1 January 2008. Statistical Commission (24 members; four-year term) Membership in 2009 Armenia Colombia Democratic Republic of the Congo Democratic Republic of the Congo . Finland Germany Honduras Hungary Jamaica Lebanon Lithuania Mexico Oman South Africa Suriname Togo c (47 members; four-year term) Membership of the forty-first session Membership of the forty-second session Term expires at close of session in the year Bangladesh Belgium Bulgaria Comoros Equatorial Guinea Croatia Gambia Finlandd Grenada India Iran (Islamic Republic of) Kenya Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Morocco Netherlandsd Peru Sierra Leone Spain Switzerland Tunisia Uganda Ukraine Zambia Zambia., c At its 6th meeting, on 29 April, the Council elected the following 13 members to the Commission on Population and Development for a four-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's forty-third session and expiring at the close of the Commission's forty-sixth session in 2013: Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany, Haiti, Israel, Pakistan, Rwanda and Switzerland. At the same meeting, the Council postponed the election of one member from Asian States for a four-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's forty-third session and expiring at the close of the Commission's forty-sixth session in 2013 (see decision 2008/201 C). d Elected at the 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, for a term beginning on the date of election, to fill an outstanding vacancy (see decision 2008/201 C). e (46 members; four-year term) Membership of the forty-sixth session Membership of the forty-seventh session Andorra Argentina Chile Côte d'Ivoire Democratic People's Republic of Korea Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Guatemala Italy Mali Monaco Myanmar Namibia Nepal Netherlands 2 Nigeria Senegal Slovakiaf Slovakia Turkey United Arab Emirates United Republic of Tanzania Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) e At its 6th and 32nd meetings, on 29 April and 16 July 2008, the Council elected the following 14 members to the Commission for Social Development for a four-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's forty-eighth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's fifty-first session in 2013: Albania, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, Gabon, Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Lesotho, Mauritius, Netherlands, Philippines, Qatar and Switzerland. At its 32nd meeting, the Council postponed the election of one member from Eastern European States and two members from Latin American and Caribbean States for a four-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's forty-eighth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's fifty-first session in 2013 (decisions 2008/201 C and 201 E). f Elected at the 2nd meeting, on 5 February 2008, for a term beginning on the date of election, to fill an outstanding vacancy (see decision 2008/201 B). g (45 members; four-year term) Membership of the fifty-second session Membership of the fifty-third session Azerbaijan Belize Cambodia Djibouti Dominican Republic Ecuador Gabon Eritrea Lesotho Mauritius Pakistan 2 Qatar g At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council elected the following 11 members to the Commission on the Status of Women for a four-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's fifty-fourth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's fifty-seventh session in 2013: Belarus, Colombia, Germany, Guinea, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mauritania, Nicaragua and Rwanda (decision 2008/201 C). (53 members; four-year term) Membership in 2008 and 2009 Australia Botswana Cameroonh Czech Republic. Democratic Republic of the Congoh. Iran (Islamic Republic of). Israel Russian Federation. Tajikistan Thailand Trinidad and Tobago. United Arab Emirates. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of America. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). Yemen h Elected at the 48th meeting, on 4 October 2007, for a four-year term beginning on 1 January 2008, to fill an outstanding vacancy (see decision 2007/201 D). (40 members; three-year term) Costa Rica i (53 members; three-year term) Membership of the sixteenth session Membership of the seventeenth sessionj Antigua and Barbuda Argentina . Bahrain Australia . Bahrain . Belgium . Democratic Republic of the Congoj Djibouti . Estonia Gabon . Gambia . Germany . Guatemala . Guinea India . Indonesia . Kuwait Monaco . Namibia . Serbia Sweden . Zimbabwe i At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council elected the following 14 members to the Commission on Sustainable Development for a three-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's eighteenth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's twentieth session in 2012: Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritius, Nigeria, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America. At the same meeting, the Council postponed the election of two members from Western European and other States for a three-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2009) of the Commission's eighteenth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's twentieth session in 2012 (see decision 2008/201 C). j Elected at the 48th meeting, on 4 October 2007, for a three-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2008) of the Commission's seventeenth session and expiring at the close of its nineteenth session in 2011. At the same meeting, the Council postponed the election of one member from Western European and other States for a three-year term beginning at the first meeting (held in 2008) of the Commission's seventeenth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's nineteenth session in 2011 (see decision 2007/201 D). (43 members; four-year term) Membership in 2008k Membership in 2009k,l Burkina Faso Jordan Latvia Pakistan . Slovakia . Sri Lanka . k At its 4th meeting, on 9 February 2007, the Council postponed the election of one member from Eastern European States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2010 (decision 2007/201 A). l At its 32nd meeting, on 16 July 2008, the Council postponed the election of one member from Latin American and Caribbean States and two members from Western European and other States for a four-year term beginning on 1 January 2009 (see decision 2008/201 E). Economic Commission for Africam (53 members) Burundi Central African Republic Chad Rwanda Sao Tome and Principe Seychelles Swaziland Liberia m Switzerland participates in a consultative capacity in the work of the Commission by virtue of Council resolution 925 (XXXIV) of 6 July 1962. n (56 members) Albania Malta Montenegro Bosnia and Herzegovina Norway Cyprus San Marino Denmark Slovenia Georgia The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Ireland Turkmenistan United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Kyrgyzstan Liechtenstein Uzbekistan n The Holy See participates in the work of the Commission in accordance with Commission decision N (XXXI) of 5 April 1976. o (43 members) Bahamas Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Dominica Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago o Switzerland participates in a consultative capacity in the work of the Commission by virtue of Council resolutions 632 (XXII) of 19 December 1956 and 861 (XXXII) of 21 December 1961, respectively. Associate members (9) Anguilla Netherlands Antilles Aruba Puerto Rico British Virgin Islands Turks and Caicos Islands Cayman Islandsp United States Virgin Islands Montserrat p Admitted as an associate member by the Economic Commission for Latin American and the Caribbean at its 32nd session, held from 9 to 13 June 2008 (see Commission resolution 640 (XXXII)). Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacificq Afghanistan Nauru Bhutan Palau Brunei Darussalam Papua New Guinea Fiji Samoa Singapore Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Kiribati Lao People's Democratic Republic Tuvalu Maldives Marshall Islands Micronesia (Federated States of) Mongolia Vanuatu Viet Nam q Switzerland participates in a consultative capacity in the work of the Commission by virtue of Council resolution 860 (XXXII) of 21 December 1961. American Samoa Hong Kong, China Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Macau, China Cook Islands New Caledonia French Polynesia Niue Guam Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (14 members) Palestine Sudanr Syrian Arab Republic r Admitted as a member on 22 July 2008 (see Economic and Social Council resolution 2008/8). Committee for Programme and Coordination (34 members; three-year term) Membership in 2008s Membership in 2009s,t s At its 2nd and 45th meetings, on 7 February and 30 November 2006, the Council postponed the nomination of two members from Western European and other States for election by the General Assembly for a term beginning on the date of election, one member for a term expiring on 31 December 2008 (decision 2006/201 A) and one member for a term expiring on 31 December 2009 (decision 2006/201 D). t At its 6th and 32nd meetings, on 29 April and 16 July 2008, the Council nominated 17 Member States for election by the General Assembly at its sixty-third session for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2009 and postponed the nomination of three members from Western European and other States (see decisions 2008/201 C and 201 E). (19 members; four-year term) Membership from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2010 Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (27 members) (33 members) Nigeriau u At its 6th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council approved Nigeria's application for membership, contained in E/2008/9/Add.12 (see decision 2008/201 C). Membership in 2008v Membership in 2009v, w v At its 3rd meeting, on 6 February 2007, the Council further postponed the election of the following 10 members for a term beginning on the date of election: 2 members from Latin American and Caribbean States and 3 members from Western European and other States for a term expiring on 31 December 2008 and 3 members from Asian States and 2 members from Latin American and Caribbean States for a term expiring on 31 December 2009 (decision 2007/201 A). w At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council postponed the election of two members from African States, three members from Latin American and Caribbean States and six members from Western European and other States for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2009 (decision 2008/201 C). Committee for Development Policy (24 members; three-year term) Membership from 1 January 2007 through 31 December 2009 Bina Agarwal (India) José Antonio Alonso (Spain) Lourdes Arizpe (Mexico) Tariq Banuri (Pakistan) Albert Binger (Jamaica) Olav Bjerkholt (Norway) Kwesi Botchwey (Ghana) Gui Ying Cao (China) Ricardo Ffrench-Davis (Chile) Stanisława Golinowska (Poland) Patrick Guillaumont (France) Philippe Hein (Mauritius) Hiroya Ichikawa (Japan) Willene Johnson (United States of America) Martin Khor (Malaysia) Amina Mama (South Africa) Hans Opschoor (Netherlands) Suchitra Punyaratabandhu (Thailand) Fatima Sadiqi (Morocco) Frances Stewart (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Diana Tussie (Argentina) Milica Uvalic (Serbia) Anatoly Vishnevsky (Russian Federation) Samuel Wangwe (United Republic of Tanzania) Committee of Experts on Public Administration Membership from 1 January 2006 through 31 December 2009 Peter Anyang' Nyong'o (Kenya) Ousmane Batoko (Benin) Marie-Françoise Bechtel (France) Rachid Benmokhtar Benabdellah (Morocco) Emilia Boncodin (Philippines) Jocelyne Bourgon (Canada) Luiz Carlos Bresser-Pereira (Brazil) Mario P. Chiti (Italy) Mikhail Dmitriev (Russian Federation) Jennifer Dorn (United States of America)x Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi (South Africa) Edgar Alfonso González Salas (Colombia) Werner Jann (Germany) Taher Kannan (Jordan) Pan Suk Kim (Republic of Korea) Barbara Kudrycka (Poland) Florin Lupescu (Romania) Anthony Makrydemetres (Greece) Jose Oscar Monteiro (Mozambique) Siripurapu Kesava Rao (India) Prijono Tjiptoherijanto (Indonesia) Luis Aguilar Villanueva (Mexico) Gwendoline Williams (Trinidad and Tobago) Wang Xiaochu (China) x Appointed by the Council at its 2nd meeting, on 5 February 2008, to fill a vacancy arising from the passing of Dennis Rondinelli (United States of America) (decision 2008/201 B). Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (18 members; four-year term) Mohamed Ezzeldin Abdel-Moneim (Egypt) Clément Atangana (Cameroon) Rocío Barahona Riera (Costa Rica) Virginia Bonoan-Dandan (Philippines) Maria Virginia Brás Gomes (Portugal) Chandrashekhar Dasgupta (India) Azzouz Kerdoun (Algeria) Yuri Kolosov (Russian Federation) Jaime Marchán Romero (Ecuador) Sergei N. Martynov (Belarus) Ariranga Govindasamy Pillay (Mauritius) Andrzej Rzeplinski (Poland) Eibe Riedel (Germany) Waleed M. Sa'di (Jordan) Philippe Texier (France) Alvaro Tirado Mejía (Colombia) Barbara Wilson (Switzerland) Zhan Daode (China) María del Rocío Barahona Riera (Costa Rica) Zdzislaw Kedzia (Poland) Nicholaas Jan Schrijver (Netherlands) (16 members; three-year term) Membership through 31 December 2010 Eight experts elected by the Council Eight experts appointed by the President of the Council Simeon Adewale Adekanye (Nigeria) Lars-Anders Baer (Sweden) Carlos Mamani Condori (Bolivia) Hassan Id Balkassm (Morocco) Paimaneh Hasteh (Islamic Republic of Iran) Elisa Canqui Mollo (Bolivia) Eugenio A. Insigne (Philippines)y Michael Dodson (Australia) Liliane Muzangi Mbella (Democratic Republic of the Congo) Tonya Gonnella Frichner (United States of America) A. A. Nikiforov (Russian Federation) Margaret Lokawua (Uganda) Bartolomé Clavero Salvador (Spain) Pavel Sulyandziga (Russian Federation) Carsten Smith (Norway) Victoria Tauli Corpuz (Philippines) y Elected at the 32nd meeting, on 16 July 2008, for a term beginning on 1 January 2009, to fill a vacancy arising from the resignation of Xiaomei Qin (China) (decision 2008/201 E). Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (25 members; four-year term) Membership through 30 June 2009 Moftah Jassim Al-Moftah (Qatar) Bernell L. Arrindell (Barbados) Noureddine Bensouda (Morocco) Rowena G. Bethel (Bahamas) Nahil L. Hirsh Carrillo (Peru) Danies Kawama Chisenda (Zambia) Paolo Ciocca (Italy) Christian Comolet-Tirman (France)z Andrew Dawson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Miguel Ferre Navarrete (Spain) Liselott Kana (Chile)aa Harry Msamire Kitillya (United Republic of Tanzania) Kyung Geun Lee (Republic of Korea) Tizhong Liao (China) Habiba Louati (Tunisia) Ronald Peter van der Merwe (South Africa) Frank Mullen (Ireland) Dmitry Vladimirovich Nikolaev (Russian Federation) Robin Oliver (New Zealand)bb Serafin U. Salvador, Jr. (Philippines) Erwin Silitonga (Indonesia) Stig B. Sollund (Norway) Robert Waldburger (Switzerland) Armando Lara Yaffar (Mexico) Eduardo Zaidensztat Capnikcas (Uruguay) z Appointed by the Secretary-General to fill a vacancy arising from the resignation of Pascal Saint-Amans (France) (decision 2008/201 B). aa Appointed by the Secretary-General to fill a vacancy arising from the resignation of Patricia A. Brown (United States of America) (decision 2008/201 B). bb Appointed by the Secretary-General to fill a vacancy arising from the resignation of Nobuyuki Nakamura (Japan) (decision 2008/201 B). Related bodies Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund (36 members; three-year term) Term expires on 31 December Canadacc Denmarkcc Francecc Italycc cc At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council elected Canada, Denmark, France and Italy for a term beginning on 1 January 2009 to fill vacancies arising from the resignations, respectively, of Australia, Austria, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Greece (decision 2008/201 C). Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (76 members) Luxembourgdd Montenegrodd Benindd Holy See The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedoniadd dd Elected at the 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 62/123 of 18 December 2007 (decision 2008/201 C). Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/ United Nations Population Fund Finlandee New Zealandee. Netherland Turkeyee Northern Ireland . United States of America . Yemen . ee At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council elected Finland, New Zealand and Turkey for a term beginning on 1 January 2009 to fill vacancies arising from the resignations, respectively, of Italy, Australia and Ireland (decision 2008/201 C). Executive Board of the World Food Programmeff Members elected by the Economic and Members elected by the FAO Council Algeriagg Finlandgg Italygg United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ff Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/8 of 1 November 1995, the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations elect 18 members each from among the States Members of the United Nations or the States members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, according to the pattern set out in that resolution. The members of the Executive Board were elected from five lists set out in the Basic Texts of the World Food Programme and reproduced in document E/2008/9/Add.5. gg Algeria, Finland and Italy replaced, respectively, Sudan, Switzerland and Austria, which resigned as of 1 January 2008. Members elected by the Economic and Social Council Members elected by the FAO Councilhh Democratic Republic of The Congo Cuba . hh The remaining six seats are to be filled by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its session to be held in November 2008. (13 members; five-year term) Members elected by the Economic and Social Council to serve on the Board as constituted under the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 Membership from 2 March 2007 Term expires on 1 March Joseph Bediako Asare (Ghana) Sevil Atasoy (Turkey) Tatiana Borisovna Dmitrieva (Russian Federation) Philip O. Emafo (Nigeria) Hamid Ghodse (Islamic Republic of Iran) Camilo Uribe Granja (Colombia) Carola Lander (Germany) Melvyn Levitsky (United States of America) María Elena Medina-Mora Icaza (Mexico) Sri Suryawati (Indonesia) Brian Watters (Australia) Raymond Yans (Belgium) Xin Yu (China) (10 members; three-year term) Membership through 31 December 2009 Committee for the United Nations Population Awardii ii For the regulations governing the Award, see General Assembly resolution 36/201 and Assembly decision 41/445. (22 members; three-year term) Denmarkjj Francekk Irelandll Italyll Netherlandskk jj At its 2nd meeting, on 5 February 2008, the Council elected Denmark for a term beginning on the date of election, to fill a vacancy arising from the resignation of Norway (decision 2008/201 B). kk At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council elected France and the Netherlands for a term beginning on 1 January 2009, to replace Monaco and Luxembourg, respectively, which were resigning their seats (decision 2008/201 C). ll At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council elected Ireland for a term beginning on the date of election, to replace Italy, which resigned its seat effective 28 April 2008 (decision 2008/201 C). (58 members; four-year term) Membership in 2008mm Membership in 2009mm,nn Braziloo Congooo Iraqpp Israeloo Jamaicaoo mm At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council postponed the election of one member from Asian States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2008. Also at its 6th meeting, the Council postponed the election of two members from Western European and other States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2011 (decision 2008/201 C). nn At its 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, the Council postponed the election of one member from African States, one member from Asian States, one member from Latin American and Caribbean States and five members from Western European and other States for a four-year term beginning on 1 January 2009 (decision 2008/201 C). oo Elected at the 48th meeting, on 4 October 2007, for a four-year term beginning on 1 January 2008, to fill a postponed vacancy (decision 2007/201 D). pp Elected at the 6th meeting, on 29 April 2008, for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2011, to fill an outstanding vacancy (decision 2008/201 C). United Nations Forum on Forests The membership of the Forum comprises all States Members of the United Nations and States members of the specialized agencies (see Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/35) qq (31 members; two-year term, as applicable)rr Membership as from 23 June 2008 Seven members selected by the Security Council Seven members elected by the Economic and Social Council Five top providers of assessed contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions to the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund (selected by and from among the top 10 providers) Five top providers of military personnel and civilian police to United Nations missions (selected by and from among the 10 top providers) Seven members elected by the General Assembly qq For guidelines regarding membership in the Organizational Committee, see paras. 4, 5 and 6 of General Assembly resolution 60/180 and of Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) and para. 1 of Security Council resolution 1646 (2005). rr At its 11th and 29th meetings, on 20 June and 11 July 2008, the Economic and Social Council decided to extend the terms of office of its seven elected members to the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission in order to align their terms of office with those of the General Assembly elected members and other members, whose terms were also extended. Accordingly, the current terms of the members of the Organizational Committee expire on 31 December 2008 (see Economic and Social Council decisions 2008/201 D and E). 