%%%DECOLONIZATION|SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|

Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Summary record of the 2nd meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 15 April 2008, at 11 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia) Contents Adoption of the agenda Pacific regional seminar Other matters The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m. 1. The agenda was adopted. Pacific regional seminar (A/AC.109/2008/5) 2. The Chairman said that the Bureau of the Committee had recommended holding the Pacific regional seminar in Bandung, Indonesia from 14 to 16 May 2008. As in the past, the Committee would also celebrate the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories at the seminar. If there was no objection, he would take it that the Committee wished to proceed accordingly. 3. It was so decided. Composition of the official delegation of the Special Committee 4. Following consultations with the regional groups, the Bureau, at his recommendation, had agreed ad referendum that the Committee would be represented at the seminar by the Republic of the Congo and Ethiopia, on behalf of the Group of African States; the Syrian Arab Republic and India, on behalf of the Group of Asian States; Cuba and Dominica, on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group of States; and the Russian Federation, on behalf of the Eastern European Group of States. The United Nations would bear the costs of travel for the members of that delegation. If there was no objection, he would take it that the Committee wished to approve the proposed composition and to authorize the Secretariat to make the necessary travel arrangements. 5. It was so decided. Extension of invitations to experts and organizations 6. The Chairman said that the Bureau had decided to suggest that invitations to attend the seminar should be extended to the persons included in the previously circulated provisional list of experts and organizations. He requested the Committee's authorization to finalize the list in consultation with interested delegations. 7. Mr. Gregoire (Dominica) said that he wished to consult with the Chairman regarding one of the experts on the provisional list prior to its approval by the Committee. 8. The Chairman said that, on approval of the list and in accordance with a previous decision of the Committee, invitations to the seminar would also be extended to other Member States, administering Powers, specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies, as well as to some regional organizations, and to all elected and appointed officials of the NonSelfGoverning Territories. The costs of travel of the representatives of other Member States, administering Powers and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations would not be borne by the United Nations. Guidelines, rules of procedure and agenda of the seminar 9. The Chairman drew attention to the guidelines and rules of procedure for the seminar, contained in document A/AC.109/2008/5. If there was no objection, he would take it that the Committee wished to approve the document, including the agenda of the seminar contained therein. 10. It was so decided. 11. Mr. Okio (Congo) thanked the Government of Indonesia for agreeing to host the Pacific regional seminar. The decolonization process had slowed significantly over the past years and he hoped that the seminar would give fresh impetus to the Committee's efforts. 12. The Chairman drew attention to the revised tentative programme of work and timetable of the Special Committee for 2008, which had been circulated to delegations. The revised document was the result of intense negotiations and reflected a balance of the interests of delegations. The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m. 