%%%CHEMICAL WEAPONS|WASTE DISPOSAL|ENVIRONMENTALLY HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES|BALTIC SEA|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|REGIONAL COOPERATION|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|

Sixty-third session First Committee Agenda item 89 General and complete disarmament Letter dated 7 October 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of the report of the Chairman of the international seminar on sea-dumped chemical weapons: perspectives of international cooperation, held in Vilnius on 30 September and 1 October 2008 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 89. (Signed) Dalius Čekuolis Ambassador Permanent Representative Annex to the letter dated 7 October 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General Report of the Chairman of the international seminar on sea-dumped chemical weapons: perspectives of international cooperation 1. The international seminar on sea-dumped chemical weapons: perspectives of international cooperation, held in Vilnius on 30 September and 1 October 2008, gathered together representatives and experts from 27 States from Europe, Africa, Asia and North America, as well as from the United Nations, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the European Union, the Helsinki Commission, academic and research institutions, non-governmental organizations and the private sector. 2. The participants discussed ecological, safety and security challenges and threats posed by sea-dumped chemical weapons in various parts of the world, as well as national and international responses to them. A special focus was devoted to the experience of the Baltic Sea States in dealing with chemical weapons dumped in the Baltic Sea. The prevailing view of the participants was that there was a rising need to intensify discussions in addressing such challenges and concerns. 3. Interest was expressed in promoting dialogue and broader engagement on the issue of sea-dumped chemical weapons within international and regional forums and frameworks. Possible security, economic, environmental and health impacts of sea-dumped chemical weapons demonstrated the need for international cooperation regarding exchange of information, best practices and technologies. 4. It was also noted that industry was willing to contribute to the process. Over the past decade, technologies for the recovery and destruction of sea-dumped chemical weapons had emerged. 5. The seminar proved to be a welcome opportunity for the exchange of relevant information. The importance of further intensified cooperation among States, relevant international and non-governmental organizations and the private sector with regard to sea-dumped chemical weapons was recognized. 6. Promoting voluntary international and regional cooperation and greater interaction among States and various organizations on sea-dumped chemical weapons was broadly welcomed and supported. 