%%%GLOBALIZATION|DEVELOPMENT|INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION|CORRUPTION|CRIME PREVENTION|ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION|ECONOMIC INTEGRATION|CULTURE|

Second Committee Summary record of the 22nd meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 29 October 2008, at 3 p.m. Chairperson: Mr. Hoppe (Vice-Chairperson) (Germany) Contents Agenda item 51: Globalization and interdependence (continued) (a) Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence (continued) (b) International migration and development (continued) (c) Culture and development (continued) (d) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin and returning such assets, in particular to the countries of origin, consistent with the United Nations Convention against Corruption (continued) (e) Integration of the economies in transition into the world economy (continued) In the absence of Ms. Ogwu (Nigeria), Mr. Hoppe (Germany), Vice-Chairperson, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m. Agenda item 51: Globalization and interdependence (continued) (A/C.2/63/4) (a) Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence (continued) (A/63/333 and A/C.2/63/3) (b) International migration and development (continued) (A/63/265 and A/63/265/Corr.1) (d) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin and returning such assets, in particular to the countries of origin, consistent with the United Nations Convention against Corruption (continued) (A/63/86, A/63/88 and CAC/COSP/2008/15) (e) Integration of the economies in transition into the world economy (continued) (A/63/256) 1. Ms. Blum (Colombia) said that her country was developing a comprehensive migration policy that identified migrants as particularly vulnerable individuals requiring State protection in their countries of origin, transit and destination and promoted the adoption of agreements to improve the security and living conditions of Colombian migrants. Domestic legislation in Colombia also guaranteed all the rights established in the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, which the country had ratified in 2005. 2. Given the political, social and cultural consequences of migration, the international policies addressing it must be based on more than merely economic criteria. Since the protection of migrants and the benefits of migration for development were inseparable, the international community should focus on ensuring the quality and safety of the migration experience and improving its impact on development, in full compliance with international law and human rights standards. Some destination countries did not fully value the contribution of migrants to their development and that lack of recognition perpetuated the phenomenon of irregular, undocumented migration, which led to greater vulnerability for migrants. 3. Remittance flows, which were equivalent to more than double the total amount of development aid, should be treated like any other source of private income and not as a substitute for official development assistance (ODA), since they came directly from the work of migrants. Reducing transaction costs would also produce significant benefits for migrants and their families, as well as having a positive impact on development. 4. The High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development was the appropriate forum to promote coherent and comprehensive debate on all aspects of international migration and the associated opportunities and challenges for the international community. Regular follow-up by the General Assembly was required; the United Nations should also interact directly with the Global Forum on Migration and Development to ensure that its outcomes led to concrete decisions and actions by Member States. 5. Mr. Dall'Oglio (Observer for the International Organization for Migration (IOM)) emphasized the groundbreaking relevance of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development, noting the spirit of positive debate that had prevailed. IOM also welcomed, and had contributed to, the Global Forum on Migration and Development, which offered another means of building on the outcomes of the High-level Dialogue by identifying practical and action-oriented ways to address the links between migration and development and providing an additional global platform for sustained dialogue on international cooperation in that area. 6. The nexus between migration and development was critical: while migration could result from a lack of development, it could also either alleviate or exacerbate underdevelopment. IOM encouraged the international community to make migration issues a more regular component of strategic development frameworks, crafting policies that would boost the positive potential of migration for development while reducing its negative repercussions. The approach should also take into account linkages with other critical policy areas, such as health, which were often overlooked in the migration and development debate. 7. Furthermore, it was important to build the capacity of Governments, in areas such as policymaking and the development of fair and properly functioning legal and administrative structures, so that they could better harness the potential development benefits of migration. Such capacity-building was also vital to ensure good governance of migration, which should be made a priority at national and international levels. Lastly, partnerships were paramount; in particular, the regional consultative processes mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/265) were important mechanisms for achieving multilateral understanding and action on migration issues. 8. Mr. Guillén (Peru) said that migrants in an irregular situation were particularly vulnerable, since the threat of detention and deportation prevented them from joining trade unions and placed them at risk of dangerous working conditions. While the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families had come into effect in 2003, it only covered the migrants' countries of origin; it was therefore urgent for the United Nations to engage in a broad and open debate on the whole issue of migration. His country was fostering that debate, with a view to establishing mechanisms for the exchange of information and expertise and forging closer cooperation between the United Nations and the Global Forum on Migration and Development. 9. In order to manage international migration in a responsible and constructive way, it was important to make practical use of the international instruments for migrant protection. The United Nations and its Member States should redouble their efforts to ensure respect for the human rights of migrants, migrant workers and their families. His delegation also stressed the principle of shared responsibility, as set out in the Lima Declaration adopted at the fifth Latin America and Caribbean-European Union Summit in May 2008, when the two regions had undertaken to develop an integrated approach to international migration that would be of mutual benefit to both the countries of origin and those of destination. 10. With regard to follow-up to the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development, his delegation agreed with the suggestions in paragraph 71 of the Secretary-General's report (A/63/265). Concerning the recommendation for new initiatives to be implemented through existing multilateral structures, such structures could include the international financial institutions provided that their aim was to support the needs of migrants in their individual capacity. Migrants' remittances were private funds and should not in any way be equated to ODA or other similar flows. 11. Mr. Davide (Philippines) said that the issue of migration was particularly important to his country, since an estimated 10 per cent of the Philippine population lived abroad as migrant workers or expatriates. The Philippines was among the top ten countries for annual average net migration, according to figures from the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs; according to World Bank figures, it was also one of the top ten countries in terms of remittance flows received. For that reason, the protection of Philippine nationals abroad was one of the pillars of his country's foreign policy, while the interests of its citizens in foreign lands and at sea were also addressed by its domestic policy, laws and institutions. His country had established a number of specialized agencies to oversee migrants' needs throughout the migration process from pre-departure to return. It should also be noted that Philippine migrant workers made a substantial contribution to the economy and development of their host countries. 12. He hoped that the outcomes of the second Global Forum on Migration and Development, which his country was hosting in Manila, would be reflected in the resolution before the Committee. In that connection, his delegation strongly supported the call for a further High-level Dialogue to be held in 2011 as follow-up to the 2006 Dialogue. 13. Ms. Santizo-Sandoval (Guatemala) said that international migration and its contribution to development could not remain a taboo subject. International migration was not a crime but a difficult personal decision taken by human beings seeking a better life. Since in many cases they also wished to maintain a close link with their country of origin and improve the lives of their families, they contributed to both that country and the country of destination, deserving recognition and support. 14. The General Assembly should not try to simplify or ignore international migration when considering the issue of globalization. The links between migration and development were increasingly complex; countries were at the same time places of origin, transit and destination for migrant workers, while some migrants were highly qualified and others were less well educated. It was increasingly clear that migration could make a positive contribution to sustainable development, provided it was supported by the right policies. Although it posed major challenges in areas such as security, the economy and regulation, those challenges represented an opportunity for cooperation and dialogue. International migration was also a multidimensional issue that involved human rights and the dignity of migrant populations. Transfers of migrants' remittances, which were private funds and must not be seen as development assistance, should be made easier and cheaper. 15. Her delegation welcomed the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/265), particularly its emphasis on the achievements of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development. She also reiterated her country's proposal to hold panel discussions, with the participation of former Heads of State and Government from origin, transit and destination countries, in 2009. Since no forum that claimed to discuss development could ignore or oppose the phenomenon of international migration, it was important for the United Nations to keep itself fully informed of the issue. 16. Ms. Bensmail (Algeria) said that her country, a key actor in the fight against illegal immigration owing to its condition as a country of transit and destination for illegal migrants, proposed a global approach to the problem, prioritizing prevention, control, cooperation and partnership. Through its active participation in subregional, regional and international meetings, it had contributed to the establishment of the African Common Position on migration and development and, in April 2006, had hosted the Meeting on Migration and Development in Algiers at which that Common Position had been adopted. 17. Her country supported the efforts of the United Nations to establish a follow-up mechanism to the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development. Welcoming the meetings of the Global Forum on Migration and Development held in Brussels and Manila, it considered that stronger links between the Forum and the United Nations could help to foster dialogue and exchange of experience among practitioners and guide international cooperation. The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, which stressed the link between migration and respect for human rights, should also be reinforced by universal ratification. 18. Her country favoured close and constructive international cooperation to combat illegal migration and, in particular, human trafficking. It had an effective legal mechanism to combat illegal immigration, transnational organized crime and terrorism. The increasing flows of illegal migrants could not however be stemmed merely by adopting more stringent laws, concluding bilateral readmission agreements, adopting more repressive regional and international conventions or mobilizing sophisticated border control techniques. The real solution was to promote development and reduce the economic disparities between developed countries and developing countries, particularly in Africa, so that emigration became a choice rather than the result of difficult economic and social conditions. 19. By establishing a direct link between migration and development in its African Common Position on migration, Africa had identified both the objective cause of migratory movements and the way to solve the problems they posed. In that area, Africans and Europeans could work together to help eradicate the main sources of such migratory flows. Africa had made development its priority, as expressed in the New Partnership for Africa's Development, which was supported by all African countries and their development partners. 20. Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) said that it was imperative for the issue of migration to be addressed at multilateral forums where countries of origin, destination and transit could take decisive action. Her delegation supported the holding of the second Global Forum on Migration and Development in Manila, particularly the inclusion of the human rights of migrants as one of its fundamental issues. In view of the humanitarian, social and economic implications of migration, the General Assembly should hold biennial high-level dialogues on international migration, with the human rights of migrants as a cross-cutting issue. 21. The linkages between migration and development and the benefits and opportunities for countries of origin, transit and destination were undeniable. Migrants should therefore be seen as key actors for the economies of those countries. Remittances from migrants had a positive impact on the lives of their families and on the economy in general. However, those private financial flows were no substitute for other types of flows, particularly ODA. 22. The free movement of peoples was a right that should be protected. The regulation of such movement must therefore comply with the principles of international humanitarian law and with the human rights of migrants. In that regard, her delegation wished to express its grave concern about the recently issued European Union Return Directive. Now, more than ever, countries needed to join together to demand effective compliance with the obligations emanating from international agreements on human rights and on migration. 23. Her Government was implementing a comprehensive migration policy, as contained in its National Human Development Plan for Migrations, which included programmes designed to protect the rights of migrants, irrespective of their origin and administrative status within the territory of a State. Migration was a direct consequence of exclusive economic models which limited the opportunities for human beings to live in dignity. The new Constitution of Ecuador therefore affirmed the principle of universal citizenship with a view to ending foreign divisions and inequalities, particularly between the countries of the North and the South. 24. Mr. Dagoh (Togo) agreed that globalization had important consequences for the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), because globalization and development were intimately linked. Indeed, the current international financial crisis and the spike in food and fuel prices posed serious problems for the achievement of the Goals. 25. The international financial arrangements currently in place increased the vulnerability of developing countries. Furthermore, the austere macroeconomic and privatization policies long prescribed for developing countries as essential for a good investment climate had not produced the expected results. As a result, any economic growth that had occurred had not led to full employment or to the eradication of poverty. Unfortunately, the gloomy world economic forecasts did not bode well for future efforts to tackle development problems. 26. It was the responsibility of the United Nations to promote international cooperation for the development of consistent policies in the context of globalization and interdependence. The United Nations also needed to ensure the coordination of its development mechanisms and institutions in order to provide sufficient, stable and predictable assistance. 27. It was vital to establish open, equitable, transparent and non-discriminatory financial, monetary and trading systems. Globalization could contribute to poverty eradication and development by helping to remove obstacles to importation and exportation. In that regard, it was important for there to be a successful conclusion to the Doha Round, which should include the removal of protectionist agricultural subsidies by developed countries. 28. In the context of the ongoing financial crisis, it had become increasingly urgent to reform the Bretton Woods institutions in order to ensure increased participation of developing countries in those bodies. The United Nations also had a duty to promote a stronger global partnership for development with a view to the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the MDGs. 29. Globalization could provide an acceptable framework for solving development problems if its worst effects were mitigated and its positive aspects reinforced. His delegation therefore called for an inclusive form of globalization with a human face. To that end, the United Nations should ensure that globalization promoted the harmonious and effective functioning of innovative financing mechanisms for the eradication of poverty. It should also ensure that multilateralism provided a context for solidarity, complementarity and partnership for all peoples. 30. Mr. Bodini (San Marino) said that the worldwide economic recession would most likely become a global depression whose full dimensions were still unknown. Greater financial solidarity would be required on the part of the international community to offset the worst consequences of that crisis. It was unfortunate therefore that the Bretton Woods institutions had not been able to satisfy all of the urgent requests of Member States in need of financial assistance and that they had also proved unable to monitor the unregulated financial transactions that were the root cause of the crisis. The United Nations itself had not been able to forecast the true scale of the financial crisis. To avoid a repetition of those failures, the General Assembly should be at the centre of the efforts to establish a new deal, starting with reform of the Bretton Woods institutions. 31. Mr. Chan Wei Sern (Singapore) said that, in a globalized world, countries could no longer expect to maintain successful economies by maintaining protectionist policies. Singapore could not rely on its limited domestic market alone for economic growth and had therefore actively attracted foreign trade and investment to remain globally competitive. By adopting such an innovative and pragmatic approach, including policies to supplement the local workforce with workers from abroad, his country had been able to enjoy the benefits of globalization without experiencing the impact of its worst effects. His country was highly appreciative of the contribution that had been made by migrants, who had injected new ideas into its society and had contributed to national growth and development. 32. Foreign nationals were invited to join the workforce of Singapore in a transparent and regulated manner that fully protected their rights. In that connection, outreach activities had been stepped up in recent years to inform migrant workers of their rights and other measures had been implemented to protect migrant workers from abuse, unfair practices and exploitation. 33. Ms. Isler (Switzerland) said that there had been a number of important initiatives in recent years to address the nexus between migration and development and she urged the international community to pursue its commitment to identify appropriate ways and means to maximize the developmental benefits of international migration and to minimize its negative aspects. 34. Migrants should be seen as agents of development in their countries of origin and in their countries of destination. The contribution of migrants was not limited to the transfer of money but included other assets such as their newly acquired skills, entrepreneurial activities and social networks. It was the responsibility of Governments to create the conditions that promoted and fostered such assets. At the same time, Governments should promote sustainable development and good governance so that people were not forced into migration or deterred from returning home voluntarily. 35. For its part, the General Assembly should hold high-level dialogues on international migration and development on a regular basis since the United Nations had the legitimacy to set a globally shared agenda in that field and could provide a platform for States to take stock of the progress made, thereby fostering action as well as policy coherence and synergies. At the same time, the Global Forum on Migration and Development should have a complementary role to play in any such high-level dialogues. 36. Ms. Strand (Norway) said that corruption was a major problem that the international community would solve only through international cooperation. To that end, she hoped that the recommendations recently issued by the task force established by Norway on curbing illicit flows would be taken up by the relevant forums in the near future and also highlighted the importance of effective implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. With respect to the latter, however, she stressed that every effort must be made to maintain the carefully balanced compromise that had made the Convention acceptable to all countries. 37. Considerable work would be necessary before a mechanism could be adopted at the third Conference of the States Parties to the Convention in 2009 to assist countries with the implementation of the Convention, identify their needs and provide them with support. All States parties to the Convention should work towards the success of the forthcoming Conference by contributing to the respective intergovernmental working groups on technical assistance, asset recovery and review of implementation. The effective implementation of the Convention was essential to ensure that its provisions on asset recovery and international cooperation functioned as intended. 38. Her delegation strongly supported the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative launched by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the World Bank and, in that connection, hoped that the new multi-donor trust fund would help to fulfil the objectives of the Initiative. 39. Ms. Kerelian (Armenia) said that her country's improved economic performance in recent years had helped to stem emigration. However, that trend was steadily reversing and the current challenging global economic environment was expected to place even greater pressure on the domestic labour market. 40. It was important for Governments to create the socio-economic incentives for migrants to return and invest their skills and savings in their countries of origin. Governments should also cooperate at the national, regional and local levels to protect the rights of undocumented migrants, who were particularly vulnerable to human rights violations. For its part, her Government was working to promote the return of highly skilled labour to Armenia with a view to achieving a more sustainable form of development. To that end, it had taken steps to achieve a better understanding of the complexities of migration through active participation in the relevant discussions of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and IOM. 41. Mr. Chitsaz (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that recent challenges, such as the financial and food crises, had demonstrated the complex impact of globalization on all countries. Globalization had significantly reduced the degree of national autonomy in policymaking, particularly in developing countries, while also vastly increasing the importance of nonState actors such as private enterprises and transnational corporations. At the same time, globalization had broadened the range of issues that could be dealt with only on a multilateral basis by the United Nations. Development must therefore be placed at the centre in considering how globalization was managed, rather than being viewed as a by-product of globalization. There should also be greater consistency among national development policies. 42. Unfortunately, the United Nations had not been able to fulfil its development mandate satisfactorily in previous decades, partly owing to the fact that the economic functions provided for in its Charter had largely been transferred to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the World Trade Organization (WTO). Those functions should therefore be restored to the United Nations, which should make appropriate recommendations on the development strategies and macroeconomic policies of all its Member States. 43. In addition, the necessary human and financial resources should be provided to enable the relevant United Nations agencies to carry out their tasks pursuant to the Charter. The Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, in particular, should play a central role in international development cooperation. Moreover, the international community, particularly developed countries, should undertake the necessary commitments to development through the relevant United Nations resolutions and recommendations. Without such commitments, the negative impacts of globalization could outweigh the positive ones, especially in developing countries. 44. The various forums held in recent years by the United Nations clearly demonstrated the international community's intention to deal with international migration and development in a more effective manner. In that connection, he hoped that the second Global Forum on Migration and Development would provide the action-oriented platform needed to foster international cooperation and partnerships. 45. His delegation agreed that the General Assembly should periodically hold high-level debates on international migration and development in order to take stock of the progress made at various levels. The General Assembly was the only United Nations body with the necessary universality and legitimacy to provide the framework for broader agenda-setting and political commitments. 46. His delegation welcomed the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) initiatives to address such issues as the migration of highly skilled workers, the international mobility of students and cultural diversity. It hoped that such initiatives would lead to the international recognition of the rights of migrants. 47. His country attached great importance to international discussions of migration flows and stood ready to engage in cooperation at all levels. Many Iranian migrants were skilled and highly educated people who had played a constructive role in the development of their host countries. It was important therefore that migrants were treated fairly by host countries, that their rights were protected and that they had access to affordable social services. 48. Ms. Safaa Ahmed (Iraq) said that combating the legacy of corruption left by the previous regime was a priority of her country's young democracy. The new Constitution had provided for an independent National Integrity Agency to uncover cases of corruption and refer them to the courts for prosecution. Her Government had signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption in March 2008 and in that same month, in cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), had held a Conference on Good Governance and the Elimination of Corruption whose outcome document established a multi-agency national anti-corruption organization. It had also established an Office of Financial Supervision and recently committed to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. In September 2008, UNODC and UNDP had launched a five-year programme to fight corruption in Iraq. Her country would continue to promote good governance based on transparency and accountability in fulfilment of its commitments under the International Compact with Iraq. 49. Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus) said that globalization would have both a positive and a negative impact on the achievement of the MDGs. In an increasingly globalized world, the economies of all States were vulnerable to the food, energy and financial crises and no State could confront those challenges alone. For that reason, the maintenance of special trade and economic regimes for developing countries, including middle-income countries, would be necessary for their achievement of the Goals. 50. The United Nations must not only build its capacity to address crisis situations, but also ensure the coherence of its actions throughout the system as a whole. In that connection, Belarus supported the measures taken by the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly to help resolve the global financial crisis. The latter's decision to establish an Interactive Panel on the Global Financial Crisis was particularly timely. As the principal United Nations body responsible for the coordination of economic activities, the Economic and Social Council must also be involved in discussions on ways to resolve the financial crisis. 51. The new risks to global energy security posed by the financial crisis could be mitigated through a multilateral dialogue involving representatives of energy-producing and energy-consuming countries. The advantage of such a dialogue was that it would allow appropriate risk mitigation options to be developed within a short period of time. One such opportunity was the initiative put forward by Turkmenistan to convene a high-level international conference in 2009 to discuss the reliable and stable transportation of energy. 52. The development of new and renewable sources of energy and increased access to technologies for their introduction were important for national energy security. Those vital issues should therefore also be discussed in the context of thematic debates held during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly. 53. Ms. Stewart (International Labour Organization (ILO)) said that over the preceding two decades the global economy's financial architecture had not distributed benefits fairly, and that the current crisis would only exacerbate poverty, underemployment and inequality. As remittances decreased and poverty spread, labour migration would continue to be a core feature of globalization. It was a fundamental principle of ILO that labour was not a commodity, and that workers had a right to freely chosen employment and decent work. Migration should be a matter of choice, not necessity. The previous year's ILO Forum on Decent Work for a Fair Globalization had brought together over 400 participants to exchange views on promoting decent work, and the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization, adopted by the June 2008 International Labour Conference, could serve as a framework for action to achieve both an immediate response to the current crises and the long-term goal of achieving a fairer globalization for all. 54. Mr. Clough (United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)) said that it was crucial to find ways of ensuring that all people shared in the benefits of globalization while safeguarding them against the risks. UNIDO had a growing programme to encourage transition economies to diversify production and move away from reliance on a small number of primary exports. It also helped countries gain access to global markets by providing assistance on compliance with international standards, quality control and sanitary measures. The international community needed to ensure that transition economies had access to updated and environmentally friendly technologies, in which regard maintaining capital flows such as foreign direct investment were crucial. UNIDO administered projects around the world to phase out ozone-depleting substances, eliminate persistent organic pollutants, and promote energy-efficient technologies with a view to strengthening competitiveness and productivity while reducing carbon emissions. Emphasis was on capacity-building, pro-poor macroeconomic policies, and modernization of agro-industry. UNIDO would continue to support partnerships between government and the private sector to facilitate the integration of economies in transition into the global economy. 55. Mr. Ben-Shaban (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that, while globalization offered genuine opportunities to developing countries to acquire new capacities and technologies, it also threatened them with economic dependency and instability. The recent crises had revealed the unsound basis of the international financial and trade systems. Efforts by developing countries to diversify their economies should be supported. It should be recognized that privatization and the free market alone would not produce development, and that conditional assistance made it difficult for developing countries to balance international commitments with national priorities. 56. Corruption, bribery and money-laundering deprived developing countries of resources needed for development. The international community could no longer turn a blind eye to the enormous sums of money hidden in money-laundering havens, which were often used by terrorist groups and organized crime. He expressed concern over the low rate of full implementation of the asset recovery provisions of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. He commended the UNODC initiative to eliminate safe havens for the proceeds of corruption, and called on the upcoming third session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention to explore mechanisms to guarantee the identification and tracing of financial flows linked to corruption and the return of illicit assets. 57. Migration should be addressed by enhanced development and economic reforms in the countries of origin. Investments in agriculture, industry and the services sector could reduce unemployment and stem the brain drain. He called for follow-up to the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development with a view to reducing the negative impacts of migration and maximizing the positive role it played in bringing together civilizations. The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m. 