%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|ZAMBIA|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/HRC/WG.6/2/ZMB/3 3 April 2008 Original: HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Second session Geneva, 5-16 May 2008 SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH 15 (C) OF THE ANNEX TO HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL RESOLUTION 5/1 Zambia* The present report is a summary of eight stakeholders' submissions to the universal periodic review. It follows the structure of the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council. It does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), nor any judgement or determination in relation to specific claims. The information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes and, to the extent possible, the original texts have not been altered. Lack of information or focus on specific issues may be due to the absence of submissions by stakeholders regarding these particular issues. The full texts of all submissions received are available on the OHCHR website. The periodicity of the review for the first cycle being four years, the information reflected in this report mainly relates to events that occurred after 1 January 2004. The stakeholders listed below have contributed information for this summary; the full texts of all original submissions are available at: www.ohchr.org. (One asterisk denotes a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council.) Civil society Child Rights Organisations Children in Need Network (CHIN), Zambia Civic Education Association, Plan-International, Save the Children Norway and Sweden in consultation with Child Care and Adoption Society of Zambia, Sport in Action (SIA), Mulumbo Early Childhood Care and Development (MECCDF), Christian Children's Fund (CC), African Network for the Prevention and Protection of Children Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN),Forum for African Women Educationalists in Zambia (FAWEZA), REPSSI, Catholic Relief Services-RAPIDS, Young Women Christian Association (YWCA), OVC-Media, Zambia AIDS Research and Advocacy Network (ZARAN), Zambia National Education Coalition (ZANEC), Project Support Zambia (PSZ), Lusaka, Zambia, joint UPR submission, February 2008 CHRI Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, New Delhi, India, UPR submission, February 2008* FI-ERI Franciscans International* and Edmund Rice International, joint UPR submission, February 2008 GIEACPC Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, London, United Kingdom, UPR submission, February 2008 GR - ILGHRC Global Rights* and International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission, New York, NY, USA, joint UPR submission, February 2008 HRW Human Rights Watch, Geneva, Switzerland, UPR submission, February 2008* ILGA and other NGOs International Lesbian and Gay Association, ILGA-Europe*, Pan Africa ILGA, Coalition of African Lesbians, Behind the Mask, The Rainbow Project, International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission, ARC International, Brussels, Belgium, joint UPR submission, February 2008 OMCT World Organisation Against Torture, Geneva, Switzerland, UPR submission, February 2008* * The present document was not edited before being sent to the United Nations translation services. Scope of international obligations The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) indicated that in its pledge to the Council, Zambia pledged to "accelerate the processes" to adhere to the two Optional Protocols to CRC and the Optional Protocol to CEDAW. Zambia is yet to fulfil this pledge. Children in Need Network, Zambia Civic Education Association, Plan-International, Save the Children Norway and Sweden and other organizations (Child Rights organizations) recommended the Government to immediately ratify the two CRC optional protocols to offer full protection of children in Zambia. The protocols will also be useful as the Government revises child related legislation in line with international instruments. B. Constitutional and legislative framework CHRI noted that it received information that the Zambian Constitution allows fundamental rights enshrined in the ICCPR to be suspended during times of emergency. CHRI noted that Article 23 of the Zambian Constitution, which provides for exceptions to the principle of non-discrimination on matters of personal and customary law, does not comply with Article 1 of CERD. As indicated by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), Part III of the Constitution of Zambia provides that no one shall be subjected to torture or any inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment. This provision however does not define the term torture neither does it provide for an act of torture as a crime. OMCT recommended the Government to amend its legislation to ensure that torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment are criminalized in accordance with the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; to enact gender-based violence legislation; the speedy enactment of the Sexual Offences and Gender Violence Bill and; to eliminate corporal punishment as a legitimate measure in its law. As also noted by Human Rights Watch (HRW), Zambian women do not enjoy effective legal protection of their property rights and as a result practices like property grabbing (the unlawful appropriation of marital property upon the death of a spouse by in-laws) and the unequal distribution of marital property according to customary law for women who divorce are widespread. This discrimination is sanctioned by Article 23 of Zambia's current constitution -- currently undergoing review -- which gives primacy to customary law in marriage-related matters. Although Zambia has a law that regulates distribution of inheritance where the deceased did not leave a will (the Intestate Succession Act of 1989, amended 1996), which should help counter property grabbing, this law is ill-enforced. HRW urged the Zambian government to ensure better enforcement of the Intestate Succession Act. According to Child Rights organisations, the Zambian Government, through the Ministry of Community Development and Social Services (MCDSS) has embarked on a law reform process to comprehensively review various aspects of child related legislation in order to ensure their compatibility with provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, the process is slow, has on occasion stalled and there is still lack of clarity regarding the process and the mandate of MCDSS to review all child related legislation. They also noted that the law reform process needs to be anchored in the right structure of Government (specifically the Zambia Law Development Commission supported by the Ministry of Justice) so that it can be comprehensively and effectively addressed. Child Rights organisations recommended the Government to take advantage of the goodwill shown by children's rights non governmental organizations to speed up the law reform process and within the next three years have a comprehensive Children's Act. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure CHRI indicated that during 2006, it received information that the Zambian Human Rights Commission was severely understaffed and lacked the technical capacity needed to carry out effective investigation and inspection visits. The Commission was also reported to have an enormous backlog of cases. OMCT indicated that the Commission is not in a position to take any further action once the recommendations are issued, especially in the case where a recommendation issued is not implemented by the "appropriate authority". Additionally, it further indicated that the Commission is not competent to initiate legal proceedings on behalf of the complainants. The dependence by the Commission on other authorities to take action does not give assurance to the complainant for redress. This procedure also unduly prolongs the possible proceedings. OMCT further noted that another weakness of the Commission is its lack of independence, as the Commissioners are appointed by the President, who has the power to decide upon the composition of the Commission. OMCT also indicated that the budget of the Commission, which is adopted by the Parliament, remains extremely low and does not cover the basic expenses of the Commissioners. The Commission is not allowed to receive grants or any other financial support from international institutions or other donations from any source, unless they have been expressly approved by the President. OMCT recommended the Government to: ensure that the Commission is established in full conformity with the Principles related to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles); to reinforce the independence of the Commissioners, especially with regard to the appointment process; to ensure that the recommendations of the Commission are fully and promptly implemented and; to allow the Commission to receive funds to carry out its activities. Child Rights organisations stated that the Children's Rights Committee within the Commission, created to strengthen the monitoring and implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, has not performed according to expectations due to inadequate resources. Child Rights organisations reported however, that there is a new process to strengthen the independent monitoring of children's rights under the Commission through the establishment of the Commissioner for Children. Child Rights organisations recommended the Government to progressively scale up the human and financial resources to the Commission to promote the establishment of institutions such as the Office of the Commissioner for Children vested with the relevant power and authority to effectively protect children and to uphold their rights. Child Rights organisations further indicated that the announced National Child Council has not yet been established; therefore there is still poor coordination of programmes relating to the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, The National Orphans and Vulnerable Children Steering Committee (established in 2000) `is not functioning'. Child Rights organisations recommended the Government to immediately set up the National Child Council and coordination of the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in the country should be a key mandate of this body. D. Policy measures Apart from the Ministry of Education mainstreaming the teaching of human rights and specifically children's rights in the high school Civic Education curriculum, Child Rights organizations noted that there is still no effort by the Government to undertake systematic awareness training of professional groups, children, parents and the general public on the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the rights-based approach. Child Rights organizations recommended the Government to systematically train and disseminate the provisions of the CRC especially at local level. According to Child Rights organizations, although there is now a new National Child Policy (2006) that has taken into account the worsening situation of orphans and vulnerable children in the country, there is still only a draft National Plan of Action to translate the policy into programmes. Child Rights organizations recommended the Government to finalize the Nation Plan of Action and allocate progressively sufficient human and financial resources in line with other planning documents such as the Fifth National Development Plan and to elaborate a comprehensive national programme for children that stakeholders can work and support. Child Rights organizations noted that, since 2005, the Government has allocated resources to areas which were not considered before in the national budget such as the resettlement of street children, Child Development and Coordination Program, Juvenile Justice and Child Welfare Program, mainstreaming of children's rights, under the Child Affairs' Department in 2005, and the sensitization programme on children's rights and rehabilitation of disadvantaged children, adults and youth. However, the lack of disaggregated data makes it difficult to plan adequately and to monitor whether the funds actually benefit the intended target. Furthermore, according to Child Rights organizations, the birth registration rate of children between 0-5 years is estimated at about 9 percent. Child Rights organizations recommended the Government to prioritize birth registration and to completely overhaul and decentralize the system of birth registration, particularly in rural areas. Child Rights organizations also recommended to put in place data collection mechanisms that are comprehensive, with indicators that can be used to measure implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child; the Government should be consistent in the amount of funding allocations to children's programmes. If it cannot increase funding, it should at least maintain the same allocation; the Government should narrow the funding gap between authorized expenditure and the actual expenditure. Child Rights organizations further recommended the Government to develop clear guidelines for mainstreaming child participation at all levels of programming and to ensure that such structures as the National Youth Council and Children's Council (once established) are used effectively for this purpose. Child Rights organizations recommended the Government to take measures including legislative, financial, and institutional to sufficiently provide for the needs of children with disabilities and; to adopt and provide an integrated and well-coordinated response for disability prevention and disability management for children, especially in rural areas. II. PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE GROUND A. Implementation of international human rights obligations 1. Equality and non discrimination Human Rights Watch (HRW) stated that, to respect its obligations under the Covenants and CEDAW, Zambia should ensure that no law or custom may grant men a right to a greater share of property at the end of a marriage or de facto relationship, or on the death of a relative. Such a law would be discriminatory and affects a woman's practical ability to divorce her husband, to support herself or her family and to live in dignity as an independent person. HRW urged Zambia to ensure that provisions on equality before the law regardless of sex, and provisions prohibiting any law, culture, custom, or tradition that undermine the dignity, welfare, interests, or status of women or men (articles 38-40), are retained in the draft constitution, under discussion. Global Rights and the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (GR-ILGHRC) noted that the National AIDS Control Program fails to mention men who have sex with men and reported that there are no programs -- government-sponsored or privately-funded -- that respond to the HIV-related needs of same-sex practicing men in Zambia. 2. Right to life, liberty and security of the person OMCT indicated that officers implicated in acts of torture are charged with the offence of causing grievous bodily harm but not torture. OMCT also reported that in spite of the numerous complaints of inmates, few cases have been brought to the courts to date. Furthermore, the State established the Police Public Complaints Authority (PPCA), which has the authority to direct prosecution or dismissal of those officers found guilty of violation of human rights (torture inclusive). It is important to note that since 2005, officers found guilty by the PPCA have been dismissed or discharge of their duties, however, none of the alleged perpetrators of torture has been prosecuted. According to OMCT, torture or ill-treatment by State's agents against women tend to be characterized by sexual violence as well as by degrading treatment, such as being forced to parade naked in front of groups of male law enforcement officials. The perpetrators of this violence have largely gone unpunished and the victims have not been granted compensation. Child Rights organizations, also noted that there is no child sensitive mechanism for children to complain against law enforcement officers regarding ill-treatment during arrest, questioning and police custody. OMCT indicated that the prison population has grown immensely without any extension of the infrastructure and capacity of the prisons. The consequence has been endemic overcrowding. Most of the Zambian prisons were built in the colonial days and are now outdated and need major refurbishment. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to have a clear and comprehensive picture of the current situation in prison facilities as there is a lack of figures and statistics. The regular visits from Lusaka Central Prison undertaken by an OMCT's local partner organization, show that there is a population of 1600 inmates for only 320 places available - showing a level of overcrowding of 500 %. The vast majority is in pre-trial detention. OMCT recommended the Government to take measures to address the very high level of overcrowding and poor physical conditions prevailing in the prisons and other detention facilities, as well as the lack of hygiene, adequate food and appropriate medical care. Zambia should consider alternative measures to imprisonment to address the situation in the detention facilities. OMCT further indicated that a local partner also reported that arbitrary arrests of street children are carried out, generally for cognisable offences or loitering. A majority of children who wait for trial in remand prisons reported that they had been assaulted by the police during arrest and questioning. This sometimes included explicit torture for the extraction of information, using handcuffs, pieces of hosepipe to beat the child and a whip. OMCT also noted that numerous police stations have no separate cell for children and even when they have one; it is often used for another purpose. According to HRW, despite high levels of sexual and gender-based violence (hereafter SGBV) in Zambia the country has no specific legislation criminalizing SGBV, and women must rely on the general Penal Code provisions on assault occasioning bodily harm. Zambia's Penal Code has no provision for marital rape or psychological abuse. Similarly, Zambia's healthcare system is ill-equipped to address gender-based violence among women living with HIV/AIDS. Healthcare facilities in Zambia have no systems to detect or address SGBV, and there are no government protocols or training programs on how to address gender-based abuses in HIV treatment programs. The only two shelters in the country are run by a non-governmental organization with little funding from the government. Although the Zambian government has established the Victim Support Unit (VSU), a special unit of the police charged with addressing a variety of abuses, including domestic violence and property grabbing, lack of human and other resources undermines this unit's ability to address gender-based abuses. Similar observations were made by Child Rights organisations and OMCT. According to OMCT, there is a large and increasing number of child victims of commercial exploitation, including prostitution and pornography, especially among girls, child orphans and disadvantaged children. OMCT further indicated that according to information received by relevant authorities, Zambia is a country of origin, destination and transit for trafficking in persons. In the penal system, corporal punishment is unlawful as a sentence for crime by virtue of a Supreme Court ruling in 1999 (John Banda v The People HPA/6/1998) and subsequent amendments to the Penal Code and the Local Court Act, but as at May 2007, article 73(1)(e) of the Juveniles Act, which allows a court to order caning, was yet to be repealed, as indicated by GIEACPC. GIEACPC also indicated that, although corporal punishment is also unlawful as a disciplinary measure in penal institutions, it is still lawful in alternative care settings, where article 46 of the Juveniles Act and rules made under the Act provide for corporal punishment in childcare facilities. OMCT also noted that in practice, corporal punishment and other forms of humiliating and degrading punishment are widely practiced against children in Zambia as a means of discipline and education. GIEACPC, Child Rights organisations and OMCT, recommended to prohibit all forms of corporal, physical and humiliating punishment of children in all settings, including in the home. Child Rights organisations also recommended putting in place a programme to raise public awareness on other non violent forms of discipline. 3. Administration of justice and the rule of law OMCT stated that there is a need to raise the minimal age of criminal responsibility, which is presently 8 years old. A major concern remains the difficulty in establishing the real age of the child accused. The reform of the juvenile justice system started in 2000 created the Child Justice Administration System and the Child Justice Forum (CJF) which focus on compliance with international standards, on adequate training and on increasing efficiency and preventing recidivism. However, as noted by OMCT, today, the CJF still fails to properly implement strategies and plans at local level. It sometimes happens that children are arrested and put in a cell without warrant. Moreover, the right to inform a relative or any other person is regularly violated. OMCT reported the absence of juvenile courts and judges; the lack of social workers; the very limited rehabilitation and integration services for juveniles and the limited training of judges, prosecutors and other staff. OMCT also reported that in practice, detention of children is not used as a measure of last resort: pre-trial detention is excessively common and no alternative to detention, such as rehabilitation measures, is really applied. Moreover, both in the law and in practice, children do not have special guarantees in the right to legal assistance. OMCT recommended the Government to ensure that deprivation of liberty of children is effectively only used as a measure of last resort (particularly for children in need of care and protection); and develop alternatives to detention as well as diversion and rehabilitation. 4. Right to privacy, marriage and family life OMCT indicated that, given the fact that most marriages are contracted under customary law, the Constitutional exception provided for in Article 23[4] [c] excluding the non-discrimination requirement in matters such as "adoption, marriage, divorce, burial, devolution of property on death" is of particular importance. Moreover, the Local Court Act, Chapter 29 calls upon Local Courts not to administer matters in a way that is repugnant to natural justice. OMCT noted that to protect women's rights in the family, Article 23[4][c] of the Constitution must be removed or amended and local court justices must be sensitized to gender equality matters. OMCT further reported that discriminatory practices related to marriage and family are still widespread, including early marriages, malobolo (lobola or bride price), polygamy, discriminatory rules for transmission of nationality, rules of succession and restriction in the freedom of movement. Other persisting discriminatory practices are directly harmful, such as the custom of ritual purification following the death of a spouse, also called "sexual cleansing". As indicated by GR - ILGHRC sections 155-157 of the Zambian Penal Code criminalize any form of consensual same-sex conduct in private between consenting adults providing for the possibility of imprisonment from seven to fourteen years. Such provisions reinforce social stigma against gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender individuals and expose them to the risk of deprivation of liberty, life, physical integrity and health. Similar observation was made by the International Lesbian and Gay Association (ILGA) in its joint submission. 5. Freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly CHRI noted that it is aware that defamation against the Head of State is a crime in Zambia punishable by a three year jail term, which reduces the space for exercising the freedom of expression. GR - ILGHRC further noted that Zambians who have fought against discrimination related to sexual orientation or gender identity have been often silenced. When LGBT organizers appeared in the newspaper to announce their wishes to register the organization, government officials warned that any attempt to register the group or hold public meetings would be met with arrests. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living FI-ERI indicated that, particularly in the Copperbelt region of northern Zambia, Zambians, were hopeful that their living conditions would be improved by the investment in the development of resources. The rapid privatization process between 1997 and2000 has however, drastically deepened the pre-existing poverty of the Copperbelt inhabitants. The unemployment rate is 22 percent whilst it is 6 percent at the national level. Health care, education, housing and other social services, including HIV and AIDS, as well as malaria awareness raising and prevention programmes were dismantled, according to FI-ERI. HIV and AIDS prevalence in the Copperbelt is much higher than the national rate. FI-ERI further noted that the transfer of the Zambia Consolidated Cooper Mines (ZMMC) to private investors was concluded under the so-called "Development Agreements", which barely took note of environmental concerns. Companies continue the mineral exploitation without making any contributions to local development. According to Child Rights organisations, the 1996 Situation Analysis of Children in Zambia and the 2004 Orphans and Vulnerable Children (OVC) Situational Analysis described a worsening situation and estimated the `population of street children to have increased rapidly to 75,000 since the first Situation Analysis undertaken in 1991. The phenomenon of children sleeping and/or working on the streets in Lusaka, , as well as across the nation was also raised by FI-ERI, indicating that their vulnerability exposes them to various risks such as child trafficking, child labour, and abuse, including sexual mistreatment and exploitation. Child Rights organisations recommended to widely publicise social welfare schemes available to support vulnerable children and to ensure sufficient funds are allocated to programmes;. FI-ERI urged the Government to specifically dedicate attention to: prevention measures; participation of families, community-based associations, traditional and Church leaders; empowerment of families to increase their support to children for an effective access to social services; educational programmes. Of the estimated population of 12,000,000 in Zambia, 1.2 million are HIV infected as indicated by FI-ERI. FI-ERI indicated that the response of the Government to HIV and AIDS should be addressed during the UPR and recommended the Human Rights Council to urge the Government to adopt a specific national programme matched with a national action plan to effectively address the problem of Orphan Vulnerable Children (OVC), grandparents heading households composed with poor orphan vulnerable children, poor households struggling to provide care for orphans on much wider scale than at present; to meet the needs of children without adult caregivers; to increase support and coordination among community-based associations and other civil society organisations to improve their contribution to tackling the disease and its consequences on children; to integrate HIV and AIDS services into other child health services; to identify HIV infected children; to expand the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV services; and transparency in management of resources devoted to the combat against HIV and AIDS. As noted by HRW, women face grave gender-based abuses, in particular domestic violence, which hinder their ability to access or continue using life-saving HIV treatment. According to Child Rights organisations, there are no counselling services specifically for children who are infected or affected by HIV/AIDS. Child Rights organisations recommended the Government to scale up testing for HIV after birth to other parts of the country; to train counsellors to ensure confidential child-friendly services without discrimination or being judgmental; to introduce a certification system that prohibits uncertified individuals to provide counselling services to children in order to reduce any further or potential damage to children as a result of poor counselling offered. Right to education and to participate in the cultural life of the community FI-ERI further indicated that during the UPR, particular attention needs to be given to primary education, community schools and skills education in Zambia. Regarding primary education, FI-ERI made a call for social partners in the consultation process of the Education Bill that is currently before the Parliament. They also indicated that community schools, especially in poorer urban and some rural areas, are mainly reliant on private donor funding and urged the Government to effectively implement the policy enunciated in its Education Our Future document and to contribute to the running costs of the community schools. III. ACHIEVEMENTS, BEST PRACTICES, CHALLENGES AND CONSTRAINTS Zambia has made considerable progress in promoting and implementing the right to education, as reported by FI-ERI. According to UNESCO data for 2005, provided by FI-ERI, some 93 percent of girls and 91 percent of boys are in primary school. However, only 83 percent of children complete a full course of primary school. Despite Zambia's impressive roll-out of HIV treatment, the country's health system and legal framework fails to address barriers to women's HIV treatment and as a result, some women living with HIV miss out on life-saving HIV treatment. IV. KEY NATIONAL PRIORITIES, INITIATIVES AND COMMITMENTS n/a V. CAPACITY-BUILDING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 