%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|CANADA|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|SPECIAL PROCEDURES|DISCRIMINATION|AMERINDIANS|GENDER DISCRIMINATION|GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE|DOMESTIC VIOLENCE|WOMEN PRISONERS|MINORITIES|PEOPLE OF AFRICAN DESCENT|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|TORTURE AND OTHER CRUEL TREATMENT|NON-CITIZENS|ASYLUM SEEKERS|IMMIGRATION POLICY|LEGAL AID|ISLAMOPHOBIA|RIGHT OF ASSEMBLY|POLITICAL PARTICIPATION|EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION|WOMEN WORKERS|MIGRANT WORKERS|WORKERS' RIGHTS|POVERTY|STANDARD OF LIVING|LIVING CONDITIONS|SOCIALLY DISADVANTAGED PERSONS|SOCIAL WELFARE|HOUSING NEEDS|RIGHT TO EDUCATION|LAND RIGHTS|NATURAL RESOURCES POLICY|COUNTER-TERRORISM|DEPORTATION|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/HRC/WG.6/4/CAN/2 17 December 2008 Original: ENGLISH HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Fourth session Geneva, 2-13 February 2009 COMPILATION PREPARED BY THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH 15(B) OF THE ANNEX TO HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL RESOLUTION 5/1 Canada The present report is a compilation of the information contained in the reports of treaty bodies, special procedures, including observations and comments by the State concerned, and other relevant official United Nations documents. It does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), other than those contained in public reports issued by OHCHR. It follows the structure of the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council. Information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the four-year periodicity of the first cycle of the review. In the absence of recent information, the latest available reports and documents have been taken into consideration, unless they are outdated. Since this report only compiles information contained in official United Nations documents, lack of information or focus on specific issues may be due to non-ratification of a treaty and/or to a low level of interaction or cooperation with international human rights mechanisms. I. BACKGROUND AND FRAMEWORK A. Scope of international obligations Core universal human rights treaties The following abbreviations have been used for this document: ICERD International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination ICESCR International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ICCPR-OP 1 Optional Protocol to ICCPR ICCPR-OP 2 Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women OP-CEDAW Optional Protocol to CEDAW CAT Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment OP-CAT Optional Protocol to CAT CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child OP-CRC-AC Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict OP-CRC-SC Optional Protocol to CRC on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography ICRMW International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families CPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities OP-CPD Optional Protocol to Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities CED International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance Date of ratification, accession or succession Declarations /reservations Recognition of specific competences of treaty bodies ICERD 14 Oct. 1970 None Individual complaints (art. 14): No ICESCR 19 May 1976 ICCPR Inter-State complaints (art. 41): Yes ICCPR-OP 1 ICCPR-OP 2 25 Nov. 2005 CEDAW 10 Dec. 1981 OP-CEDAW 18 Oct. 2002 Inquiry procedure (art. 8 and 9): Yes CAT 24 Jun. 1987 Inquiry procedure (art. 20): Yes Inter-State complaints (art. 21): Yes Individual complaints (art. 22): Yes CRC 13 Dec. 1991 Yes (arts. 21,37,30) OP-CRC-AC 7 July 2000 Binding declaration under art. 3: 16 years OP-CRC-SC 14 Sept. 2005 Core treaties to which Canada is not a party: OP-CAT, ICRMW, CPD (signature only, 2007), CPD-OP, CED. Other main relevant international instruments Ratification, accession or succession Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide Yes Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Palermo Protocol Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Refugees and stateless persons 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, 1954 Convention relating to the status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. Yes, except 1954 Convention Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocols thereto Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (First Convention); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (Second Convention); Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third Convention); Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth Convention); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II); Protocol additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III). For the official status of ratifications, see Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, at www.eda.admin.ch/eda/fr/home/topics/intla/intrea/chdep/warvic.html. ILO fundamental conventions International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour; Convention No.105 concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour, Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize; Convention No. 98 concerning the Application of the Principles of the Right to Organize and to Bargain Collectively; Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value; Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation; Convention No. 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment; Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. Yes, except Nos. 29, 98 and 138 UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education No In 2008, Canada was encouraged by the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) to ratify CPD and CED. The Committee against Torture (CAT) recommended ratifying OP-CAT, which in 2006 the Government, pledged to consider signing or ratifying. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) and CEDAW recommended ratification of ICRMW; CERD recommended making the declaration provided for in ICERD article 14, ratification of the 1954 Convention relating to Status of Stateless Persons and the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention No.169. B. Constitutional and legislative framework The Human Rights Committee (HR Committee) regretted Canada's continued failure to address the inadequate remedies for violations of ICCPR articles 2, 3 and 26, recommending amendment to legislation at federal, provincial and territorial levels and legal system enhancement, allowing victims of discrimination full access to competent tribunals and effective remedy. Similarly, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR)and CEDAW recommended domestic legislation be harmonized with ICESCR and CEDAW. CERD, CEDAW and CESCR said the Federal Government must ensure that provinces and territories are aware of Canada's obligations, and that rights are enforceable. CESCR reiterated that Government at all levels should promote interpretations of laws and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms consistent with the Covenant. CERD noted with satisfaction amendments to the Canadian Human Rights Act (CHRA) and the Criminal Code strengthening Internet hate crime legislation, and recommended adopting mechanisms, in consultation with Aboriginal communities, to ensure adequate application of CHRA to complaints under the Indian Act. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure Established in 1977, the Canadian Human Rights Commission (CHRC) was conferred "A" status by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions in 1999, and again in 2006. CESCR recommended establishing mechanisms for independent monitoring and adjudication of implementation of ICESCR, with the mandate to follow up on concluding observations. D. Policy measures CERD welcomed the "Action Plan against Racism: A Canada for All" also noted in the 2006 report of the Security Council Committee concerning counter-terrorism. It welcomed the CHRC "Anti-Hate Team" and the establishment of the Hate Crimes Community Working Group in Ontario. In 2007, the ILO Committee of Experts noted measures to improve the situation of aboriginal children, by addressing gaps in life chances and health status. II. PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE GROUND A. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms 1. Cooperation with treaty bodies Treaty body CERD Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination CESCR Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights HR Committee Human Rights Committee CEDAW Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women CAT Committee against Torture CRC Committee on the Rights of the Child Latest report submitted and considered Latest concluding observations Follow-up response Reporting status CERD March 2007 Overdue since March 2008 Combined nineteenth and twentieth report due in 2009 CESCR May 2006 Sixth report due in 2010 HR Committee October 2005 Received in Dec. 2006 November 2008 Combined eighth and ninth report due in 2014 May 2005 Received in June 2006 Sixth report overdue since July 2008 October 2003 Combined third and fourth report due in 2009 OP-CRC- AC June 2006 To provide information together with the report to CRC in 2009 OP-CRC- SC Initial report overdue since 2007 HR Committee was concerned that recommendations it made in 1999 were not implemented. It also expressed concern, as did CAT, at Canada's reluctance to consider its obligation to implement their requests for interim measures of protection. HR Committee recommended Canada establish procedures by which oversight of implementation of the Covenant is ensured. CESCR strongly reiterated that Canada should implement recommendations dating back to its second and third periodic reports. 2. Cooperation with special procedures Standing invitation issued Latest visits or mission reports Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to non-discrimination in this context (9-22 October 2007); A/HRC/7/16/Add.4 Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (1-15 June 2005); E/CN.4/2006/7/Add.2. Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people (21 May to 4 June 2004); E/CN.4/2005/88/Add.3 Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (15 to 26 September 2003). E/CN.4/2004/18/Add.2 Visits agreed upon in principle Special Rapporteur on racism in 2007. Visits requested and not yet agreed upon Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, requested in 2006. Facilitation/cooperation during missions The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and the Special Rapporteurs who visited during the period under review expressed their gratitude to the Government. Follow-up to visits Responses to letters of allegations and urgent appeals About four communications were sent within the four-year periodicity. In addition to communications sent for particular groups, 5 individuals, including 1 woman, were concerned by these communications. During the period under review, the Government replied to 3 communications (75 per cent). Responses to questionnaires on thematic issues The questionnaires included in this section are those which have been reflected in an official report by a special procedure mandate holder. Canada responded to 7 of the 13 questionnaires sent by special procedures mandate holders during the period under review, within the deadlines. See (a) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (A/HRC/4/29), questionnaire on the right to education of persons with disabilities sent in 2006; (b) report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants (A/HRC/4/24), questionnaire on the impact of certain laws and administrative measures on migrants sent in 2006; (c) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (A/HRC/4/23), questionnaire on issues related to forced marriages and trafficking in persons sent in 2006; (d) report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders (E/CN.4/2006/95 and Add.5), questionnaire on the implementation of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms sent in June 2005; (e) report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people (A/HRC/6/15), questionnaire on the human rights of indigenous people sent in August 2007; (f) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children (E/CN.4/2006/62) and the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (E/CN.4/2006/67), joint questionnaire on the relationship between trafficking and the demand for commercial sexual exploitation sent in July 2005; (g) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (E/CN.4/2006/45), questionnaire on the right to education for girls sent in 2005; (h) report of the Working Group on mercenaries (A/61/341), questionnaire concerning its mandate and activities sent in November 2005; (i) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/4/31), questionnaire on the sale of children's organs sent on July 2006; (j) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (E/CN.4/2005/78), questionnaire on child pornography on the Internet sent in July 2004; (k) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/7/8), questionnaire on assistance and rehabilitation programmes for child victims of sexual exploitation sent in July 2007; (l) report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises (A/HRC/4/35/Add.3), questionnaire on human rights policies and management practices; (m) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (), questionnaire on the right to education in emergency situation sent in 2007. Questionnaire on the impact of certain laws and administrative measures on migrants (A/HRC/4/24, para. 9); questionnaire on issues related to forced marriages and trafficking in persons (A/HRC/4/23, para. 14); Questionnaire on the human rights of indigenous people (A/HRC/6/15, para. 7); joint questionnaire on the relationship between trafficking and the demand for commercial sexual exploitation (E/CN.4/2006/62, para. 24 and E/CN.4/2006/67, para. 22); questionnaire on the sale of children's organs (A/HRC/4/31, para. 24); questionnaire on child pornography on the Internet (E/CN.4/2005/78, para. 4); questionnaire on human rights policies and management practices (A/HRC/4/35/Add.3, para. 7). 3. Cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Canada is a regular donor to OHCHR work, pledging additional unearmarked contributions in 2006, and contributed to the United Nations Humanitarian Funds. The High Commissioner visited Canada in 2006, discussing issues such as discrimination and the need to uphold rights in the context of international migration and counterterrorism. B. Implementation of international human rights obligations 1. Equality and non-discrimination CERD recommended that Canada amend or adopt legislation criminalizing racist violence, in compliance with ICERD, article 4. CERD regretted lack of progress on discrimination against First Nations women and children. CEDAW, CERD, CESCR and the Special Rapporteur on indigenous people urged legislative solutions addressing discriminatory effects of the Indian Act on the transmission of Indian status to children, the rights to marry, own property and inherit (under Matrimonial Real Property regulations) and on economic, social and cultural rights for Aboriginal women and children. CEDAW recommended interpreting Section 67 of CHRA to provide full protection and redress for Aboriginal women. It was concerned that Aboriginal and ethnic minority women suffer from multiple discrimination in employment, housing, education and health care, with high rates of poverty, lack of access to clean water and low school completion rates. Canada should take measures, including temporary special measures, to eliminate de jure and de facto discrimination, to sensitize these women about their rights, and ensure they are empowered to participate in governance and legislative processes. Regarding the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111), the ILO Committee of Experts requested that CHRA prohibit discrimination on grounds of political opinion and social origin. 2. Right to life, liberty and security of the person CEDAW welcomed initiatives to address violence against women, but remained concerned that domestic violence is a significant problem in Canada. A 2005 WHO report indicated that rates of abuse during pregnancy are between 4 and 11 percent. CERD and HR Committee were concerned about serious acts of violence against Aboriginal women - disproportionate in the number of victims of violent death, rape and domestic violence. CEDAW urged Canada to examine its failure to investigate cases of missing and murdered Aboriginal women, despite the establishment of a working group, and to take steps to remedy systemic deficiencies. Canada should urgently conduct investigations determining whether racialized patterns exist, and take relevant measures. Regretting that domestic violence is not a criminal offence, CEDAW and CESCR recommended it be included as one. HR Committee and CEDAWrecommended Canada address root causes, ensure effective access to justice, establish immediate means of redress and protection, ensure perpetrators are prosecuted and adequately punished, and enact "primary aggressor" policies. A 2006 UNFPA report noted that immigrant and visible minority women (68 percent of whom are immigrants) reporting abuse were less likely to seek services than the general population. CESCR recommended that Canada ensure low-income women and those trying to leave abusive relationships access to housing and support services consistent with the right to an adequate standard of living. CERD recommended strengthening and expanding existing services and providing culturally sensitive training for law enforcers, and HR Committee recommended ensuring prompt and adequate response. The ILO Committee of Experts sought information on reports that 90 percent of women indicated having been sexually harassed in the course of employment, and on measures taken. HR Committee and CEDAW were concerned about the situation of women prisoners, particularly women with disabilities, Aboriginal and ethnic minority women. Canada was urged to end the presence of male guards in female prisons; redesign its classification system for federal women prisoners; ensure girls are held in single-sex youth prisons or detention centres; and establish an external redress and oversight independent mechanism for federal women prisoners based on CHRC recommendations. The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Special Rapporteur on racism and CERD noted that, regrettably, over-incarceration of Aboriginals, Afro-Canadians and ethnic minorities - particularly women, as highlighted by CEDAW - is more marked than before. The Working Group recommended strengthening policies to address this over-representation, particularly by increasing Aboriginal participation in law enforcement and the justice system, and sensitizing law enforcers. CERD recommended giving preference to alternatives to imprisonment; increasing efforts to address socio-economic marginalization and discriminatory approaches to law enforcement and introducing a programme facilitating reintegration of Aboriginal offenders into society. Further, UNHCR urged the authorities to follow the principle of non-commingling of immigration hold detainees with the criminal population. While CERD welcomed the initiative "Addressing Race-Based issues in the Justice system", the Committee and the Special Rapporteur were concerned about the disproportionate use of force by police against Afro-Canadians. Concerned at the still substantial number of major violent incidents involving serious bodily harm or hostage-taking in federal corrections facilities, CAT called for progressive reduction in their frequency. The HR Committee recommended ensuring, at all levels that sufficient community-based supportive housing is provided to prevent the detention of persons with mental disabilities or illnesses without a legally based medical reason. Noting continued allegations of inappropriate use of chemical, irritant, incapacitating and mechanical weapons by law enforcement authorities for crowd control, CAT recommended a public and independent study and a policy review of crowd control methods, at all levels. CAT noted positive aspects, inter alia the definition of torture in the Criminal Code, the exclusion of the defences of superior orders or exceptional circumstances, including in armed conflict, and the inadmissibility of evidence obtained by torture. It expressed concern, however, at the absence of effective measures to provide civil compensation to victims of torture and recommended that Canada review its position under article 14 of the Convention to ensure the provision of compensation. CAT was also concerned at the failure of the Supreme Court of Canada to recognize in domestic law the absolute nature of the protection of article 3 of the Convention, which is not subject to any exception, and recommended that Canada unconditionally undertake to respect it and fully to incorporate the provision into domestic law. HR Committee was concerned at Canada's policy under which, in exceptional circumstances, persons can be deported to a country where they would face risk of torture or degrading treatment. 3. Administration of justice and the rule of law A 2007 UNHCR report noted the rising number of detained asylum-seekers. CERD was concerned that under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), non-citizens and asylum-seekers may be remanded in custody, indefinitely, and, as also noted by the UNHCR report, without a warrant, if they are unable to produce valid identity documents or on suspicion of providing a false identity. CERD was concerned that detention on the grounds established in IRPA Section 55 may adversely affect stateless persons and asylum-seekers from countries where conditions make obtaining identity documents difficult. The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention was concerned about the broad discretion of immigration officers in detaining aliens and the limited review of decisions. CERD recommended that Canada ensure detention is imposed only on objective grounds stipulated in law and that persons detained enjoy rights under relevant international norms. Concerned about non-eligibility of undocumented migrants and stateless persons for social security and health care and that in some provinces, such children are ineligible for schooling, CERD urged Canada to ensure such provisions and consider amending IRPA, explicitly including statelessness as a factor for humanitarian and compassionate consideration. On access to justice for Aboriginals, Afro-Canadians and ethnic minorities, CERD sought measures to ensure non-discrimination. CERD and CESCR recommended that Canada extend the Court Challenges Program to provide financial assistance for test cases of national significance, as a matter of priority. The ILO Committee of Experts requested information on measures to ensure disadvantaged groups can pursue equality claims in court. CESCR noted with concern cuts in financial support, particularly in British Columbia, to civil legal aid services with regard to economic, social and cultural rights and recommended that Canada ensure that such aid is provided to poor people. 4. Freedom of religion or belief, association and peaceful assembly, and right to participate in public and political life Noting that since 11 September 2001, Canada's Muslim and Arab communities have continuously felt victimized, the Special Rapporteur on racism stated that the resurgence of anti-Semitism and Islamophobia required vigilant attention, and encouraged promoting dialogue. HR Committee also recommended that Canada eliminate discrimination on the basis of religion in school funding in Ontario. HR Committee was concerned about information that police, particularly in Montreal, resorted to large-scale arrests of demonstrators. It recommended that Canada ensure the right to peaceful protest, and that only those committing criminal offences during demonstrations are arrested. CERD encouraged strengthening programmes to ensure appropriate representation of ethnic - particularly Afro-Canadian and Aboriginal - communities in public office, at federal and provincial levels. The UN Statistics Division indicated that women held 21.3 percent of seats in the national parliament in 2008. CEDAW urged action, including temporary special measures, to accelerate an increase in women's representation in public life. 5. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work Concerned that minority groups, particularly Afro-Canadians and Aboriginals, face discrimination in recruitment, remuneration, access to benefits, job security, qualification recognition and in the workplace, CERD recommended full implementation of anti-discrimination legislation in the labour market and measures to reduce unemployment. CEDAW echoed this recommendation, including the adoption of temporary special measures. CESCR recommended that women's right to work and the need for parents to balance work and family life be considered by providing adequate childcare services. In 2007, the ILO Committee of Experts cited a 2003 study which showed that women earned 71 percent of what men earned, and that the gap had changed little in a decade. The ILO Committee and CESCR urged provincial and territorial legislation to ensure equal remuneration for work of equal value in public and private sectors. A 2007 ILO report indicated that female migrants with university degrees from visible minorities suffer multiple discrimination. In 2006, the Special Rapporteur on migrants sent an allegation letter concerning alleged structural flaws in the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Program contributing to exploitative work and inadequate living conditions for many of its 20,000 workers who migrate to Canada every year. It was alleged that lack of an appeals mechanism and monitoring and the high worker turnover rate leads to frequent abuse including 12-15 hours work without overtime or holiday pay; being denied necessary breaks; using dangerous chemicals without proper equipment or training; cramped, substandard housing; acute pay discrimination; and unfair paycheck deductions. CESCR noted with concern that minimum wage is below the Low-Income Cut-Off and urged its increase to levels enabling a decent standard of living for workers and their families. It strongly recommended re-examining the exclusion from the right to strike of public servants and employees of Crown corporations, public school teachers and college professors. In 2008, the ILO Committee of Experts noted that on 8 June 2007, the Supreme Court of Canada overruled 20 years of previous Supreme Court decisions to hold unanimously that freedom of association encompasses a measure of protection for collective bargaining under the Canadian Charter of Rights. 6. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living The Special Rapporteur on adequate housing noted that for a highly developed, wealthy country, Canada's poverty figures were striking. CESCR was concerned that in 2004, 11.2 percent of the population lived in poverty, particularly Aboriginals, Afro-Canadians, immigrants, persons with disabilities, youth, low-income women and single mothers, and that significant differences persisted between provinces and territories. It recommended integrating economic, social and cultural rights into poverty reduction strategies. CESCR noted with concern that in most provinces and territories, social assistance benefits are lower than a decade ago, often at less than half the Low-Income Cut-Off and urged for social assistance levels allowing realization of an adequate standard of living. HR Committee recommended measures to ensure that such cuts do not have detrimental effects on vulnerable groups, and on women and children. CESCR strongly recommended that Canada reconsider retrogressive measures adopted in 1995. CESCR was concerned that around 7.4 percent of the population suffers from food insecurity, and recommended that Canada significantly intensify efforts to address this issue. It regretted that Canada did not recognize the right to water as a legal entitlement and strongly recommended that it ensure equal and adequate access to water. During his mission to Canada in 2007, the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing raised concerns about the significant number of homeless throughout the country. One and a half million Canadian households experience housing affordability, suitability or adequacy problems. He observed an apparent shortage of social housing stock, noting that cuts in social spending have heavily impacted many lowest-income households. CESCR reiterated that all levels of Government should address homelessness and inadequate housing as a national emergency. CERD remained concerned at the dramatic inequality in living standards of Aboriginal peoples. The Special Rapporteur on adequate housing witnessed some living without access to drinking water and sanitation. CESCR noted with concern that low-income, single-mother-led families and Aboriginal and Afro-Canadian families continue to be forced to relinquish children into foster care because of inadequate housing and urged Canada to assess the extent of the problem at all levels. It also recommended paying special attention to homeless girls. In 2006, the Office of the Auditor General of Canada shared with the Special Rapporteur on the adverse effects of the illicit movement and dumping of toxic wastes two petitions addressed to federal ministers on the environment and sustainable development. The petitioner requested the Government to affirm the rights to clean water, clean air and a healthy environment. The Special Rapporteur emphasized the need to avoid projects, such as polluting industries, in communities where they could adversely impact the environment and health. Marginalized communities should be given the opportunity to participate meaningfully in decisions with possible implications for their rights, including cultural rights. 7. Right to education and to participate in the cultural life of the community A 2005 UNESCO report noted the excellent performance of immigrant children in education. However, CESCR was concerned that Afro-Canadians face difficulties accessing education and experience disproportionately high secondary school drop-out rates. A 2006 UNESCO report noted that 17 percent of indigenous 15- to 49-year-olds reported no formal schooling or less than Grade 9 as their highest level of education, in contrast to 6 percent of non-indigenous. It noted also that over 40 percent of disabled children have only completed primary education. CESCR recommended Canada ensure that higher education is equally accessible to all. 8. Minorities and indigenous peoples Acknowledging that "modification" and "non-assertion" approaches have replaced the "cede, release and surrender" approach to Aboriginal land titles, CERD noted the lack of perceptible difference in results between the two. Concerned that claims of Aboriginal land rights are settled primarily through litigation, at disproportionate costs for the communities, CERD asked that new approaches to land claims do not unduly restrict progressive development of Aboriginal rights. Wherever possible, CERD urged Canada to engage in good faith in negotiations based on recognition and reconciliation, and that it examine ways to facilitate the establishment of proof of Aboriginal titles over land before the courts. Treaties concluded with First Nations should provide for periodic review, including by third parties. Government authorities assured the Special Rapporteur on indigenous people that the new treaties do not imply extinguishment of Aboriginal rights, but numerous conflicts exist due to the failure to recognize indigenous property rights. Settling of comprehensive land claims and self-government agreements are important milestones but do not resolve many grievances and require more political will regarding implementation, responsive institutional mechanisms, effective dispute resolution mechanisms, and stricter monitoring procedures at all levels. Efforts to reduce the socio-economic gap between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples have been thwarted by Government failure to honour the Kelowna Accord. The Special Rapporteur on adequate housing noted the negative impact of oil extraction and other industrial activities, such as those in the Lubicon area, which continue to lead to the loss of lands and destruction of livelihoods and traditional practices. HR Committee and CESCR in 2006 recommended that Canada resume negotiations with the Lubicon Lake Band, consult with the Band before granting licences for economic exploitation of the disputed land and ensure that rights respectively under ICCPR and ICESCR are not jeopardized. CERD regretted that Canada's report did not address limitations imposed on the use by Aboriginal peoples of their land, urging Canada to allocate sufficient resources to remove obstacles preventing enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by Aboriginals and requesting immediate implementation of the 1996 recommendations of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. Noting with concern economic exploitation of natural resources in other countries by transnational corporations registered in Canada, CERD and the Special Rapporteur on toxic waste encouraged Canada take measures against acts negatively impacting the rights of indigenous peoples outside Canada and to explore ways to hold the corporations accountable for such violations abroad. HR Committee recommended increasing efforts to protect and promote Aboriginal languages and cultures. CESCR recommended the adoption and implementation of concrete plans recommended by the Task Force on Aboriginal Languages and Cultures, and in the area of intellectual property for protection and promotion of ancestral rights and traditional knowledge. 9. Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers CAT recommended that Canada remove the explicit exclusion of categories of persons posing security or criminal risks from the protection against refoulement provided by IRPA, and provide for judicial review of the merits of decisions to expel an individual where substantial grounds exist for believing the person faces a risk of torture. CAT also recommended that Canada insist on unrestricted consular access to Canadians detained abroad, with facility for unmonitored meetings and appropriate medical expertise. CESCR urged Canada to adopt effective measures to eliminate exploitation and abuse of migrant domestic workers under the federal Live-in Caregiver Program. 10. Human rights and counter-terrorism Concerned about the wide definition of terrorism under the Anti-Terrorism Act, HR Committee recommended a more precise definition ensuring that individuals are not targeted on political, religious or ideological grounds. The Committee recommended reviewing the Canada Evidence Act in order to guarantee the right to a fair trial and to ensure, in compliance with article 14 of ICCPR, that individuals cannot be condemned on the basis of evidence to which they, or those representing them, do not have full access. Canada should not invoke exceptional circumstances as a justification for deviating from fundamental principles of fair trial. CERD, concerned about racial profiling, underlined the obligation to ensure that anti-terrorism measures do not discriminate in purpose or effect on grounds of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin. It recommended sensitization campaigns to protect persons and groups from stereotypes associating them with terrorism and that Canada consider amending the Anti-Terrorism Act to include an explicit anti-discrimination clause. Further, CAT, CERD, HR Committee and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention were concerned about the use of immigration procedures to remove or expel immigrants and refugees on grounds of national security. They were concerned in particular about the use of security certificates under IRPA, whereby non-national terrorist suspects can be arrested and indefinitely detained without charge or trial, without being adequately informed why and without guarantees of criminal proceedings. HR Committee was also concerned about mandatory detention of foreign nationals who are not permanent residents. Canada should ensure that administrative detention under security certificates is subject to judicial review, that it is never mandatory but decided on a case-by-case basis, and legally determine a maximum detention period. The Working Group recommended that the detention of terrorism suspects be imposed in the framework of criminal procedure, with the corresponding safeguards enshrined in international law. CAT expressed concern at the alleged roles of the State in the expulsion of Canadian national Maher Arar from the United States of America to the Syrian Arab Republic, where torture was reported to be practiced. HR Committee, while appreciating Canada's denial, was concerned about allegations that Canada may have cooperated with agencies known to resort to torture with the aim of extracting information from individuals detained in foreign countries. Canada should ensure public and independent inquiry to review all cases of Canadian citizens who are suspected terrorists or suspected of possessing information relating to terrorism, and who have been detained in countries where it is feared they have undergone or may undergo torture or ill-treatment. Such an inquiry should determine whether Canadian officials have directly or indirectly facilitated or tolerated their arrest and imprisonment. In Ahani v. Canada, HR Committee found that Canada had breached its obligations under ICCPR-OP1 by deporting the subject to the Islamic Republic of Iran before the Committee's determination of his allegation of irreparable harm to his Covenant rights. It also found violations of article 9 relating to lawfulness of detention, and article 13 for failing to provide procedural protections, in conjunction with article 7, which relates to torture. Canada responded to the Committee's request for information. The Committee decided the matter need not be considered further under the follow-up procedure, but will be re-examined if the situation changes. Responding to CAT, Canada provided information that there was no case of extradition or removal involving a risk of torture subject to receipt of diplomatic assurance since September 2001. III. ACHIEVEMENTS, BEST PRACTICES, CHALLENGES AND CONSTRAINTS In 2007, the ILO Committee of Experts took note of amendments to the Criminal Code in 2005, creating three indictable offences, also welcomed by CEDAW, prohibiting trafficking in persons, providing more effective prohibitions against child trafficking. CEDAW welcomed the publication, in 2006, of new guidelines for immigration officers to ensure that victims receive consideration for immigration status. In 2005, the ILO Committee of Experts noted that under the Criminal Code, Canadian citizens or permanent residents who sexually abuse children or use child prostitutes whilst travelling abroad can be prosecuted for sexual offences. CERD noted with satisfaction the establishment of the Canadian Coalition of Municipalities against Racism and Discrimination. A 2006 UNFPA report indicated that Canada has developed broad-based immigration policies tackling cultural and linguistic barriers by promoting social and political integration of immigrants and refugees. In 2007, the ILO Committee of Experts recalled that the Employment Equity Act requires employers to adopt policies and practices ensuring women, visible minorities, persons with disabilities and Aboriginals equal access to employment. IV. KEY NATIONAL PRIORITIES, INITIATIVES AND COMMITMENTS A. Pledges by the State In 2006, the Government committed to actively pursue the implementation of human rights, including regarding racism, indigenous peoples and the protection of children; and international cooperation programmes on human rights, gender equality, child protection, democracy, good governance, and rule of law. It also pledged to re-extend its open invitation to special procedures. B. Specific recommendations for follow-up HR Committee requested, by October 2006, information on follow-up to recommendations on the wide definition of terrorism under the Anti-Terrorism Act; the Canada Evidence Act relating to non-disclosure of information in connection with proceedings; "security certificates" under IRPA; and the situation of women prisoners. In December 2006, Canada provided detailed responses. At its ninetieth session, the Committee decided no further information was required at the time. CERD requested, by March 2008, information on follow-up to recommendations on heightened risks of racial profiling and discrimination in application of the Anti-Terrorism Act; dramatic inequality in living standards of Aboriginal peoples; the "cede, release and surrender" approach; and difficulties in access to justice for Aboriginals. The follow-up reply is overdue. CAT requested, by May 2006, information on follow-up to its recommendations on unrestricted consular access to its nationals detained abroad; extradition or removal subject to receipt of diplomatic assurances; and the frequency of major violent incidents in federal corrections facilities. Canada provided detailed responses. The Special Rapporteur on adequate housing recommended effective action on critical obstacles to the right to adequate housing and a properly-funded poverty reduction strategy respectful of human rights. Apart from recommendations above on over-incarceration of Aboriginals and use of immigration processes against suspected terrorists, the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention recommended that the detention of asylum-seekers remain exceptional, and that the Government amend immigration laws and/or their application policies leading to unjustified detention of migrants and asylum-seekers, and strengthen control over decision-making by immigration officers. The Special Rapporteur on racism recommended the creation of a national commission to combat discrimination and promote multiculturalism. In view of the considerable gap between political will and achievements in combating racism, the commission should begin with an exhaustive assessment of policies and strategies. Law enforcement agencies should undergo urgent review, in line with Canada's multiculturalism. The Government should reinforce safeguards ensuring that anti-terrorist measures do not aggravate racism. In 2008, CEDAW requested, within one year, written information on the implementation of recommendations to raise awareness of the Convention and OP-CEDAW at all levels, and to investigate cases of missing and murdered Aboriginal women. V. CAPACITY-BUILDING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE N/A. Notes 