%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|RUSSIAN FEDERATION|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. ENGLISH Original: HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Fourth session Geneva, 213 February 2009 NATIONAL REPORT SUBMITTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH 15 (A) OF THE ANNEX TO HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL RESOLUTION 5/1* Russian Federation 1. This national report was prepared by the Ministry of Justice on the basis of material provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Health and Social Development, the Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of Information and Mass Communication, the Ministry of Regional Development and the Ministry of Sport, Tourism and Youth. 2. During the preparation of the report, consultations were held with the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Commercial Court, the Office of the ProcuratorGeneral, the Central Electoral Commission, the Commissioner for Human Rights (Ombudsman), the national Social Forum and social forums in the constituent entities of the Russian Federation. Representatives of civil society organizations were also consulted. II. COUNTRY BACKGROUND 3. The Russian Federation is a democratic, federal State based on the rule of law, with a republican form of government. 4. The Russian legal system is founded upon generally recognized principles and standards of international law, international treaties to which the country is a party and the legal enactments of the Russian Federation, its constituent entities and those of local administrations. 5. The Russian Federation is composed of the territories of its constituent entities, which have equal status. III. LEGAL underpinnings of HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS 6. Recognizing the importance of constructive international cooperation in the promotion and protection of human rights, the Russian Federation has become a party to the following cardinal international human rights instruments: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, and many others. 7. In 2008 Russia signed the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. 8. Besides the generally recognized principles and standards of international law, international conventions to which the Russian Federation is a party take precedence over national legislation. 9. Rulings by the European Court of Human Rights are binding on the Russian Federation. 10. There are constant visits to Russia by the United Nations human rights special procedures. The most recent visits were: in 2006, by the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, Mr. Doudou Diène, and in 2008, by the Council's Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, Mr. Leandro Despouy. 11. Russia is a world leader in numbers of reports submitted to the United Nations treaty bodies. 12. A resolution entitled "Inadmissibility of certain practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance" has been adopted thanks to Russian initiatives at the sixtieth, sixtyfirst and sixtysecond sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. 13. Close cooperation has been established with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The High Commissioner has visited Russia twice in recent years. Since 2006, Russia has made an annual voluntary contribution of $2 million to the OHCHR budget. Implementation of a framework agreement on cooperation between OHCHR and the Russian Federation for 2007 and beyond began in late 2007. A. Aims and objectives of State human rights policy 14. The Constitution establishes that the State shall recognize, respect and defend human rights and freedoms, which are acknowledged as being of the utmost importance. 15. The human and civil rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution are not subject to revision. They are inalienable, are the right of every person by birth, and are directly enforceable. 16. Russian law and its application in practice are in keeping with international legal instruments for the observance and protection of human rights and with the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights. B. Protection and promotion of human rights (protection mechanisms) 17. Human rights and freedoms are protected by the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. The President of the Russian Federation is the guarantor of the Constitution and of human and civil rights and freedoms. 18. The office of the Commissioner for Human Rights (Ombudsman) was established to ensure that the State protects human rights and freedoms and that Russian State bodies, local administrations and officials observe and respect them. The Commissioner is independent, and is not subordinate to any State bodies or officials. 19. The Constitution guarantees judicial protection of every person's rights and freedoms. 20. The Russian Federation has abolished restrictions on the judicial defence of citizens' constitutional, social or labour rights and on the right to appeal against unlawful decisions and actions (or omissions) by any State bodies, public organizations or officials that violate citizens' constitutional rights. 21. As a result, there have been major changes in judicial practice. For example, while in 1992 the courts heard some 5,500 cases involving unlawful actions (omissions) or decisions by administrative bodies, there were over 47,000 such cases in 2007. 22. Currently, the courts uphold approximately 60 per cent of complaints relating to officials, and about 70 per cent of complaints relating to administrative bodies. 23. The country has independent bar and notaries' associations. 24. A system of State legal aid offices providing services free of charge has been set up to improve access by socially vulnerable groups to qualified legal assistance. 25. Under international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party, it is the right of every person to apply to international bodies defending human rights and freedoms once all available domestic remedies have been exhausted. 26. The Social Forum was set up in the Russian Federation to provide a setting for exchanges between citizens and civil society organizations on the one hand and federal administrative bodies, the administrative bodies of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation and local administrations on the other. IV. ACHIEVEMENTS IN ENSURING HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS A. Equality of human rights 27. The State guarantees equal human and civil rights and freedoms regardless of a person's sex, race, ethnicity, language, origin, material status, function, place of residence, attitude towards religion, convictions, membership of associations and other circumstances. 28. Any restriction of citizens' rights based upon social, racial, ethnic, linguistic or religious identity is prohibited. 29. Discrimination in the Russian Federation is a criminal offence. The incidence of crimes involving violations of equal human and civil rights and freedoms is quite low; in 2006 and 2007, just three discriminationrelated offences were registered. 30. Measures have been taken to ensure gender equality. B. Relations between ethnic groups 31. It is the multiethnic population of the Russian Federation that wields sovereignty and is the sole source of power. The country's federal structure is founded on the principle that its peoples enjoy equal rights. 32. The Constitution establishes basic rights and safeguards for individuals belonging to ethnic minorities, including the right to define and manifest their ethnic identity, to use their mother tongue and freely to choose the language in which they communicate, raise and educate their children and go about their business. 33. As at September 2008, 717 autonomous ethnic cultural organizations were registered in the country: 18 federal, 211 regional and 488 local. C. Countering extremism and terrorism 34. The Russian Federation is party to a great many international agreements establishing the generally recognized principles and standards of international law that apply in combating terrorism and extremism. These were ratified between 2000 and 2007, and include in particular the Shanghai Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism. 36. Under the Criminal Code, the fact that a crime is motivated by racial, ethnic or religious hatred or enmity is an aggravating circumstance attracting a harsher sentence. 37. The media regularly denounce crimes and related incidents that foment ethnic or religious strife. 38. There has been a substantial improvement in the observance of fundamental human rights in the Chechen Republic, in particular the rights to life and to personal inviolability. 39. State bodies and law enforcement agencies, together with Chechen civil society, are actively working to prevent abductions and unauthorized incursions into citizens' homes. 40. In February 2006, the Chechen parliament named an Ombudsperson for human rights in the Chechen Republic who operates in accordance with the republic's laws. 41. Following a number of rulings by the European Court of Human Rights on complaints lodged against the Russian Federation by citizens who suffered as a result of the settlement of the crisis in the Chechen Republic, the Russian authorities have taken comprehensive steps (both general and individual) to comply with those rulings. D. Right to life 42. Under the Constitution, every person has the right to life. 43. Until repealed, capital punishment may be imposed under federal law on an exceptional basis as a punitive measure for particularly grave, lifethreatening crimes, provided the accused is given the right to a trial by jury. In practice, Russia is continuing to honour a moratorium on the execution of death sentences. For more than 10 years, the courts have not sentenced anyone to death, using long custodial sentences (including life imprisonment) as an alternative. E. Protection against torture, violence and other cruel or degrading treatment 44. The Constitution establishes that no one shall be subjected to torture, violence or other cruel or degrading treatment or punishment. 45. Acts such as torture or illtreatment are offences under the Criminal Code. 46. In particular, under the Militia Act, the police are forbidden to resort to torture, violence or other cruel or degrading treatment. Russian penal enforcement legislation and practice are both based upon strict observance of the safeguards against torture, violence and other cruel or degrading treatment of convicts. 47. There have been instances in which the authorities have unlawfully resorted to violence. In 2007, for example, after procurators carried out over 4,000 checks of police holding facilities, action on violations of the law was taken in some 1,300 cases. In 2007, criminal proceedings were brought against 21 penal enforcement officials for abuse of power, including the illegal use of physical force and special restraining devices. F. Right to defend one's honour, dignity and business reputation Compensation for moral injury 48. The Russian Federation is a social State with a policy of enabling the individual to live a life of dignity and develop unhindered. The dignity of the individual is defended by the State. Nothing can justify encroaching on it. Everyone has the right to inviolability of his or her private life, personal and family secrets, and to defend his or her honour and good name. 49. Intangible assets are protected by the Civil Code and other federal acts. If a citizen suffers a moral injury through acts that violate or infringe upon his or her private nonproperty rights, he or she may claim damages and compensation for moral injury. When information detrimental to a citizen's honour, dignity or business reputation is circulated, the injured party is entitled to demand a retraction over and above the damages and compensation for moral injury. 50. The same rules apply to the protection of legal entities' business reputations. 51. In 2006 and 2007, the courts considered over 10,000 cases involving the protection of honour and dignity, and awarded over 151 million rubles in damages, including for moral injury. G. Right to freedom of movement and to choose one's place of temporary and permanent residence 52. Any person legally in the territory of the Russian Federation has the right freely to move about, to choose his or her temporary or permanent place of residence, and to leave the country and return without hindrance. The country uses a notification system for registering place of residence that ensures observance of the right freely to move about and choose where to live. 53. Federal laws establish the legal status of foreign citizens in the country and the procedure under which they may work. 54. The Code of Administrative Offences has been amended to make the illegal employment of foreigners in the Russian Federation an offence, thus helping to combat human trafficking, slave labour and forced labour. 55. In order to uphold migrants' legitimate rights and interests, the Russian migration authority has set up a public council which has successfully begun operation. Migration bodies in all constituent entities of the Federation have established public advisory councils. H. Freedom of thought, conscience and religion 56. Under the Constitution, no religion may be established as the State or mandatory religion. Religious organizations are separate from the State and equal before the law. Inciting religious strife, hatred or enmity is prohibited; freedom of conscience and of religion is guaranteed, as is equality of human and civil rights and freedoms, regardless of a person's attitude towards religion and religious convictions. No one may be compelled to express or renounce his or her religious beliefs. 57. The concept and form of religious organizations, safeguards for their operation and guarantees that State and religious organizations will not interfere in each others' affairs, are set out in the federal Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations Act. 58. Foreign citizens and stateless people legally residing in the country have the same right to freedom of religion as do citizens, and are liable under federal law if they violate the legislation on freedom of conscience, freedom of religion and religious organizations. 59. There are currently religious organizations of over 66 confessions registered and functioning in the country. The right to operate without hindrance applies not only to religious organizations registered according to the established procedure, but also to religious groups that have not registered with the Government. I. Freedom of thought and expression 60. By law, the right to freedom of thought and expression is guaranteed for all. No one may be compelled to express or to renounce his or her thoughts and convictions. Everyone has the right freely to seek out, receive, transfer, produce and disseminate information by any legal means. The collection, storage, use and dissemination of information on the private life of an individual without his or her consent is prohibited. 61. Citizens are guaranteed the right to address State bodies, local administrations and officials free of charge, including for the purpose of criticizing them. 62. Freedom of the press and media is guaranteed. Censorship is prohibited. 63. The establishment and funding of organizations, institutions, bodies or posts whose tasks or functions would include censorship of the media is prohibited. 64. As constitutional guarantees that the media are free from Government control, there are various pieces of legislation establishing, for instance, that officials are to be held liable if they cover up facts or circumstances that may threaten people's lives or health, and requiring meetings of the chambers of the Federal Assembly and court proceedings to be open to the public. 65. There are over 40,000 press and electronic media outlets in operation in Russia. J. Right of association 66. The right of citizens to form associations is guaranteed in Russia; this is a mainstay of a stable civil society. 67. Federal laws have been adopted to govern the right of association and to set out the main State guarantees of that right; these include the Non-Profit Organizations Act, the Voluntary Organizations Act, the Trade Unions (Rights and Guarantees of Activities) Act, the Political Parties Act, the Charitable Activities and Organizations Act and the Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations Act. 68. Under Russian law, the right of association is subject to restrictions. For example, a person whose actions have been found to be extremist by enforceable court decision may not be a founder, member or participant in a non-profit organization. 69. The right of association is enjoyed not only by Russian citizens. The law establishes that foreign citizens and stateless persons legally present in the country have the same rights as Russian citizens to be founders, members and participants in non-profit organizations, except where otherwise specified by federal laws and the international treaties to which the Federation is a party. Thus, foreign citizens and stateless persons are not allowed to be members of political parties. 70. The legislation makes provision for over 20 types of non-profit organizations, including voluntary organizations, religious organizations and branches of international and foreign non-profit non-governmental organizations. 71. Political parties are a type of voluntary organization. Currently, under the Political Parties Act, they are subject to certain requirements: they must have at least 50,000 members, and regional branches must exist in at least 43 of the constituent entities of the Federation. Fourteen political parties meet those criteria. 72. The Russian Federation has moved from a mixed majority-based and proportional electoral system to a proportional one, under which all 450 deputies in the Federal Assembly's State Duma are elected from federal candidate lists put forward by political parties. 73. There are currently over 217,000 registered non-profit organizations, of which 57 per cent are voluntary organizations and 11 per cent are religious organizations. The number of voluntary organizations being established is constantly rising. There are 248 branches and representative offices of international and foreign non-profit, non-governmental organizations functioning in the country. K. Assemblies, meetings, demonstrations, marches and picket lines 74. Under Russian law, the country's citizens have the right, unarmed, to gather peacefully, to hold assemblies, meetings, demonstrations and marches and to organize picket lines. 75. The right to hold public events is enshrined in the Constitution and is a major form of participation by citizens and their associations in the affairs of the State. 76. Under the federal Assemblies, Meetings, Demonstrations, Marches and Picketing Act, when public events of this kind are organized, all that is required is notification of the event in the interests of maintaining public order: the organizers must send the local authorities notice that the event will be held. L. Freedom of economic activity 77. Everyone in the Russian Federation has the right freely to make use of his or her abilities and belongings in entrepreneurial and other economic activity not prohibited by law. A fast-developing body of laws regulating entrepreneurial activity is helping to support and develop small and medium-sized enterprises. 78. To protect the property rights of citizens and legal entities, the State guarantees the confidentiality of banking, tax and commercial information. 79. The right to private property is guaranteed by law. Everyone has the right to own property and to possess, use and dispose of it both individually and jointly with others. Citizens and their associations are guaranteed the right to own land as private property. 80. No one may be dispossessed of his property by any means other than a court decision. The compulsory purchase of property for Government use may take place only with the prior payment of fair compensation. M. Protection of maternity, paternity, childhood and families 81. Russian law governing relations in the family is based on the principles set out in the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 82. Under the Constitution, the State is responsible for defending motherhood, childhood and the family. A series of laws have been passed to provide a legal basis for countering social distress among children and families. 83. For example, there are federal laws such as the Rights of the Child in the Russian Federation (Fundamental Guarantees) Act, the Social Assistance for Orphans and Children Lacking Parental Support (Additional Guarantees) Act, and the Prevention of Child Neglect and Juvenile Delinquency (Fundamentals) Act. 84. In order to protect maternity, paternity, childhood and families, major changes in civil status are registered by State bodies following procedures established by law. 85. The prevention of orphanhood is one of the main fields of action of the Russian authorities. There has been a decline in the number of orphans and children lacking parental support. In 2004, some 132,500 such children were registered; in 2005, approximately 133,000 were; in 2006, about 127,100; and in 2007, the figure fell to 124,000. 86. In 2007 alone, some 126,000 children were placed in foster care with Russian families (as against 106,000 in 2006). For the first time, the number of international adoptions fell twice as fast as domestic adoptions; the number of domestic adoptions was up by nearly 15 per cent over the 2006 figure. In 2007, the Russian education system included 1,688 institutions for orphans and children lacking parental support. 87. The Government's poverty-reduction strategy is set out in the mid-term (2005-2008) social and economic development programme, and is aimed first and foremost at increasing the welfare and income of the population. The proportion of the population with incomes under the poverty line is gradually declining: there were 42.3 million such people in 2000, 25.2 million in 2005, 21.6 million in 2006, and 19.5 million in 2007. 88. There are social service institutions for families and children in all the constituent entities of the Russian Federation (including psychological and educational assistance centres, emergency psychological assistance hotlines and other such services). N. Right to social security 89. The Government's activities in the field of social security are premised on respect for human and civil rights, equal access to social services and social services oriented towards meeting citizens' individual needs. Under the Constitution, everyone is guaranteed social security appropriate to their age and in the event of illness, disability or loss of breadwinner, for the upbringing of children, and in other circumstances as established by law. 90. The Russian Federation is duly honouring its obligations in respect of citizens' pension payments. There are currently over 36 million people receiving employment pensions. Citizens who have not earned the right to an employment pension receive social pensions. Steps are being taken to increase pension levels: while in 1999 a pension covered only 60 per cent of the pensioner's minimum subsistence requirements, it now covers 117 per cent. 91. State and local authorities encourage housing construction and are establishing conditions in which the right to housing can be exercised. One of the most urgent tasks facing the Government is the implementation of a national priority project for the provision of accessible housing. O. Health care 92. Under the Constitution every person has the right to health care and medical assistance. Medical care is provided free of charge at State and municipal health institutions, being financed through the corresponding budget, insurance premiums and other forms of revenue. 93. The implementation of a national priority project in the field of health is a key factor in State policy. In 2007 alone, funding for immunization came to 6.1 billion rubles. The decline in the infant mortality rate has accelerated; between 2006 and 2007 it fell by 7.8 per cent. P. Right to education 94. Everyone in the Russian Federation is guaranteed the right to education. 95. Access free of charge to preschool, basic general and secondary vocational education at State and municipal educational institutions is guaranteed. Basic general education is compulsory. 96. Everyone has the right to compete for a free higher education at State or municipal educational institutions. 97. One of the most important aspects of State policy in the field of education is ensuring that children with disabilities can exercise their right to education. Russia has institutionalized special (remedial) schools. There were 1,884 such schools in operation in the academic year 2007/08. Q. Right to be heard in court 98. The exercise of judicial authority and administration of justice in the Russian Federation are strictly governed by the Constitution and other laws. 99. The presumption of innocence is guaranteed in the Russian Federation. No one may be tried more than once for the same crime. 100. Defendants have the right to trial by jury in the circumstances provided for by federal law. Anyone convicted of a crime has the right to appeal the sentence to a higher court, and also the right to request a pardon or a reduced sentence. 101. The right to qualified legal aid is guaranteed in the Russian Federation. In the circumstances stipulated by law, legal aid is provided free of charge. 102. The President and the Government are following the reform and development of the Russian justice system very closely. The administration of justice is being made transparent and adversarial. 103. The main achievement of the judicial reform has been the establishment of the adversarial principle in the Russian criminal justice system. 104. The Constitutional Court plays a special role in the defence of human rights in the justice system, as it issues rulings on whether Russian laws are in keeping with the Constitution and the human and civil rights and freedoms that it guarantees. 105. Recently, more humane forms of sentencing have become more prevalent. 106. The total number of convicts receiving life sentences was 69 in 2007. Some 303,000 people or 33 per cent of all those convicted (34.5 per cent in 2006) received sentences involving deprivation of liberty for a specified term. 107. Nearly 17,000 convicts (approximately 7 per cent) received sentences that were under the lower limit. 108. In 2007, the country's courts considered over 194,000 applications for parole, nearly 70 per cent of which were granted. Of the 11,500 applications for lighter sentences, the courts approved 70 per cent. 109. In 2007, sentences were reduced on appeal to higher courts for over 36,000 convicts. R. Enforcement of court rulings 110. The federal Enforcement of Judicial Decisions Act, adopted in 2007, laid the foundations of a system for the compulsory enforcement of court decisions and decisions by other authorized bodies and officials in a manner adapted to modern economic circumstances and consistent with international standards. 111. More effective enforcement has been confirmed by positive indicators of implementation. The percentage of rulings actually enforced has risen from 45 per cent in 2001-2003, to 63.1 per cent in 2007. In the first half of 2008, it stood at 74.3 per cent. 112. Modern techniques have been introduced, on an experimental basis, for the sale by electronic auction of confiscated property. S. Observance of the rights and legal interests of persons in police custody and correctional institutions 113. The basis for Russian penal enforcement legislation and its application in practice includes the Constitution, generally recognized principles and standards of international law and the international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party. 114. Russian penal enforcement legislation is on the whole in keeping with the requirements set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, the European Prison Rules and other international instruments; in many instances, it is more progressive. For example, it makes allowance for lengthy prison visits by family members. 115. To ensure objectiveness and transparency in the observance of human rights, the Russian Federation has set up a multilevel system for monitoring the activities of institutions and bodies in the criminal justice system, including by international bodies. 116. In 2007, federal budget spending on the development of the penal correction system amounted to 2.1 billion rubles; in 2008, over 2.2 billion rubles was allocated for this purpose. 117. Foreign nationals sentenced to deprivation of liberty have the right to remain in contact with their countries' diplomatic representations and consular institutions in the Russian Federation, and 118. Convicts who are pregnant, breastfeeding, underage, ill or in disability groups I or II are provided with a higher standard of accommodation. The penal correction system has 12 facilities for mothers with children in which 776 children are living. V. PROBLEMS IN ENSURING HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS AND MEANS OF SOLVING THEM A. Death penalty 119. The question of the ratification of Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Freedoms, which stipulates that member States of the Council of Europe shall abolish the death penalty, has not been resolved. 120. Under Russian law, until 1 January 2010 (when the jury system will be established in the Chechen Republic), the courts do not have the right to issue death sentences. Russia will have to deal with the question of the ratification of Protocol No. 6 by that time. B. The nation's health 121. The Russian Federation's demographic policy is aimed at increasing life expectancy, reducing mortality, increasing the birth rate, regulating domestic and foreign migration, maintaining and improving public health, and on that basis, improving the demographic situation in the country. 122. Since 1992 the population has been declining steadily, as the death rate has exceeded the birth rate. For the past 15 years, over 2 million people have died annually, while there have been between 1.2 million and 1.5 million births every year. The main reason for the low life expectancy in the country is the high death rate among citizens of working age. Of the deceased, nearly a third are of working age, and some 80 per cent of them are men. Cardiovascular disease accounts for 55 per cent of all deaths. 123. Since 2000, the birth rate has been rising. C. Pensions 124. Pension levels in Russia are regularly increased and indexed. At the same time, questions remain as to whether the Russian pension system meets the standards set by the International Labour Organization, in particular in respect of the level of the average pension, which is supposed to be at least 40 per cent of prior wages. In accordance with the priority tasks facing the Government, there are plans to index pensions. D. Military service 125. Enjoyment of rights by members of the military still encounters serious problems; these include bullying, abuse of power and other issues. The provision of allowances and housing for servicemen remains problematic. There has, however, been a downward trend in crimes related to breaches of the rules of conduct among servicemen of the same rank: 3,786 such crimes were registered in 2005, while in 2006 there were 3,598, and in 2007, 2,401. E. Extremism 126. Extremist crime in Russia is on the rise. In 2004, 130 extremist acts were carried out; in 2005, 152 were registered, while the figure rose in 2006 to 263 and in 2007 to 356. In the first half of 2008 alone, 250 were registered. VI. EXPECTED OUTCOMES FOR ENSURING HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS 127. The Russian Federation intends to continue to refine its domestic legislation in the field of human rights and freedoms, to reform the judiciary, to improve the situation of servicemen and people deprived of their liberty and to devise and test measures for fighting corruption. Conclusion 128. Russia will maintain its policy of broadening and strengthening international cooperation in the promotion and protection of human rights, establishing equal, non-confrontational dialogue in the interests of all regional groups of States in the United Nations Human Rights Council, and working constructively with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in part by offering financial support for its activities. 