%%%PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|MEDIUM-TERM PLANNING|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|

Committee of Experts on Public Administration Seventh session New York, 14-18 April 2008 * E/C.16/2008/1. Item 5 of the provisional agenda* Review of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance Review of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance Note by the Secretariat Summary The present note highlights the major activities undertaken by the Secretariat in 2007 under the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance for review by the Committee of Experts on Public Administration. It also presents the main activities to be implemented under the Programme during the current biennium 2008-2009. The Committee is requested to provide feedback to the Secretariat on these activities, which are intended to assist Member States in meeting their current governance and public administration challenges in a globalized world, and on emerging issues. The Programme has been assisting Member States in addressing their governance and administrative challenges since 1948 and is commemorating its sixtieth anniversary throughout 2008. This note also presents the proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 for review and approval by the Committee. The Committee's comments together with the proposed framework will be submitted to the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-eighth session in June-July 2008 and transmitted, through, the General Assembly at its sixty-third session when the Assembly considers the proposed strategic framework for the Secretariat as a whole. In the preparation of this framework for the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, the Secretariat took into consideration its strengths and accomplishments noted as well as recommendations contained in recent evaluation reports of the Programme and its various components. Paragraphs Page Introduction Update on major activities Normative Coordination Analytical Exchange of best practices Technical cooperation Approved activities for 2008-2009 Proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 Conclusion Recommendations 1. The present note highlights the major activities undertaken by the Secretariat in 2007 under the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance for review by the Committee of Experts on Public Administration. It also presents the main activities to be implemented under the Programme during the current biennium 2008-2009. The Committee is requested to provide feedback to the Secretariat on these activities, which are intended to assist Member States in meeting their current governance and public administration challenges in a globalized world, and on emerging issues. The Programme has been assisting Member States in addressing their governance and administrative challenges since 1948 and is commemorating its sixtieth anniversary in 2008. 2. This note also presents the proposed strategic framework for the period 20102011 for review and approval by the Committee. In the preparation of this framework for the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, the Secretariat took into consideration its strengths and accomplishments noted as well as recommendations contained in recent evaluation reports on the Programme and its various components. 3. Given that 2008 commemorates the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, it may be useful to pause and reflect upon the mission and history of the Division for Public Administration and Development Management within the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. The Division is currently the administrative unit within the Secretariat mandated to implement the aforementioned Programme. The Division's mission is to assist Member States in ensuring that their governance systems, administrative and financial institutions, human resources and policy development processes function in an effective and participatory manner by fostering dialogue, promoting and sharing information and knowledge, and providing technical and advisory services. This mission is carried out to assist Member States in developing governance and public administration capacities for implementing the United Nations development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals. 4. The genesis of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance can be traced back to the third session of the General Assembly in 1948. In its resolution 246 (III) of 4 December 1948, the Assembly, having recognized the need for international facilities that would provide adequate administrative training for an increasing number of candidates of proved ability recruited on a wide geographical basis, but mainly from the countries in greatest need of access to the principles, procedures and methods of modern administration, resolved that an International Centre for Training in Public Administration should be established under the direction of the United Nations. 5. The importance to development of public administration and the support provided by the United Nations system to Member States was reiterated by the General Assembly during its fiftieth session in 1996. In its resolution 50/225 of 19 April 1996, the Assembly acknowledged that the role of United Nations activities and programmes in public administration and development was to assist Governments, at their request, in improving their responsiveness in meeting the basic needs of all, as well as in achieving sustainable development in all countries, and that the United Nations should focus its activities in the areas recommended by the Group of Experts on Public Administration and Finance in its report on its twelfth meeting, held in New York from 31 July to 11 August 1995 (A/50/525-E/1995/122, annex). The Group of Experts on Public Administration and Finance, which was the predecessor of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration, had been established in 1967 and held 15 sessions, ending in 2000. 6. Throughout 2008, the Secretariat will be commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the Programme. In its resolution 2007/38 of 4 October 2007, the Economic and Social Council encouraged Member States to participate in and support the marking of the sixtieth year of the work of the United Nations in the area of public administration and development. II. Update on major activities 7. The activities of the United Nations Secretariat in the area of public administration and finance are implemented, under subprogramme 8, Public administration and development management, of section 9, Economic and social affairs, of the programme budget, by the Division for Public Administration and Development Management. The following is a summary of the major activities implemented in 2007. A. Normative 8. The sixth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration was held from 10 to 13 April 2007. At the sixth session, the Committee dealt with the following substantive items: (a) participatory governance and citizens' engagement in policy development, service delivery and budgeting; (b) the compendium of basic United Nations terminology in governance and public administration; (c) the review of the activities of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance; and (d) the public administration perspective on the theme of the annual ministerial review held during the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council: Strengthening efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger, including through the global partnership for development. Based on its discussions, the Committee recommended to the Council the adoption of the draft resolution entitled "Report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its sixth session and dates, venue and provisional agenda for the seventh session of the Committee". The Committee also recommended that a policy brief on participatory governance and citizens' engagement in policy development, service delivery and budgeting, outlining the recommendations on this main substantive theme, be prepared by the Secretariat in consultation with the lead speakers and approved by the Committee Bureau. The policy brief would be a follow-up to the sixth and future sessions, for consideration by Member States. 9. The Economic and Social Council, in October 2007, reviewed the report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its sixth session and adopted the draft resolution contained in the report, as orally amended. In resolution 2007/38, the Council, inter alia, expressed concern at the continuous marginalization of the poor and the disadvantaged in an era of a globalized world, which had led to decreasing trust in government by citizens; encouraged Member States to reaffirm and deepen their use of participatory governance and citizen engagement in policy development service delivery, and budgeting and public accountability with enabling mechanisms, including information and communications technology (ICT) tools and other measures; and requested the Secretariat to ensure that the normative, analytical and technical cooperation elements of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance continued to address participatory governance and to identify best practices. 10. In the same resolution, the Economic and Social Council noted the work undertaken by the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on defining basic United Nations terminology in governance and public administration and the input by the Committee on the theme of the annual ministerial review, held during the 2007 high-level segment of the Council, and the proposals for themes for the review for 2008; and requested the Secretariat to continue to expand the reach of the United Nations Public Service Awards and the United Nations Public Service Day to foster and disseminate excellence in public governance and to expand the outreach of the portal of the United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance (UNPAN) at the regional and subregional levels as a one-stop shop in promoting knowledge management and networking among public sector leaders around the world. 11. Also in resolution 2007/38, the Economic and Social Council requested the Secretariat to continue its useful role as the lead agency in facilitating the implementation of the action lines on e-governance-related issues contained in the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society; congratulated the Secretariat for the high quality of the programme of the seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government, held in Vienna from 26 to 29 June 2007; encouraged Member States to participate in and support the marking of the sixtieth year of the work of the United Nations in the area of public administration and development; and approved the convening of the seventh session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration from 14 to 18 April 2008 and the proposed agenda for the session. 12. During the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council, held in July 2007, the Chair of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration represented the Committee at a meeting of the Bureau of the Council with the heads of the functional commissions. The Chair also participated in the launch of the Development Cooperation Forum. 13. On 30 October 2007, the General Assembly considered the report of the Secretary-General on public administration and development (A/62/283). In response to the request of the Assembly in its resolution 60/34 of 30 November 2005 and as a follow-up to the reports previously submitted by the Secretary-General in 2002, 2003, 2004 and 2006 (A/57/262-E/2002/82, A/58/152, A/59/346 and A/60/114, respectively), the report had provided an update on the implementation of Assembly resolution 60/34. 14. The report highlighted the activities of the United Nations system in assisting Member States in governance and public administration in respect of achieving the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development commitments. The report, which was based on the analysis of the substantive work of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration and recent activities carried out by the Division for Public Administration and Development Management, incorporated the contributions of those United Nations organizations in the Governance and institution-building cluster of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs that had responded to a request for inputs. The report also discussed the outcome of the seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government. 15. In pursuance of this report, the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China are preparing a draft resolution on public administration and development, to be introduced during the sixty-second session of the General Assembly. 16. As mentioned above, throughout 2008 the Secretariat will be commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance. A number of activities are envisaged for the seventh session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration in April, the United Nations Public Service Day in June and the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council in July. More details thereon will be shared with the experts at the seventh session. B. Coordination 17. In addition to normative work, the Division undertakes important coordination activities in the area of governance and public administration within and outside of the United Nations system. They include coordinating: :: The Governance and Institution-building cluster of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs :: The system-wide implementation of World Summit on the Information Society action lines C1, C7eGov and C11, with the participation of the multistakeholders :: The organization of the Global and Regional Forums on Reinventing Government, through bringing together periodically the members of the Institutional Partners Group :: The widest network of organizations in the area of governance and public administration, the United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance (UNPAN), which is utilized for the exchange of knowledge, documentation and training C. Analytical 18. The World Public Sector Report is produced biennially as a research and analytical tool to provide policymakers and civil society with relevant research findings and information on issues related to the public sector. In its resolution 59/55 of 2 December 2004, the General Assembly recognized the significant analytical and operational contributions of the Report to public administration. The past editions include World Public Sector Report, 2001: Globalization and the State; World Public Sector Report, 2003: E-Government at the Crossroads; and World Public Sector Report, 2005: Unlocking the Human Potential for Public Sector Performance. 19. The 2007 World Public Sector Report, entitled People Matter: Civic Engagement in Public Governance, explains the concept of participation, distinguishing in the process between the concepts of governance and participatory governance on the one hand, and participatory governance and formal democracy on the other. It elaborates the context of and the rationale for participation, and provides an overview of emerging practices, the lessons learned and the challenges of participation and highlights capacity-building issues of participation. The 2007 Report also incorporates the issues raised and the lessons distilled during the discussion on participatory governance held at the sixth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration, which included the elaboration of practices of participatory governance in policy development, service delivery and budgeting and public accountability. The Committee concluded that (a) civic engagement in public administration was being recognized as valuable, especially in the implementation of accountable and equitable public policies and programmes, (b) a clear understanding of institutional, methodological and capacity-building issues of participatory governance was key to the success of such practices and (c) the systematic gathering of information on participatory governance was important for South-South cooperation. The Division for Public Administration and Development Management will prepare the next World Public Sector Report during 2008-2009 on the tentative theme of "Reconstructing governance and public administration in post-conflict countries: lessons learned". 20. The United Nations Global e-Government Readiness Survey ranks 192 countries according to their e-government readiness and the extent of e-participation worldwide. The reports of the Surveys, which provide time-series data and analysis of trends in e-government readiness across regions and at the country level, have become the benchmark for measuring e-government readiness. 21. The United Nations e-Government Survey, 2008: From e-Government to Connected Governance postulates that Governments are increasingly looking towards the e-government-as-a-whole concept which focuses on the provision of services at the front end supported by integration, consolidation and innovation in back-end processes and systems to achieve maximum cost savings and improved service delivery. The distinguishing characteristic of the whole-of-government approach is the sharing by government agencies and organizations of objectives across organizational boundaries, as opposed to working within a sole organization. 22. Other major 2007 publications were: :: United Nations E-Government Readiness Knowledge Base :: Innovations from Around the World: Success Stories from the Winners of the United Nations Public Service Awards -- Fifth Anniversary (2003-2007) :: Guide for the Transfer and Adaptation of Innovations in Governance: Practical Tools and Steps :: Report of the Fifth United Nations Public Service Day and Awards Ceremony :: Building Capacities for Public Service in Post-Conflict Countries :: Historical Review of the United Nations Public Administration Programme :: United Nations Public Administration Profiles :: Civic Engagement for Building Trust in Government :: Participatory Governance and the Millennium Development Goals :: Auditing for Social Change: A Strategy for Citizen Engagement in Public Sector Accountability :: Public Enterprise and its Management: New Opportunities and Unresolved Challenges :: Opportunities and Challenges of Civic Engagement in Socio-Economic Policies in the Arab Region :: Report on the Networking and Capacity-building for Poverty Alleviation through Community-based Development in the Areas Affected by Environmental Degradation in the Central Asian and Southeast Asian Regions :: Toolkit on Civic Engagement in Public Policies :: Online Training Course on Results-based Monitoring and Evaluation 23. Ad hoc expert group meetings are held on new developments or emerging trends in governance and public administration that are of interest to Member States. They provide forums where expert knowledge and experience can be mobilized to identify critical issues and begin forging consensus on policy options. The following expert group meetings were held in 2007. 24. The meeting on "Building Trust through Civic Engagement" discussed the challenges of trust and stressed the importance of civic engagement and public accountability as important components of building trust. A publication of the same title that emanated from the Meeting discusses the conceptual issues of trust and how these relate to public institutions and processes and presents several case studies that highlight the imperatives of trust-building through civic engagement. 25. The meeting on "Public Service Capacity-building for Post-conflict Reconstruction and Development" focused on the challenges of reforming and reconstructing public administration and governance systems in the aftermath of conflict, focusing on the public service, judiciary, the security sector, leadership and civil society engagement. 26. The meeting on "Managing Knowledge to Build Trust in Government" examined the critical role of effective knowledge management as a means of improving trust in government, and concluded with a set of recommendations and policy options on the strategies that improve the storage, exchange and dissemination of information and knowledge within the public sector. The discussion and deliberation demonstrated how different institutional and regulatory frameworks, leadership and managerial qualities, effective sharing of information, technical cooperation and specialized training at the local, national and international levels can promote confidence and good governance. D. Exchange of best practices 27. The United Nations Public Service Awards programme was established by the Economic and Social Council in 2000 to promote better delivery of services by Governments. This Award confers the most prestigious international recognition of excellence in public service. It rewards the creative achievements and contributions of public service institutions with respect to promoting a more effective and responsive public administration in countries worldwide (further information available from http://www.unpan.org/dpepa_psaward.asp). 28. In June 2007, during a high-level plenary session of the seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government, the United Nations hosted the fifth Public Service Awards ceremony and commemorated the United Nations Public Service Day in Vienna. Awards were given in the following three categories: (a) improving transparency, accountability and responsiveness in the public service; (b) improving the delivery of services; and (c) fostering participation in policymaking decisions through innovative mechanisms. For the 2007 competition, 195 nominations were received from 46 countries. The number of applications, as well as their geographical distribution, had significantly increased compared with the prior year (146 applications). Six new products centred around the Public Service Awards have also been developed to provide information about the Awards programme in a more comprehensive way and to give more prominence to its activities and impact on public sector performance around the world: (a) a new UNPAN web address featuring all necessary information related to the Awards in the six United Nations official languages; (b) a new online database designed to facilitate online applications; (c) users' guidelines for the online Awards database; (d) the United Nations Public Service Awards Newsletter; (e) a follow-up questionnaire devised to gather past winners' experiences; and (f) a new brochure on the Awards. 29. The 2008 Awards will be presented at United Nations Headquarters in New York on United Nations Public Service Day, 23 June. During the Day, the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance will also be celebrated. The Awards will be given in three categories: accountability and transparency, public service delivery, and innovative mechanisms of participation in public administration. 30. The United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance (UNPAN) (www.unpan.org) is an online network of more than 35 relevant international and regional institutions and more than 10 United Nations-related agencies. Set up in 2000, UNPAN serves as a global network and portal for public administration. Its main objective is to build capacity; bridge the digital divide; promote South-South cooperation; and access, process and disseminate relevant information via up-to-date information and communication technologies (ICT) for the promotion of better public administration. The portal has registered one of the highest numbers of visitors among the Department of Economic and Social Affairs websites; however, it needs to be promoted consistently in order to reach a critical mass of more public sector institutions around the world. 31. The Division has been continuously developing the UNPAN network and its portal to fulfil the requests of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly (see Assembly resolution 59/55; Council resolution 2005/55; Assembly resolution 60/34; and Council resolution 2006/47) and UNPAN clients, in particular those from developing countries. For instance, the UNPAN Online Training Centre is a learning content management system, delivering online capacity-building courses on various topics in public administration. Five online courses on e-government have been delivered to more than 1,475 participants from around the world since September 2005. Of these participants, 86 per cent are from developing countries. More than 450 certificates have been issued. The courses have been well received and 90 per cent of the trainees found it very relevant to their daily tasks. With the help of its partners, UNPAN is developing more courses on decentralized governance, knowledge management, and results-based budgeting in the public sector. 32. The United Nations hosted the seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government in partnership with the Government of Austria from 26 to 29 June 2007. The Forum, which was held at the United Nations Office at Vienna, had as its theme "Building trust in government". As the largest and most inclusive international event thereon, over 3,700 participants attended from 177 countries to promote the exchange of strategies designed to improve governance and public administration. The Forum received Heads of State and Government, ministers, senior officials, parliamentarians, civil society representatives, and members of the private sector. 33. The purpose of the seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government was to support Member States in their efforts to achieve goals in the United Nations development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals, by providing a platform for the exchange of good practices that would improve governance and help Governments earn citizen confidence. The Forum enabled participants to exchange experiences, examine tools and methodologies designed to strengthen public sector capacities; build the foundation for a government reinvention network among Governments, civil society and the private sector; and identify areas for improved South-South and North-South cooperation and action. The main policy findings and areas of consensus that emerged from discussions at the Forum are reflected in the Vienna Declaration on Building Trust in Government, an online policy document which contains a series of recommendations for concrete follow-up action at the local, national, and international levels. In the Declaration, participants conveyed their appreciation to the Secretary-General for the successful preparation of the Forum by the United Nations Secretariat. The Secretariat will support the eighth Global Forum, scheduled to be held in 2009. Various Member States have indicated an interest in hosting the event as well as various regional forums. 34. The Programme for Innovation in Public Administration in the EuroMediterranean Region (InnovMed) seeks to promote good governance and a culture of innovation within the public sector through the dissemination and adaptation of pioneering initiatives in public administration. The Programme constitutes a mechanism at the service of the Governments in the region that may be seeking fresh, effective solutions to concrete problems and challenges. Set up in mid-2003, the Programme covers more than a dozen countries in the Middle East, Northern Africa and the western Balkans, as well as partner countries from Southern Europe. 35. Other major meetings held in 2007 were: :: Second World Summit on the Information Society Implementation Consultation Meeting on Action Lines: C1, C7e-Gov and C11 -- International and Regional Cooperation :: Seventh Interregional Consultative Meeting of UNPAN :: International Seminar on Citizen Participation in Public Management :: International Round Table on the Economic and Social Council for Bolivia :: Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention and Transformation: A Review and Sharing of Experiences :: Panel on Accountability from the Bottom :: Panel on Emerging Parameters of Global Governance and Reform of Public Administration at the twenty-seventh Congress of the International Institute of Administrative Sciences :: Panel on Public Accountability: A Space for Supreme Audit Institution and Civil Society Participation, at the nineteenth Congress of the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions :: Dialogue on Civil Society Engagement in Public Accountability :: World Urban Forum III side event on "Fighting urban poverty: which participatory approaches?" :: Arab Regional Workshop on "Opportunities and Challenges of Civic Engagement in Socio-Economic Policies" :: Special meeting of the Network of Innovators in Governance in the Mediterranean Region :: The first meeting of the Steering Committee of the Network of Innovators in Governance in the Mediterranean Region :: Meetings of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat and the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration on Standards of Excellence in Public Administration Education and Training for Effective Public Service :: Meeting on Strengthening Parliamentary Information Systems in Africa :: Capacity-building for the Peaceful Management of Conflict in Central American and Caribbean States :: International Training Courses on the Implementation of the Ibero-American Charter for Public Service :: International Seminar on the Implementation of the Ibero-American Charter for the Public Service: Selected Country Experiences :: Programme on Leadership, Ethics, Accountability and Professionalism in the Public Sector (LEAP) Capacity-building for Public Officials Regional Seminar in Central Asia E. Technical cooperation 36. The Division carries out, through its three substantive Branches, technical cooperation activities in the form of advisory services and training activities on subjects falling within the mandate of the Division. The overall thrust of the Division's technical cooperation programme is to assist, at the request of Member States, in the capacity-building of Government officials and institutions and, increasingly, of civil society organizations for the reform and modernization of public administration. It should be noted that the findings and recommendations of advisory missions and the outcomes of training activities, including their publications, feed into the normative and advocacy work of the Division as well as provide support to the intergovernmental dialogue of the Economic and Social Council and the Committee. 37. Though demand-driven, the Division's technical cooperation activities conform to the priority themes set out by the Council and by the Committee. In this regard, for 2007, over 100 technical cooperation projects were implemented in the following areas: (a) improvement of transparency and accountability, (b) decentralized governance, (c) participatory and equitable governance, (d) post-conflict governance, (e) ICT application to governance (e-governance) and (f) governance for poverty alleviation (pro-poor governance). 38. The budget of technical cooperation projects comes from the United Nations Regular Programme for Technical Cooperation, the United Nations Development Account, extrabudgetary sources (United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and UNDP-administered funds) and numerous funds in trust, with contributions from donor countries and other agencies. 39. In addition to training courses available online, a number of training workshops for the participants from the developing countries were organized in 2007. They included: :: International Workshop on e-Access for All :: UNPAN e-Information management training for new members :: Fifth UNPAN e-Knowledge Management Training Workshop :: Training workshop/consultation on capacity-building for the management and mediation of conflict :: Regional Workshop on the "Poverty-environment nexus: building institutional capacity", Hue City, Viet Nam 40. Currently, the Division backstops three regional centres as part of its technical cooperation activities. First, there is the Department of Economic and Social Affairs Human Resources for International Cooperation project office which was established in 2001 in Rome, building on a previous project office that had supported human resources development projects since 1992. It acts as a liaison between the Department and the Government of Italy, runs the junior professional officers, fellowships and United Nations volunteer internship programmes. The Rome Office is also home to the Global Centre for Information and Communication Technologies in Parliament, which began in 2006, in partnership with the InterParliamentary Union. This project aims to support a more efficient and transparent functioning of parliaments through the application of ICT to their deliberative procedures. 41. Second, there is the United Nations Centre for Regional Development (UNCRD), which was established in 1971, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1582 (L) of 21 May 1971. Supported by the Government of Japan, the Centre conducts a research and training programme on regional development. It is composed of four offices: one at Nagoya (headquarters, research and training), one at Hyogo (disaster management), one at Nairobi (research and training in Africa) and one at Santa Fé de Bogotá (research and training in Latin America). 42. Third, there is the United Nations Project Office on Governance (UNPOG), based in Seoul, which was established in June 2006 to act as an international and regional focal point for research, training and advocacy in government reinvention. The Government of the Republic of Korea supports the Project Office. 43. Major ongoing technical cooperation projects are: :: Strengthening Parliaments' Information Systems in Africa: A Regional Capacity-building Initiative :: Training programme on Peacebuilding and Good Governance for African Civilian Personnel in Ghana :: Africa Governance Inventory (AGI) Initiative :: Caribbean Regional Technical and Advisory Support Facility (TASF) :: e-Government for Enhanced Service Delivery: Lesotho :: e-Human Resources Management Project in the Public Administration of Morocco :: Enhancing the Official Website of the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines :: Integrating Saint Lucia Information Systems :: Computerization of the motor vehicles registry and driving licences issuing procedures: Belize :: Web enabling of the Financial Management system (FINMAN) for the Government of Jamaica III. Approved activities for 2008-2009 44. During the biennium 2008-2009, the following final outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (regular budget): (i) General Assembly: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: General Assembly (8); panels as required by the Assembly on emerging issues in the public sector (2); b. Parliamentary documentation: report mandated by resolutions of the sixty-second and sixty-third sessions of the General Assembly on public administration and development (through the Economic and Social Council) (2); (ii) Economic and Social Council: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: Economic and Social Council (12); panels as required by the Council on basic data and trends in the public sector (2); b. Parliamentary documentation: report on the seventh session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (1); report on the eighth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (1); (iii) Committee of Experts on Public Administration: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: seventh session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (also provision of technical servicing) (14); eighth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (also provision of technical servicing) (14); b. Parliamentary documentation: analytical/working papers on selected issues (8); report on emerging trends in the public sector (2); report on the programme in public administration and development management (2); (iv) Ad hoc expert groups: six expert group meetings on: connecting Government for better public service delivery; assessing information and communications technology-based knowledge management in Government; government/civil society organizations partnership-building in post-conflict situations; trust-building through improved public accountability mechanisms; restructuring post-conflict governance and public administration; leadership capacity-building in the public sector for development; (b) Other substantive activities (regular budget): (i) Recurrent publications: compendium of best practices and innovation in public administration (2); compendium of electronic/mobile-Government innovative practices and lessons learned (2); country profiles of public administration (1); United Nations global electronic/mobile-Government readiness survey for 2008-2009: trends and impact of information and communications technology in development (1); United Nations Public Service Award report (2); World Public Sector Report (1); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: assessing information and communications technology-based knowledge management in Government (1); connecting Government for better public service delivery (1); government/civil society organizations partnership-building in post-conflict situations (1); leadership capacity-building in the public sector for development (1); restructuring post-conflict governance and public administration (1); trust-building through improved public accountability mechanisms (1); (iii) Special events: support for the observance of the United Nations Public Service Day (2); public service awards competition (2); five regional ministerial meetings on emerging trends in the public sector (in cooperation with the regional commissions (5)); (iv) Technical material: Development Administration Newsletter (4); maintenance and improvement of the website on the administration and cost of elections (1); maintenance and update of the database of the online interactive inventory of information and communications technology solutions for electronic/mobile-Government development (1); maintenance and update of the database on African governance online inventory (1); maintenance and update of the database on the Caribbean electronic/mobile-Government knowledge bank (1); maintenance and update of the database on United Nations electronic/mobile-Government knowledge base (1); maintenance and update of the database on conflict management organizations, programmes and practitioners (1); maintenance and update of the database on innovation in public administration in the EuroMediterranean region (1); maintenance and update of the United Nations global Online Network in Public Administration and Finance (UNPAN) (1); working/discussion papers on specialized issues (8); (v) Audio-visual resources: training materials on CD-ROM (4); (vi) Substantive servicing of inter-agency meetings: substantive support to the Global Forum on Reinventing Government (1); support to regional technical meetings organized by partner institutions (10); (c) Technical cooperation (regular budget/extrabudgetary): (i) Advisory services: approximately 16 training seminars, workshops and policy dialogues at the request of developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the areas of public policy and public economics, public administration finance and socioeconomic governance, with particular emphasis on initiatives fostering South-South cooperation and innovation in public administration; approximately 60 needs-assessment and diagnostic missions related to the substantive expertise of the subprogramme in the areas of public administration and finance and socioeconomic governance; approximately 8 guidelines, manuals and training materials for application to the public sector resulting from requests for training assistance from developing countries and countries with economies in transition; (ii) Field projects: approximately 80 field projects (some in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other operational entities) aimed at strengthening the institutional and management capacity of interested developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the areas of public administration and finance and of socio-economic governance. IV. Proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 45. The Committee has before it, for its consideration, the proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 for subprogramme 8, Public administration and development management, of programme 7, Economic and social affairs, of the programme budget. The Committee is invited to review the proposed strategic framework and to provide its comments thereon. The proposed biennial programme plan, modified as appropriate, will be submitted to the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-eighth session. Its recommendations thereon will be transmitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session when it considers the proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011. 46. The proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011 for subprogramme 8, Public administration and development management, of programme 7, Economic and social affairs, is as follows: Objective of the Organization: To promote effective, efficient, accountable, participatory and transparent public administration for the attainment of internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration and in the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences. Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat Indicators of achievement (a) Enhanced dialogue on improved understanding of the issues related to public administration, participatory governance, capacity-building and promotion of professionalism and ethics, and knowledge management for development (a) Increased number of references, recommendations and decisions aimed at facilitating intergovernmental dialogue on the cross-cutting issues in the area of public administration found in reports, declarations and resolutions (b) Enhanced knowledge and improved exchange of innovations and good practices in the area of public administration, participatory governance and knowledge management for development (b) Increased number of visits to and downloads from the United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance (c) Increased capacity of national Governments to strengthen participatory governance, professionalism and accountability in the public sector for improved performance, including through the use of information and communications technology (c) The number of methodological and technical recommendations implemented by national Governments as a result of advisory services and technical cooperation projects 47. The Division for Public Administration and Development Management is responsible for the subprogramme. The strategy is based on an integrated approach comprising the provision of substantive support to the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Committee of Experts on Public Administration, analytical work, capacity development as well as the dissemination of best practices, experiences in information-sharing and network-building. It is aimed at: :: Promoting greater awareness, common approaches, understanding and innovative policy options among Member States in the key substantive areas of public management such as: post-conflict reconstruction of public administration; engaged governance; capacity-building and promotion of professionalism and ethics in the public sector; use of information and communications technology in government and resource management :: Strengthening partnerships and cooperation with other international and regional as well as professional organizations within and outside the United Nations system to increase synergies among the related activities :: Devoting special attention to countries emerging from conflict or crisis V. Conclusion 48. Under the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, the Secretariat undertakes an integrated approach encompassing normative and substantive work, information-sharing and networking and technical cooperation. It uses the modalities of advocacy, developing analytical and policy tools, building a common understanding of governance and public administration issues, supporting institution-building, assisting in developing human resources, building technological adequacy and connectivity, information-sharing and exchange of experiences, and coordinating development assistance in public administration. The Secretariat focuses on areas of ongoing work, especially in innovation in public administration, post-conflict reconstruction of public administration systems, participatory governance and information and communications technology, for improving the efficiency, quality and transparency of governance. It must also address issues in emerging areas of concern to Member States. 49. Therefore, in implementing the Programme for the current biennium of 20082009 and beyond, the Secretariat sets its direction based on the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome as well as the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on strengthening the Economic and Social Council. It also receives guidance from the basic programme of work of the Council for 2008 and 2009 and the annual ministerial-level substantive reviews, which cover the following themes: :: 2008: Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development :: 2009: Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to global public health 50. The Secretariat also receives guidance from the Committee of Experts on Public Administration. In 2006, at its fifth session, the Committee adopted a multi-year agenda with the following themes: :: 2007: Participatory governance and citizens' engagement in policy development, service delivery and budgeting :: 2008: Capacity-building for development, including post-conflict reconstruction of public administration and crisis/disaster management :: 2009: Building transparency, accountability and trust, including leadership development through information and communications technology (ICT) tools :: 2010: Governance, public administration and the United Nations development agenda 51. In addition, the Division has taken into account the recommendations contained in recent evaluation reports of the Programme and its various components. The triennial review by the Committee for Programme and Coordination of the Division's programme evaluation, issued on 29 March 2007, showed that the Division had reduced its scope and focused on priorities recommended by the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (see E/AC.51/2007/3, sect. II). In addition, an independent evaluation commissioned by the Division at the end of 2007 found that the Division was meeting its expected accomplishments and that there was better internal coordination and collaboration than in the previous biennium. For the current and the next biennium, methodological and substantive improvements in line with recommendations in the evaluation reports have been programmed. 52. Based on these developments, the following new emerging priorities have been identified under the 2008 theme of "Building governance and public administration capacities for development, identified by the Committee": :: Developing standards of excellence in public administration education and training in partnership with the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration (IASIA) through enhancing the capacity of public administration schools and institutes to attune government and public service leaders to the multiple and increasingly complex challenges facing the world and the various regions and countries :: Improving back-office management to make government operations more transparent, accountable and trustworthy through the application of ICT tools :: Building capacity in participatory governance approaches, strategies for civil society engagement and tools for policy formulation in forging strategies on climate change :: Building transparency, accountability and trust in government partnerships in the context of the United Nations development agenda and the United Nations Convention against Corruption through work related to civil service reform, public sector ethics and public accountability. In this regard, a joint United Nations/International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutes platform for supreme audit institutes-civil society organizations partnership initiative has been proposed VI. Recommendations 53. The Committee is invited to comment on the activities carried out in 2007 and to make recommendations on priorities for the biennium 2008-2009, as well as the strategic directions set for the period 2010-2011 in the proposed strategic framework, through: :: Taking note of the work of the Secretariat in 2007 in implementing the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance :: Taking note of the activities approved for 2008-2009 and making any suggestions thereon :: Approving the proposed strategic framework for the period 2010-2011. 