%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|EDUCATION|TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMES|

Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Seventh session New York, 21 April-2 May 2008 * E/C.19/2008/1. ** The submission of the present document was delayed in order to ensure the inclusion of the most recent information. Item 4 of the provisional agenda* Implementation of the recommendations on the six mandated areas of the Permanent Forum and on the Millennium Development Goals Information received from the United Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization** Summary The present report outlines initiatives and activities undertaken in 2007 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in response to the recommendations of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues at its sixth session. It also provides input on the contribution of UNESCO to the Programme of Action for the Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People, on this year's special theme "Climate change, bio-cultural diversity and livelihoods: the stewardship role of indigenous peoples and new challenges", as well as on other areas which are of interest to the Forum. This year, recommendations directly addressed or relevant to UNESCO covered a wide range of issues, including quality education, indigenous languages, poverty, the Millennium Development Goals and water management. The response from UNESCO illustrates its commitment to mainstream principles of cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue in policies for sustainable development, as highlighted in the new UNESCO Medium-term strategy (2008-2013). This new strategy recommends, as a specific, expected outcome, that awareness of the cultural contribution of indigenous peoples to sustainable development be enhanced and the strategy is explicit about the commitment of UNESCO to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable segments of society, including indigenous populations. I. Response to the recommendations addressed exclusively to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Quality education for indigenous peoples: recommendation 69 1. As the United Nations specialized agency for education, science and culture, and in line with recommendation 69 of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) is committed to promoting quality education for indigenous peoples, taking into account their particular world views and pedagogies. A number of UNESCO activities planned for 2008 or currently being carried out within the framework of quality learning enhancement and inclusive education reflect this commitment, notably: (a) An e-forum on languages in education that contribute to and enrich data on mother-tongue instruction and bilingual education, with the active participation of indigenous organizations, individuals and experts; (b) Advocacy for enhancing quality learning through mother-tongue-based education; case studies of good practices from Canada, Mali, Papua New Guinea and Peru will be published and disseminated; (c) A series of regional workshops on inclusive education, in preparation for the international conference on education to be held in Geneva in November 2008 by the UNESCO International Bureau of Education; indigenous education is one of the themes to be discussed during the conference. 2. Indigenous peoples' knowledge systems, as well as their rights and aspirations related to culture and education, are highlighted in the UNESCO contribution to the Decade of Education for Sustainable Development. In 2007, two projects launched with indigenous communities in the Central African Republic and Niger and entitled Heritage education for sustainable development: dialogue with indigenous communities, aim at developing input to policy and programme formulation in the field of education that builds on safeguarding the natural and living cultural heritage of those communities and fosters their sustainable development. 3. Integrating indigenous knowledge into school curricula has been a central focus of the UNESCO Local and indigenous knowledge systems (LINKS) programme. In Solomon Islands, the project has been furthered this year by reprinting and shipping the publication Reef and Rainforest: An Environmental Encyclopaedia of Marovo Lagoon, Solomon Islands (UNESCO, 2005) for distribution to schools; the pilot development of an accompanying teacher manual is now under way. A Maori language version of the interactive CD-ROM learning tool entitled The Canoe is the People: Indigenous Navigation in the Pacific was produced, launched and disseminated with a view to expanding indigenous knowledge and language content in Pacific Island schools. A volume in Mayangna and Spanish on indigenous Mayangna knowledge of the aquatic ecosystem in the Bosawas Biosphere Reserve (Nicaragua) will also be published shortly. 4. An international workshop on improving quality of mother tongue/bilingual literacy programmes and activities was organized by the UNESCO Dhaka office. The workshop aimed to support participating countries in their efforts to undertake research with the participation of linguists and community members, to prepare context-specific literacy materials using mother tongue/bilingual approaches, and to train locals in the use of these teaching materials as educational tools for community members. 5. UNESCO field offices have undertaken a number of activities related to indigenous education at the community level. These include the Tribal adolescents development programme, which is implemented by the UNESCO Dhaka office and aims to promote literacy among the adults and adolescents of the tribal communities in Bangladesh, notably through the channel of community learning centres. The UNESCO office in Moscow, in collaboration with the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation, has launched the project "promoting literacy of indigenous pupils through capacity-building for the system of community education of nomadic peoples of the north of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia)". Technical and judicial study of a normative instrument for the protection of indigenous languages: recommendation 71 6. By the terms of decision 59 taken at its one hundred seventy-sixth session, the UNESCO Executive Board requested the Director-General to conduct a preliminary study of the technical and legal aspects of a possible international standard-setting instrument for the protection of indigenous and endangered languages, including a study of the outcomes of the programmes implemented by UNESCO relating to this issue, and to submit such a preliminary study for examination at its one hundred seventy-ninth session, which will be held from 1 to 17 April 2008. 7. The Executive Board further invited the Director-General to convene a meeting of experts, including representatives of indigenous peoples, to assist him in the preparation of such a preliminary study, and to seek extrabudgetary funding for it. Accordingly, a preliminary information document, entitled "Preliminary study on the advisability of developing a new standard-setting instrument for endangered and indigenous languages" will be submitted to the one hundred seventy-ninth session of the Executive Board for its consideration and discussion. Pending the mobilization of extrabudgetary funding, this document will be the subject of further revision by a group of experts, to include indigenous representatives. Adapting statistical inquiries to the needs of indigenous peoples: recommendation 126 8 The UNESCO Institute for Statistics informed the Forum at its last session, in 2007, of a possible project aimed at collecting information on best practices in adapting statistical inquiries to the needs of indigenous groups. While dialogue and information-exchange between the Forum and UNESCO have intensified on this issue, the fund-raising efforts for a specific project are still ongoing. II. Response to the recommendations addressed to two or more agencies or to the United Nations system in general under one or more items of the mandate/agenda of the Forum Water and indigenous peoples: recommendation 54 9. UNESCO has contributed to raising awareness on the role of indigenous peoples in water management through the publication of the volume Water and indigenous peoples (Local and indigenous knowledge systems, LINKS Programme, 2006). In 2007, an updated Spanish version was published and disseminated in collaboration with the Division of Water Sciences and the UNESCO Montevideo office. 10. UNESCO's International hydrological programme launched an initiative on water and cultural diversity in summer 2007. The project is based on the premise that sustainable management of water has as much to do with cultural issues as it does with technical ones and it puts due emphasis on indigenous participation and knowledge relating to water. 11. Indigenous Peoples, Poverty and Millennium Development Goals: recommendation 43. A concept paper on indigenous peoples' vision of sustainable development, entitled Development with identity and culture or Self-determined Development, was elaborated by Tebtebba, the Indigenous Peoples International centre for policy research and education, with the support of the UNESCO Division of cultural policies and intercultural dialogue and through a consultative process with indigenous leaders from around the world. The paper explains indigenous peoples' rights and aspirations, linking them to the question of sustainable development and referring to relevant standard-setting instruments on enhancing cultural and/or biological diversity, notably those developed by UNESCO. Indigenous leaders will present and discuss the paper with various agencies and development partners in March 2008. 12. A policy paper on indigenous peoples, poverty and the Millennium Development Goals is in the final stages of development by the UNESC local and indigenous knowledge systems programme. Its aim is to contribute to a broader awareness among decision makers and development planners on the particularity of development strategies and indicators, in particular with respect to indigenous peoples' aspirations for development. 13. A project with the Jarawa peoples of the Andaman Islands, India, is currently under way. A dossier presenting the rich cultural and biological diversity of their territory has been compiled; it seeks to aid decision makers in understanding historical developments that shaped the Jarawa Reserve, thus facilitating the initiation of development strategies appropriate to the Jarawa people and their development aspirations. Expert group meeting on indigenous languages: recommendation 72 14. Following the Forum's recommendation 72, UNESCO has presented and discussed its relevant policies and activities at the International expert group meeting on indigenous languages, held in New York from 8 to 10 January 2008. The UNESCO participants provided feedback on the expert meeting to the UNESCO intersectoral team on indigenous issues to disseminate the findings and discuss follow-up to the recommendations made. Policies with indigenous people in Asia: recommendations 99 and 101 15. On the occasion of the half-day discussion on Asia held during the sixth session of the Forum, UNESCO disseminated an information document on its partnership with indigenous people from the region. The paper provides an overview of Organization policy and project work with indigenous peoples in Asia. See UNESCO, Bangkok website. 16. More recently, UNESCO carried out a project entitled "The culture of the Bandarban Hill People: cultural diversity and richness of Bangladesh", which aimed to create awareness and improve the knowledge and appreciation for the history, craftsmanship and culture of the Chittagong, especially in Bandarban. Major project outputs involved exhibitions by indigenous artists, lectures and other cultural events as well as the creation of a library. Regional workshops on climate change, biocultural diversity and livelihoods: recommendation 130 17. The first meeting ever was held on world heritage in the Arctic with the participation of representatives from various indigenous groups, including the Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North, the Inuit Circumpolar Council and the Saami Council. This event was organized in connection with the Arctic Council meeting in Narwik, Norway (November 2007) and involved discussions on synergy effects for the reduction of carbon footprints. This event is also relevant to the Forum recommendation 130 concerning the organization of regional workshops on the special theme of the seventh session, "climate change, bio-cultural diversity and livelihoods". III. Information on how UNESCO is dealing with the issues of indigenous children and youth, indigenous women, data collection and disaggregation, and free, prior and informed consent Indigenous children and youth 18. UNESCO has continued to host indigenous fellows under the anglophone and francophone Indigenous Fellowship Programmes in collaboration with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other partners. In 2007, UNESCO participated in the Russian-speaking programme for the first time. The French-speaking 2007 fellows had the opportunity to participate in the UNESCO-supported initiative of the youth magazine Respect, to engage in a digital intercultural dialogue among youth from different cultural backgrounds. 19. In 2006-07, the UNESCO Youth Programme organized a series of regional meetings in each of the regions on the theme Young people and the dialogue among civilizations, cultures and peoples which involved young representatives of indigenous peoples and organizations and provided them with an opportunity to voice the concerns of indigenous youth. For instance, one of the resolutions of the Asian Youth Forum (Jeju Island, June 2007) was to promote more experience-sharing with representatives from indigenous cultures in the future. 20. UNESCO also implements projects that are specifically targeted to indigenous youth, such as the Tribal adolescents development programme in Bangladesh and a project on indigenous youth and life skills in Mexico. Indigenous women 21. UNESCO reinforced its partnership with the International Indigenous Women's Forum following an initial culturally sensitive human rights training for women in Kenya, which UNESCO supported jointly with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Dialogue is ongoing with the International Forum of Indigenous Women, United Nations Development Fund for Women and Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop strategies to strengthen capacity-building for indigenous women in the areas of culturally sensitive, gender-aware and human rights-based development approaches. 22. UNESCO's regular programme for the 2008-2009 biennium specifically mentions the knowledge held by indigenous women on their environment and foresees related activities in this area in Pacific small islands developing States. The project will assess, monitor and manage coral reefs, mangrove forests and sea grass beds, with a focus on the indigenous knowledge possessed by women, who are the main users of these near-shore marine habitats. 23. Within the framework of its activities on resource management processes in the Bosawas biosphere reserve of Nicaragua, the LINKS programme recently launched a project to examine the importance of fishing resources for Mayagna women, especially those in socially marginalized situations (single parents, widows and older people, for example). 24. In the Greater Mekong Region, the UNESCO office in Bangkok has been working extensively with indigenous women and girls to develop a series of radio programmes and other educational materials in minority languages on HIV/AIDS and human trafficking. UNESCO Mexico has supported initiatives aimed to promote access to primary education for indigenous women. Data collection and disaggregation 25. This subject is covered in recommendation 126 in paragraph 8 above on adapting statistical inquiries to the needs of indigenous peoples. Free, prior and informed consent 26. The UNESCO partnership with indigenous peoples is based on the commitment to ensure full participation of minorities and marginalized and vulnerable groups in devising, implementing and monitoring policies and actions that directly affect them (Medium-term strategy 2002-2007), thus reflecting respect for the principles of free, prior and informed consent in all its initiatives related to indigenous peoples. A paper entitled "Cultural diversity and principles of free, prior and informed consent regarding indigenous peoples: the work of UNESCO (2005)" details the Organization's approach and initiatives in this regard. 27. At the operational level, UNESCO has supported research, training and projects in the area of participatory cultural mapping with indigenous communities as one strategy to build the capacity of indigenous peoples to express and defend their rights and aspirations in discussions about the future development of their communities. One recent example is the ongoing UNESCO cultural mapping project with Tuareg communities in Niger led by the Indigenous Peoples for Africa Coordination Committee. The project calls for carrying out a participatory cultural mapping exercise and then capitalizing on the outcomes to formulate local education strategies that take into account the tangible and intangible heritage of these communities and that help sustain their lives and living space. A number of new resource materials on participatory cultural mapping are now available, including the recent concept paper The role of participatory cultural mapping in promoting intercultural dialogue (2007), the workshop facilitation guide "Building critical awareness of cultural mapping (2007) and the CD Mapping for change: practice, technologies and communication (2007)", supported by UNESCO and co-published by the International Institute for Environment and Development and the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation. IV. Obstacles to the implementation of the recommendations of the Forum 28. The recommendations of the Forum foresee a great number of individual activities without always considering their feasibility for the organizations concerned. A focus on priority issues and underlying processes, as opposed to an enumeration of activities, may strengthen the impact of the Forum recommendations. V. Factors facilitating the implementation of the recommendations of the Forum 29. Projects that contributed most efficiently to achieving the recommendations of the Forum were based on extended networks of partnerships with indigenous organizations, local and national decision makers and civil society at large. The momentum created by the recent adoption of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by the General Assembly was another facilitating factor for UNESCO's activities in response to the Forum recommendations. VI. Other significant information on recent programmes, budgetary allocations or projects/activities regarding indigenous peoples' issues within UNESCO 30. In 2007, UNESCO implemented some 100 activities involving indigenous peoples, while over 10 programmes carried out by Headquarters and field offices had an explicit focus on indigenous issues. However, since the majority of UNESCO's programme areas are of relevance to the rights and aspirations of indigenous peoples, actual numbers of activities related to indigenous peoples might be higher. 31. The San José UNESCO office has launched a publication on the cosmovision and biodiversity of the Kuna community in Panama. It has also provided support to educational activities in the Nahuatl language in El Salvador. Furthermore, an action plan with indigenous people in Honduras and two publications on the traditions and local languages of Panama and El Salvador have recently been released. 32. Within the framework of the International coalition of cities against racism; the Canadian coalition of municipalities against racism and discrimination, currently comprising 23 municipalities (as of 11 January 2008), adopted a particular focus on aboriginal peoples. Its 10-point plan of Common commitments and sample actions against racism and discrimination encourages a participatory approach, which aims to engage aboriginal peoples and initiate dialogue among diverse communities. Municipalities are invited to integrate this plan of action into their policies and strategies. VII. UNESCO activities relative to the goal, objectives and Programme of Action of the Second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People 33. The Programme of Action for the Second International Decade contains a number of recommendations of direct relevance to the UNESCO mandate and its programmes, and specifically mentions several UNESCO legal instruments and programmes, such as the Convention on the protection and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions and the UNESCO-LINKS programme on local and indigenous knowledge. In 2007, UNESCO pursued efforts towards implementing the Programme of Action, as reflected in the activities detailed in previous sections. In line with item 96 of the Programme of Action for the Second International Decade, UNESCO established a network of UNESCO focal points on indigenous issues in the Organization's field offices to strengthen partnerships with indigenous peoples at the local level and reinforce interaction across regions. In this regard, it is worth mentioning that the Organization is an active member of the United Nations Development Group task team on indigenous issues elaborating guidelines for United Nations country teams on how to adequately address indigenous peoples' issues in United Nations programming. Moreover, a number of activities can be highlighted in the fields of culture, education, environment and human rights. Culture 34. In 2007, the Convention on the Protection and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions was ratified. It now has 77 States parties. This is an important achievement in light of paragraph 14 of the Programme of Action, which recognizes the Convention as a tool to ensure the right of indigenous peoples to create and disseminate their cultural goods and services in a fair environment. 35. In June-July 2007, in line with paragraph 14 of the Programme of Action, the World Heritage Committee took the decision at its thirty-first session (Christchurch, New Zealand) to add "communities" as the fifth "C" under the strategic objectives of the 1972 World Heritage Convention. (The other four "Cs" are: credibility, conservation, capacity-building and communication.) This was done under the chairmanship of Tumu Te Heuheu, who is the first indigenous person ever appointed to this position. This is a step towards enhancing the full and effective participation of indigenous people in UNESCO's activities in the area of world heritage. Directly inspired by this new approach, the UNESCO office in Mexico has organized a community workshop on valuing heritage with local indigenous communities in order to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the inscription of the archaeological site El Tajín on the UNESCO world heritage list. 36. Regarding item 15 of the Programme of Action, UNESCO can report that progress was made over the past year through the first sessions of the governing bodies of the 2003 Convention for the safeguarding of the intangible cultural heritage, which entered into force in April 2006. The preparation of the complex operational guidelines that will bring this important treaty into practical operation is well under way. The preamble to the Convention refers specifically to the important role of the world's indigenous communities in the production, safeguarding, maintenance and re-creation of intangible cultural heritage. Within the framework of its Endangered languages programme, UNESCO is implementing several projects aimed at the safeguarding of indigenous languages and oral traditions, in line with paragraph 15 of the Programme of Action. The projects were developed and implemented either by local indigenous NGOs or by national scholars working closely with the speakers of the languages in question, on the following topics: (a) Revitalization of the Sillanko language and oral traditions (Burkina Faso); (b) Safeguarding the Yukagir language and oral traditions (Russian Federation); (c) Safeguarding Mayan oral traditions (Mexico); (d) Language documentation in three indigenous communities: Paresi, Djeoromitxi, and Ka'apor (Brazil); (e) N u language workshops for #Khomani youth (Namibia); (f) Safeguarding the Khang language (Viet Nam); (g) Bembele and Gbete: from oral to written languages (Cameroon); (h) Indigenous language revitalization and preservation in Melanesia and the Pacific (Vanuatu, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands). 37. Other UNESCO activities in the field of indigenous languages and oral traditions include the following: (a) Study of the cultural traditions and languages of the Chechen and Circassian communities in Jordan, and analysis of their rights in Jordanian legislation; (b) Cultural mapping with indigenous people in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic; (c) Mapping of cultural assets in the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan; within the framework of the International Year of Languages, activities will be designed for the revitalization and rescue of threatened languages in Pakistan, particularly of the Kalash valleys in Chitral. 38. Regarding point 12 of the Action programme recommending that culture should be integrated as a prerequisite and a basis for development project design in order to build development with identity, UNESCO has expanded its outreach in training United Nations staff, parliamentarians and development partners in using the so-called Cultural diversity programming lens. Designed for use by policymakers, programme managers and community leaders who work in both nonculture and culture-related sectors for sustainable development, this lens is an interdisciplinary tool to help integrate the principles of cultural diversity into development policy and programming. It serves to systematically analyse and evaluate whether programmes, policies and practices do in fact incorporate and promote the principles enshrined in the UNESCO declarations and conventions related to cultural diversity. The lens takes into account the rights and aspirations of indigenous peoples. UNESCO participated actively in the Interagency Group on indigenous issues, preparing and sharing a UNESCO paper entitled Development with identity -- indigenous culture: UNESCO's experience and good practices (2006). Education 39. See response to recommendation 69 in section I above. Environment 40. UNESCO organized an expert workshop on links between biodiversity and cultural diversity with support from the Christensen Fund in September 2007. Indigenous participants contributed extensively to the debates, and attention to indigenous knowledge and perceptions was an essential component of the process. 41. Through the launch of the study entitled "Fishers' knowledge in fisheries science and management", UNESCO highlighted the contribution of indigenous people (published within the framework of the LINKS programme) to the preservation of halieutic resources. Guides illustrating linkages between indigenous cultural practices and the fostering of sustainable biodiversity use within Andaman Sea Islands (India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand) were also developed in both English and Thai. Human rights 42. The Director-General of UNESCO made a public statement on the occasion of the adoption of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by the General Assembly, explaining its connections with UNESCO standard-setting instruments and relevant programmes. This statement is on UNESCO's website. 43. In accordance with the forty-sixth paragraph of the Programme of Action for the second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People, the UNESCO office in Mexico has released a publication compiling the seven thematic reports presented to the Human Rights Council from 2002 to 2007 by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous peoples, Rodolfo Stavenhagen. The book by the Special Rapporteur is based on the official reports and aims to make these texts accessible to a broader audience. VIII. Information and suggestions regarding the special themes of the seventh session: climate change, biocultural diversity and livelihoods: the stewardship role of indigenous peoples and new challenges 44. UNESCO welcomes the opportunity to address the issues of climate change, biocultural diversity and livelihoods as the special theme of the seventh session of the Forum. The Organization considers the contribution of indigenous peoples in these areas to be crucial, as reflected in its new Medium-term strategy (2008-2013): "UNESCO will study the ties between cultural diversity and biodiversity and will disseminate the relevant information to decision-makers. It will also endeavour to contribute to the development of indigenous peoples by encouraging respect for and the preservation and maintenance of their knowledge systems, and by identifying innovations and practices based on traditional lifestyles that may be relevant to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity." 45. An international expert meeting on indigenous knowledge and changing environments was held by the UNESCO local and indigenous knowledge systems programme in Cairns, Australia (19-23 August 2007), with extrabudgetary funding from the Christensen Fund. This highlighted how communities facing climate change may build upon coping and adaptation strategies rooted in indigenous knowledge. 46. The stewardship role of indigenous people in observing, informing and responding to climate change was highlighted during a side event entitled Indigenous people and climate change: impacts and responses, held at the thirty-fourth session of the UNESCO general conference. The event featured indigenous experts. 47. Papers from the international experts meeting held in Aichi, Japan on Safeguarding the transmission of local and indigenous knowledge of nature have been received and edited and are scheduled to be published by UNESCO's Division of cultural policies and intercultural dialogue and the local and indigenous knowledge systems programme in the second quarter of 2008. The papers examine links between indigenous knowledge transmission, education and biodiversity. 48. The World Heritage Centre has released a publication entitled Case studies on climate change and world heritage (2007) and has participated in activities related to Polar Year and the Year of Planet Earth. IX. Capacity-building on indigenous issues for staff within UNESCO 49. The Indigenous fellowship programme (francophone and anglophone) was organized in collaboration with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other partners (see also section III on indigenous children and youth, above). The programme is a two-way exchange in which the fellows attend lectures and conferences to learn about UNESCO activities, while UNESCO staff members receive input from the fellows on their projects with indigenous people and learn about the situation and challenges of indigenous communities today. At the end of 2006, a special workshop was organized for fellows and UNESCO staff on participatory cultural mapping and its possible uses for development work with indigenous peoples. Thirty-five staff members from all UNESCO sectors participated. 50. The information booklet entitled "UNESCO and indigenous peoples: partnership to promote cultural diversity", issued in 2006 was translated into French and Spanish and distributed widely across UNESCO field offices and national commissions. The booklet provides the secretariat and partners with basic knowledge about why and how UNESCO works with indigenous peoples. 51. The declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples was presented and discussed at a training organized for UNESCO culture sector field staff on using the UNESCO cultural diversity programming lens. The lens includes questions for analysis on indigenous rights and aspirations. X. List of UNESCO conferences and meetings regarding indigenous issues in 2008 52. UNESCO conferences and meetings regarding indigenous peoples' issues for 2008 are as follows: (a) The second extraordinary session of the Intergovernmental committee for the safeguarding of intangible cultural heritage was held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 18 to 22 February 2008; (b) A day of presentations at UNESCO headquarters, including, inter alia, on the theme of indigenous languages and knowledge on the occasion of International Mother Language Day 2008 (21 February); (c) The one hundred seventy-ninth session of the UNESCO Executive Board from 1 to 17 April 2008; (d) The Global Action Week (Education for All) 2008 from 21 to 27 April 2008 on the theme Quality education to end exclusion; (e) The thirty-second session of the World Heritage Committee, scheduled to take place from 2 to 10 July 2008 in Quebec, Canada; (f) The annual meeting of the Interagency support group on indigenous issues, hosted by UNESCO during the third quarter of 2008; (g) An international conference on education organized by the UNESCO International bureau of education in Geneva, is planned for November 2008, on the topic of inclusive education, to follow a series of preparatory regional workshops; (h) The third session of the Intergovernmental committee for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage, is scheduled to take place during the third quarter of 2008 (more information to follow at a later date); (i) The one hundred eightieth session of the UNESCO Executive Board, from 30 September to 17 October 2008. 