%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2008 Resumed session 29 May-6 June 2008 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2003-2006 received from non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council submitted through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Fondation Guilé Green Earth Organization Hong Kong Council of Social Service International Association for Water Law International Federal of Agricultural Producers 1. Fondation Guilé (Special; 2003) Part A - Introduction The Guilé Foundation is an ecclesiastical foundation established under Swiss civil law. It was founded by Charles Burrus and his wife in 1997. The registered office of the Foundation is the Domaine de Guilé in Boncourt (Switzerland), the former estate of the Burrus family. In 2005, the Foundation was completely reorganized. A new board of trustees was appointed and the Foundation's entire program revised. The major objective of the Guilé Foundation is to tailor its activities to the crucial topics of values in connection with corporate responsibility. The Foundation's activities focus on the discussion and examination of important current topics on the ethical challenges managers and entrepreneurs have to face as a result of globalization. Based on the mission of the Guilé Foundation to address entrepreneurial challenges around the issues of the Global Compact, the Foundation works in three complementary areas of activities: The Guilé European Engagement Fund and Policy: The basic idea of the engagement fund is to invest in companies that are members of the United Nations Global Compact and committed themselves to make progress in the areas of human rights, labor norms, environment, and anti-corruption. The fund follows an engagement strategy, i.e. it strives for an active dialogue as shareholder, supporting the companies to further integrate the United Nations Global Compact principles into management systems and strategic decision-making processes (Guilé Engagement Policy). The Guilé Foundation was one of the first institutions to launch an innovative approach to combine the financial markets with the objectives of a global non-binding framework of principles. The Guilé Foundation program offers a series of seminars and dialogues with a specific focus on how to live up to corporate responsibility in the context of an ever more rapid globalization process. The main target audience is actual and future decision makers of the private and public sector. The uniqueness of the Foundation's dialogues and seminars is based on the specific topic, the method applied and the quality of the contributors. Guilé concentrates its dialogues on issues that need a rather small audience and a confidential atmosphere in order to facilitate an open and frank discussion and exchange of experience among participants. Domaine de Guilé: The exclusive infrastructure of the Domaine de Guilé, the seat of the Guilé Foundation, supports the two main activities as it offers a perfect surrounding for the workshops and seminars. While the main focus of activities remains on Switzerland, starting in November in 2006, the Guilé Foundation has expanded its activities to European countries by engaging with companies that are in the portfolio of the Guilé European Engagement Fund. Part B - Contribution to the work of the United Nations Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field: Press conference on the launch of the Guilé European Engagement Fund in cooperation with the United Nations Global Compact Office, 17 November 2006, Zurich, Switzerland. Financial contribution to the Foundation for the United Nations Global Compact in November 2006. Secondment of a Guilé Engagement Team member to the United Nations Global Compact Office in New York to support the work in the area Communication on Progress (COP) from February 2007 to June 2009. Initiatives undertaken by the Guilé Foundation in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals: The Guilé Foundation initiated the Guilé European Engagement Fund in November 2006. The portfolio of this investment fund consists of about 30-50 multinational European companies (currently with headquarters in Finland, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), which have already signed or are about to sign the United Nations Global Compact. To foster endeavors in corporate responsibility, the Guilé Foundation engages in a credible dialogue and offers valuable services to companies that are in the portfolio of the fund. These services are provided by the foundation's Guilé Engagement Team of leading corporate responsibility experts, in close collaboration with the United Nations Global Compact Office. By engaging with companies, the fund and the Guilé Foundation contribute to all Millennium Development Goals in countries where the portfolio companies have operations. The Guilé Engagement Team engaged with several portfolio companies of the Guilé European Engagement Fund on the issue of social investment and approached them with very concrete proposals. The most advance project is the Health Microinsurance Initiative. Health is of crucial importance for sustainable development and schemes that help the poor to cover the financial risks linked to health and to reduce their out-of-pocket payments are on the top priority for the people living under the poverty line. Microinsurance aims to offer adopted solutions as microfinance offers access to credit for people without any securities. Driven by the high demand, the Guilé led consortium focused on developing a pilot project in the health microinsurance sector. So far, suitable pilot project areas have been defined, potential distribution channels and partners in two Indian states identified and the situation in African countries was explored where the framework conditions allow private sector solutions and health services are in place. The Health Microinsurance Initiative contributes to Millennium Development Goals 4, 5, and 6. Events organized by the Guilé Foundation: The ten principles of the United Nations Global Compact were also the basis for the dialogues and seminars offered by the Guilé Foundation. Theses seminars were addressed at decision-makers within economy, governments and civil society. The seminars' aims are to (1) sensitize to the deficiencies found in the way the strategies and policies based on the ten principles of the United Nations Global Compact are implemented and (2) offer the opportunity to exchange experiences and best practices on how to best meet the strategic and political goals. The series with dialogues and seminars was started on 14 December 2006 at the Domaine de Guilé with a first event on "Is China using the resources of the world?". The speaker was Mr. Claude Martin, former Director General of the World Wildlife Found International and member of the China Council for International Cooperation on Environment and Development. The program was continued in 2007 with four meetings in Boncourt, Geneva, Basel and Zurich. In 28 November 2006, the Foundation entered into cooperation with the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs programme to set-up and manage a education platform for small and medium-sized companies concentrating on subjects around the ten principles of the United Nations Global Compact. Several seminars were and will be organised in cooperation with this platform in 2007 and the coming years. The team of the Guilé Foundation was closely associated in the initiative to build an international communication centre for the Millennium Development Goals in Switzerland. From August to October 2006, the team supported the initiators in helping set up the content for the future communication centre (http://www.cmdg.ch/page_3.html). 2. Green Earth Organization PART I The aim of Green Earth Organization is to help halt environment degradation, conserve and restore the environment geared toward sustainable development. Objectives/Purpose: Its objectives are: To promote and undertake tree planting To promote and undertake water conservation activities To educate the public to create awareness on the need to protect the environment To promote development that mainstreams environment conservation and gender equity To engage in policy analysis, lobby and advocacy towards sustainable use of natural resource Energy conservation activities Forest and biodiversity conservation activities. Expanded area of Activities GEO has expanded its activities in lobby and advocacy towards sustainable management of the forest. Besides, it has as part of its policy changes, ensured that all projects that are planned and implemented, to mainstream gender needs. In addition to that, most programmes planned have mainstreamed poverty reduction activities to address the fundamental cause of environment degradation which tend to undermine protection of the environment and sustainable development. Another major activity is education to create awareness about the danger of HIV/AIDs pandemic. World Environment Day was celebrated in Kumasi with second cycle schools in the Kumasi Metropolis with 10 second cycle schools participating to create awareness about the need to protect the environment - 10 June 2004. Undertook wetlands restoration project to preserve and maintain the ecosystem to support livelihood in Songhor ramsar site in Ada from January - December 2004. Publication on water in the Green Dove highlighting on the importance of water and the need to protect water resources. Issue No. 36 - December 2005. Wetland restoration project to protect the Keta wetlands and to support the citizens' livelihood at Keta ramser site in Volta Region from May 2006 - April 2007. The organisation published issues on climate change, covering causes and effects in its news letter the Green Dove. Issue No. 35 published in August 2005. Workshop and field trip were organized for teachers from second cycle institutions drawn from forty secondary schools from Volta, Eastern, Central, Ashanti regions. Other participants came from Greater Accra and Western regions. The workshop was to get teachers and students involved in advocacy lobby and campaign against forest destruction. At Catholic Pastoral training Centre Akwadum near Koforidua - October 2005. Green Earth Organization trained 40 women in fuel efficient stove construction to reduce amount of fuel wood use daily to reduce pressure on the destruction of the forest at Ada - May 2005. Green Earth Organization nursed 10,000 seedlings and distributed to communities to plant in Ada and Keta to encourage agro forestry and to provide the people with fuel energy in future at Keta - February 2006. Equipping civil society group on lobby and advocacy skill towards the protection of the forest resource at Kumasi - March 2006. Participated in stakeholders workshop on Forest Certification by the Friends of the Earth Ghana on the theme "Certification and sustainable forest management in Ghana" - March 2006. Participated in national Desertification programme in preparation towards United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in Accra organized by the Friends of the Earth Ghana on the theme "Desertification the neglected menace" - November 2006. Research on the impact of using environmental newspaper to carry out environmental education and awareness creation among readers - August-December 2006. Seminar was held on wetlands to educate the public on the importance f wetland. And World Wetlands Day was observed with a seminar in conjunction with Wildlife Division of the Forestry Commission on the theme Wetlands support fisheries - Keep them healthy in Accra - February 2006. Sixty-five (65) women were trained in proper use of agro chemical in Keta to minimize agro chemical contamination of agricultural land at Keta - February 2007. PART II Expert Group meeting and workshop on the theme "Integrating environment into the development processes: Practical experiences in Sub Saharan Africa" organized by Environment Protection Agency (EPA); Ministry of Environment and Science, Ghana; United Republic of Tanzania, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs and United Nations Development Program in Accra, Ghana - 3-6 October, 2005. Part I. Introduction The aims and purposes of the organization and its main course of action The Hong Kong Council of Social Service (HKCSS) represents non-governmental welfare agencies committed to sustain and develop social welfare in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China. HKCSS and its member agencies believe in social justice and equality, and the intrinsic rights of every individual. While society is obliged to provide individuals with the basic social and economic resources to develop their potentials, individuals in turn should carry out their responsibilities towards their families and society, to be self-reliant and to achieve self-actualization. With the vision to build a welfare sector that is highly accountable, efficient, effective and responsive to social needs, upholding the long-term sustainable development of society and the well-being of our citizens, HKCSS aims to promote the development of social welfare together with its member agencies, through: Enhancing accountability of social welfare service agencies; Promoting improvement of social welfare services; Facilitating agencies to better serve the community; Advocating equality, Justine, social integration and a caring society; and Setting the local welfare sector as a model of excellence in the international community. Part II. Contribution to the Organization to the Work of the United Nations Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings: HKCSS Representatives attended the following UN events from 2003-2006: Asia Pacific Regional Conference in preparation of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) Phase 1 - on 13-15 January 2003, Tokyo, Japan; World Summit on the Information Society, 10-12 December 2003, Geneva. Representative, Dr C K Law, had his intervention at a formal roundtable discussion during the Summit, highlighting the needs of developing countries in accessing the Internet; United Nations Consultative Meeting on Deliberation for a Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 16-20 June 2003, New York, United States of America; International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Africa 2004, 4- 8 May 2004, Cairo, Egypt; United Nations 3rd Meeting of Ad Hoc Committee on a comprehensive and Integral International Convention on Promotion and Protection of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 24 May-4 June 2004, New York, United States; Prep-Com 2 for Second Phase of WSIS, 17-25 February 2005, Geneva, Switzerland; Meeting of the United Nations Committee on Children's Rights on 6 June 2005, Geneva, Switzerland; the Organisation also contributed to the preparation of the "NGO Report of Hong Kong SAR of China under the Convention of on the Rights of the Child"; Second Phase of WSIS, 16-18 November 2005, Tunis; United Nations 6th Meeting of Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on Promotion and Protection of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 1-12 August, 2005, New York, United States of America; 10th Session of United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) Thematic Working Group on Disability Related Concerns, 4-7 July, 2005, Bangkok, Thailand; United Nations 8th Meeting of Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 14-25 August, 2006, New York, United States; UNESCAP Biwako Millennium Framework Stakeholders' Coordination Meeting, 17-19 July, 2006, Bangkok, Thailand; The First Regional Conference on 11-12 October, Bangkok, Thailand, focused on the regional and national implementations of the outcomes of Geneva Phase as well as the formulation on draft of the Regional Plan of Action towards Information Society in Asia and the Pacific. Intervention was made by the HKCSS representative with respect to the right of disabled persons to be included in the draft action plan; Internet Governance Forum at Athens, Greece from 30 October-2 November 2006. Cooperation with UN bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters: The organization prepared a formal submission of supplementary information and views on the second report of the Hong Kong SAR of China under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to the Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights on 24 March 2005; The organization met Ms Virginia Bonoan-Dandan, Chairman of the Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights and Ms Maria Virginia Bras Gomes, Member of the Committee on 3 March 2005 in Hong Kong SAR of China and expressed its recommendations on the implementation of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; The organization contributed to the compilation of the reports on the application of the International Labour Convention in the Hong Kong SAR of China for the period from 1 June 2001 - 31 May 2005; The organization contributed to the compilation of the second report of the Hong Kong SAR of China under International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) which was submitted to the Committee in March 2004. Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals: Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) The organization contributed to the MDG in the Hong Kong SAR of China. Major actions have been undertaken the following: Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger The MDG related agenda were covered in the programme of the 5th International Conference on Social Work in Health and Mental Health, in Hong Kong SAR of China, 10-14 December 2006. More than 700 papers on sub-themes on Children & Adolescence, Women & Health, Infertility & Reproductive Health, and Poverty & Sustainable Development were presented. A paper on "From Polarization to Participation Combating Poverty in an Affluent City" was presented by the organization; In commemoration of the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, the organisation held the following events: (1)A Poverty Summit held on 21 & 22 September, 2004; (2)A multi-stakeholders strategy dialogue on 8 October 2006 to establish a unified position on child poverty and develop policy proposals; (3)A Forum on Combat Poverty-Policies and Strategies and exhibition on 17 October 2005; (4)A Seminar on "How to Vitalize the Districts in Poverty" on 14 October 2006; a resources website on poverty alleviation was launched on that day. Three Roundtable Discussions were held on 10, 14 & 28 September 2006 to create opportunities to build cross-sector consensus about child poverty and discuss potential solutions; A five-day Poverty Visitations Programme was arranged on 23, 25, 31 August 2006 and 6, 7 September 2006 to provide the opportunity to learn about the challenges faced by the poor; In 2005: An Open Forum on "From International Convention to Local Policy Implementation: Poverty, Social & Cultural (ESC) Rights", 26 July 2005; Seminar on Poverty Alleviation, 26 April 2006; Research Report on "Voices of the Poor"; Sharing Session on "Service Support for Working Poor Families", 30 May 2005; Briefing Session on Poverty Alleviation and Comprehensive Social Security Assistance Scheme (CSSA) Review, 16 March 2005; In 2004: Research Report on "A Comprehensive Jobs Strategy? An Exploratory Study on Policies Tracking Unemployment in Hong Kong"; Public Seminar on Poverty, 22 September 2004; Poverty Summit 2004, 21 September 2004; In 2003: Research Report on "Child Poverty Study"; Seminar and Workshop on Community Economic Development, 13 January 2003. Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women Workshop on "Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women", 25 September 2004; Workshop on "Women-centered Social Service in Hong Kong - Theory and Practices", 1 January 2004; Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women Consultation Forum, 31 October 2003; Activities in Support of Global Principles All of the following activities were organized in the Hong Kong SAR of China: 2 roundtables to prepare for WSIS Participation on 26 August 2003 & 30 October, 2003; Post WSIS phase 1 follow up work, in support of the Global Principles and Declaration adopted by participating countries in the Summit: Successfully lobbied the government in conducting research studies to measure the level of digital inclusion in Hong Kong SAR of China, with particular references to the underprivileged. Successfully lobbied the government and the commercial sector in establishing a Digital Solidarity Fund which has been providing financial support for digital inclusion activities in the community since 2004; Seminar on Critical Issues Affecting the Drafting of an International Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 3 August 2004; Seminar on the Implications and Challenges of an International Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 7 October 2005; Sharing Session on Practice Wisdom on Implementation of Integrated Family Service, 17 February 2006; International Day of Family was observed in 2006 in the form Press Conference through radio. The Organization held the followings: Collaboration with the Radio Telecom Hong Kong in incorporate topics related to "Family" into the radio programme, Thematic report on family, Conference on Balancing Work and Family on 25 May 2006, family-work balance website, roving exhibition to enhance public understanding, promotion of partnership between business and welfare sector in providing family friendly support to employees; Views and Concerns on the Consultation Paper on Legislating Against Racial Discrimination was submitted to the Legislation Council of Hong Kong SAR of China on 4 Feb 2005; "From Promise to Performance: A Forum on the Recent Convention of the Rights of the Child Hearing and Concluding Observations", 26 November 2005; 4. International Association for Water Law (Special; 1971) PART I. Introduction i) As stated in the Association's Charter, the purpose of the International Association for Water Law (IAWL, hereinafter referred to as AIDA, the Spanish acronym for its name) is to foster the evolution, study, knowledge, understanding and application of national and international water law, with a view to the development of national water legislation and of the legal aspects of national water administrations and institutions, and of related aspects of international water law. The doctrines, laws, institutions and administrations pertaining to areas smaller than nation-states are also included. In practice, AIDA acts as catalyst for the exchange of information relevant to water law, policy and administration, both among its members and within the context of the meetings in which it participates. ii) Membership in AIDA is international and includes lawyers and engineers involved in water management. An amendment, approved by the Executive Council on 25 June 2003, extends to corporate entities the possibility to become members. Moreover, AIDA has instituted a network of regional representatives of the Association, who are to assist the Executive Council in the identification of issues of relevance to the scope of activities of AIDA, in keeping in closer contact with members from the relevant region and in the organization of AIDA events. iii) Since August 2003, AIDA runs a website (www.aida-waterlaw.org) as a vehicle for the dissemination of information to its members and to the public at large. Through its newsletter, AquaForum, which is posted twice a year on the Web Site but is reserved to members, AIDA provides information on events, capacity building initiatives, publications and developments in the field of water law and administration. PART II. Contribution to the work of the United Nations Through participation in meetings and events of direct or indirect relevance to the achievement of the United Nations principles and goals, as follows: i) Participation in the work of the United Nations Participation in the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) International Hydrological Program (IHP) meeting on `Transboundary Aquifers in the Americas,' Paris, France, 7-9 March, 2005. Contributions on topics and experiences of relevance to the management of transboundary aquifers. Support for the work of Ambassador Chusei Yamada (Japan), Special Rapporteur of the International Law Commission of the United Nations (ILC), on the development of a draft legal instrument on transboundary aquifers (ongoing). Participation in the launch of the UNESCO Centre for Water Law, Policy and Science, hosted by the University of Dundee, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The launch took place in Brussels, on 28 November 2006. ii) Participation in other relevant events in line with Millennium Development Goal 7 (Ensure environmental sustainability), or in support of global principles 3rd World Water Forum, Kyoto, Japan, 16-23 March, 2003, session on `River Management and Water Uses'. Speech on the need for sound legal and institutional arrangements for river basin management and for the participation of water users in the water allocation process. Sixth General World Meeting of the International Network of Basin Organizations (INBO/RIOB), Fort-de-France, Martinique, 24-28 January, 2004. Participated in discussions relating to progress in the establishment of basin organizations, the implementation of the European Union (EU) Water Framework Directive and the role of international basin institutions in water management. Second Israel-Palestinian-International Conference on `Water for Life in the Middle East', Antalya, Turkey, 10-14 October, 2004. Contribution on the legal framework for water resources management in Palestine. International Workshop on African Water Laws: `Plural Legislative Frameworks for Rural Water Management in Africa,' Gauteng, South Africa, 26-28 January, 2005. Contribution on water entitlements and community-based approaches to water management. Seminar on European, National and Comparative Law on the Implementation of Directive 2000/60/CE, Liège, Belgium, 8 December, 2004. Paper on `The French experience in the implementation of the EU Water Framework Directive.' Eighth Riversymposium - Water and Food Security, Brisbane, Australia, 6-9 September, 2005. Keynote address on `Approaches to the Integrated Management of Groundwater - A Comparative Law Perspective'. 3rd International Symposium on Transboundary Waters Management, Ciudad Real, Spain, 30 May - 2 June, 2006. Various contributions: `Groundwater and international law: translating principles into practice;' the implementation of international water legislation at the national level; the codification of the law of transboundary groundwaters by the International Law Commission. Participation in the work of the Water Resources Committee of the International Law Association (ILA), which resulted in the "Berlin Rules" on water resources adopted by the ILA in 2004. iii) Comments The organization would have performed much better in the implementation of the United Nations programmes if not for the following problems: information about international meetings and conferences generally arrives too late to be included in plans and budgets; scarce funds make attendance by representative staff at international meetings difficult. 5. International Federation of Agricultural Producers (General; 1947) The International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) is a world farmers' organisation. Founded in 1946, it represents in 2006 more than 600 million family farmers with a membership of 114 national farmers' organisations in 83 countries around the world. The focus of IFAP's policy work is to improve the position of farmers in a rapidly changing world-wide environment. IFAP is financed by voluntary contributions from its member organisations. Any change that may have had a significant impact on the organization vision and/or functions Launching of a discussion paper for a new Strategic Plan for 2007-2010. IFAP has undergone significant changes since 2000. Membership from developing countries is growing strongly, IFAP's work program has expanded into more areas, and IFAP is invited to participate in more and more discussions of international institutions. Results have been very positive, but they have led to IFAP coming up against serious resource constraints. IFAP's 60th anniversary in May 2006 provided the occasion to look at the focus of IFAP over the next five years and where the real priorities lie. i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) High-level meeting on Rural Development. IFAP participated in the Preparatory Committee session in New York, 30 April 2003 and in the meeting itself in Geneva, 30 June - 2 July 2003. IFAP stressed that the persistence of hunger and poverty was largely due to the neglect of agriculture over the last 10 years. United Nations Commission for Sustainable Development (CSD), New York: IFAP participated in CSD11, 28 April-2 May 2003; CSD12, 19-30 April 2004; CSD13, 11-22 April 2005 (IFAP made recommendations on `water') and CSD14, 1-12 May 2006 (IFAP made recommendation on `energy for sustainable development and climate change'). IFAP representatives addressed the Ministerial Segments and Multi-stakeholder Dialogues on behalf of the Farmers' Group, and also participated in various side events. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD): IFAP's President made a statement at the Conference of the Parties (COP) 6 in Cuba, August 2003. This was the first time that a farmer leader had addressed the UNCCD. IFAP was also represented at Committee on the Parties of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC) 3 in Bonn, Germany, 2-11 May 2005, and at COP-7 in Nairobi, Kenya, 17-28 October 2005. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC): IFAP addressed COP10 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, 6-17 December 2004; COP11 and COP/Meeting of the Parties (MOP) 1 in Montreal, Canada 28 November-9 December 2005, and COP12 held in Nairobi 6-17 November 2006. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD): IFAP participated in the Governing Council and 25th Anniversary, Rome, 19-20 February 2003. 17 IFAP farmer leaders participated in the 1st IFAD Farmers' Forum linked to the IFAD Governing Council in 13-14 February 2006. Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO): The IFAP President addressed the plenary session of the FAO Conference in Rome, 29 November-10 December 2003 and 19-26 November 2005. IFAP proposed a new partnership with farmers as part of FAO's reform agenda. IFAP addressed the FAO Committee for Agriculture, Rome, 31 March-5 April 2003; participated in the FAO Committee on World Food Security, Rome, 20-23 September 2004, 23-26 May 2005, and 30-31 October 2006. The IFAP President led a delegation of farmer leaders to the FAO International Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7-10 March 2006. World Health Organisation (WHO): IFAP participated in the WHO Private Sector Consultation on "Diet, Nutrition and Non-Communicable Diseases", Geneva, 17 June 2003, as well as the Joint WHO/World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)/FAO/World Bank Conference to "Mobilise Resources for the Control of Avian Influenza in Animals and for the Prevention of Pandemic Influenza in Humans", Geneva, 7-9 November 2005. IFAP participated in the World Health Assemblies of the WHO, Geneva, 16-25 May 2005 and 22-27 May 2006. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD): IFAP participated in UNCTAD XI in Sao Paulo, June 2004 and addressed an UNCTAD event on "Commodities, Poverty Alleviation and Sustainable Development". IFAP also participated in the UNCTAD Expert Group on Financing Trade and Development, Geneva, 15-16 November 2004, the UNCTAD Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities, Geneva, 6-10 February 2006, and the UNCTAD Expert meeting on the Future of Small Commodity Producers in a Globalized World, Geneva, 11-13 December 2006. Codex Alimentarius: IFAP was represented at sessions of the Commission of the Codex Alimentarius in Rome, the Codex Committee on General Principles in Paris, the Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables in Mexico City, and the Codex Committee on Meat and Poultry Hygiene in Christchurch, New Zealand. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters. Presentations by the United Nations and specialised agencies to major IFAP events 36th IFAP World Farmers Congress in Washington D.C., 29 May-4 June 2004: Address of the United Nations Under-Secretary-General and former Director of the World Food Program; Address on behalf of the Director General of FAO. 37th World Farmers' Congress, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 13-20 May 2006 (IFAP's 60th Anniversary): Keynote address by the President of IFAD. His speech set a new standard in the working relations between international organisations and farmers' organisations, with the development of a real partnership. Address of the Executive Secretary of UNCCD to mark the International Year of Deserts and Desertification. Address by the Director of the WHO Department of Food Safety, Zoonoses and Food-borne Diseases concerning food safety issues on the farm. iii) Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) i) Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals IFAP contributed to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in the following areas: Target 1: Reduce by half the proportion of people living on less than a dollar a day. ACTIONS: IFAP adopted "Recommendations for Eliminating Rural Poverty and Achieving Food Security" in November 2004. They constitute the road map of world farmers to achieving the United Nations MDGs, and in particular MDG 1. These recommendations were submitted to the United Nations Task Force on Hunger in September 2004 as well as the Blair Commission for Africa at its meeting in Ethiopia, 7-8 October 2004. Keynote speech by the Minister of Development Cooperation of the Netherlands at IFAP's 37th World Farmers' Congress in Seoul, May 2006. The Netherlands was the first country to directly support farmers' organisations in poor countries, and the Minister announced that the Netherlands would scale up this support to a total of 50 million euros in the next four years. IFAP is a member of Organization for Economic Co-operational Development's Povnet Agriculture Task Team which met in Paris, 21-22 September 2005 and on 7-8 February 2006. The team worked on a text concerning "enabling pro-poor growth through agriculture". IFAP's President addressed the World Bank Rural Week seminar on "Small holders in coordinated supply chains" in Washington D.C. on 31 March 2005. Goal 2. Promote gender equality and empower women. ACTIONS: IFAP held its 2nd International Conference for Women Farmers in Manila, Philippines, 19-21 November 2003. The conference declaration focused on women farmers' access to land and water resources and on international trade. Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability. Target 9: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programmes; reverse loss of environmental resources. ACTIONS: Adoption of IFAP policy papers on "Access to and Management of Water Resources" (June 2004), "Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change: the role of farmers" (May 2006) and an updated booklet entitled: "The Struggle to Combat Desertification, Guidelines to Good Practices: Farmer's experiences for sustainable development" (June 2004) The IFAP President addressed the 3rd World Water Forum in Kyoto, Japan 16-23 March 2003 and the 4th World Water Forum held in Mexico City, 16-25 March 2006. Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development Target 12. Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. ACTIONS: Holding of an IFAP Family Farmers' Conference on Trade with Ministers of Trade and Agriculture just prior to the World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial Conferences, in Cancun, Mexico, 9 September 2003, and in Hong Kong SAR China, on 12 December 2005. 200 farmers participated. IFAP also organised dialogue sessions with trade ambassadors during the annual WTO Public Symposiums held in Geneva 20-22 April 2005 and on 25-26 September 2006, entitled Outstanding Issues in Agriculture and Impacts on Farm Policies". More than 300 participants attended each event. ii) Activities in Support of Global Principles At its 60th Anniversary World Farmers' Congress held in Seoul, Republic of Korea, 13-20 May 2006, IFAP adopted a "World Farmers' Charter". This Charter was presented to the United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs on 23 October 2006. 