%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2009 regular session 19-28 January 2009 Quadrennial reports for the period 2004-2007 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page 1. Association of Families and Women in Rural Areas 2. Corporation of Opportunity and Joint Action 3. Global Foundation for Democracy and Development 4. International Federation of Hard of Hearing People 5. Turkish Foundation for Combating Soil Erosion, for Reforestation and for the Protection of Natural Habitats * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. (Special; 2004) PART I. Introduction The aims and purposes of the organization and its main course of action. The aims and purposes of the Association of Families and Women in Rural Areas (AFAMMER) are to pursue the defence of the rights and equal opportunities for the women living in rural areas. They coincide with the III Plan for Equal Opportunities between Women and Men and those of the different areas of the Beijing `95 Platform. We work with women living in rural areas because the environment they live in provides fewer opportunities than an urban environment, to try to obtain for them real equality in the different areas of their lives, such as training, health, economy, work, power and decision-making, violence, education, the media, the environment. AFAMMER works, above all, to improve the situation of women living in rural areas, trying to improve their quality of life and fighting for them to achieve the necessary conditions for sustainable development in the rural areas with the aim of avoiding the exodus of young women to urban areas and in this way stop the rural population from growing older. Through meetings with public organizations it is working to achieve the necessary conditions: rural kindergartens, social recognition of the work of women in rural areas, etc. that helps to keep the young population living in the environment in which they were born. It is also developing training programmes with the aim of creating employment and self-employment and taking advantage of new employment opportunities. All from an analysis of resources and potentialities of the environment and respect for the area they live in. The final objective is to achieve a sustainable development, improving economic and social conditions. PART II. Contribution of the organization "Association of Families and Women in Rural Areas (AFAMMER)" to the work of the United Nations Periodic information in the magazine edited every three months by the AFAMMER, on current topics of interest of the United Nations: (i) Magazine Autumn 2007 -- Report on the AFAMMER participation in the 2007 UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe) Ministerial Conference on Ageing; (ii) Magazine Spring 2007 -- Reports on the statements (15 May 2007) of Thoraya Ahmed Obaid, Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund, at the 60th World Health Assembly (14-23 May 2007), on women's right to health as a condition for global development (http://www.unfpa.org/news/news.cfm?ID=975); (iii) Magazine Summer 2006 -- Information on the report Eradicating extreme poverty and hunger: towards a coherent policy agenda, prepared by the United Nations Organization for Food and Agriculture, which indicates that greater public investment in agriculture would maintain the population; (iv) Magazine Spring 2004 -- Report on the granting of AFAMMER Consultative Status in the Economic and Social Council. Participation in the survey on the commitment of civil society to implementing the Millennium Development Goals entitled "How are organizations of civil society implementing commitments to the goals of the Millennium Development Goals?" sent to The North-South Institute on 15 June 2004. "Mujeres Rurales en España" report, presented on 29 June 2004 in the United Nations to the Women's Advancement Division. High-Level segment of the 2004 substantive session of the Economic and social Council, 28-30 June 2004, United Nations headquarters, New York. The National President of the Association participated in the 49th session of the Commission on the Status of Women for the Review Appraisal of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the Outcome Document of the 23rd Special Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, from 28 February until 11 March 2005, in New York. A report was published in the Association's magazine. Participation of the AFAMMER, also, as a representative of the Worldwide Mothers Movement (MMM) and of the Family Action Foundation, in the 2007 UNECE Ministerial Conference on Ageing, with the slogan "A society for all ages: challenges and opportunities", chapter 11 of the provisional programme, 6-8 November 2007 in León (Spain). An article was published in the Association's magazine. Filling in the questionnaire about "Preparing Africa for the 16th session of the commission for Sustainable Development", sent by e-mail on 18 June 2007. AFAMMER also participated in: (i) The International Congress of Mothers for Peace, represented by the National President, under the sponsorship of the United Nations Science, Education and Culture Organization, 29-30 March 2007 in Paris (France), with which the 60th anniversary of the commencement of the MMM was celebrated. An article was published in the Association's magazine; (ii) The IV World Congress of Rural Women, celebrated from 23 to 26 April 2007 in Durban, South Africa, the Association was represented by the National President, Secretary General and President of AFAMMER-Andalucía. A report was published in the Association's magazine. AFAMMER highlighted the following International days: (i) 8 March, International Woman's Day and 15 October, Día International Rural Woman's Day: AFAMMER has a Manifesto claiming the concept of equality as a right of women; this manifesto is applied to all the Regions of Spain and is published in the different media, such as: the press, radio, television, the group's website, by e-mail etc.; (ii) 25 November, International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women. During the reporting period, the Association continued its practice of going out to the streets on that day to hand out leaflets to make Spanish society aware of the need to end violence against women. In these leaflets information is provided on: Why that particular day; What advances have been made; What rights victims have; Where they can obtain further information; as well as a free telephone number guaranteeing the total confidentiality of all details shared by callers. Within the eight Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations, the AFAMMER identifies the most with Goal 3 "To promote equality between the sexes and empower women", as this is one of the main objectives of the Association. Part I. Introduction OPCION is a non-profit corporation founded in 1990. Its mission is to contribute to the full implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocols. Further Human Rights Guidelines were ratified by Chile in order to have children and adolescents exercise fully and effectively their rights within a democratic, just and united society. Part II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings. 2004: Between 7 and 11 May 2004, Mr. Julio Cortés Morales, a Lawyer with OPCION, took part in the 32nd Session of the United Nations Committee Against Torture held in Geneva, Switzerland from 3 to 21 May. An alternative Report "State Violence in Chile" was drawn up by four Chilean NGOs together with the World Organization Against Torture. The report was submitted to the Committee in May and by December was published in English and Spanish. 2006: In August, OPCION together with the World Organization Against Torture prepared an Alternative Report on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in Chile for submission to the Committee on the Rights of the Child at the 44th session from 15 January-2 February in Geneva, Switzerland. During that same year, between 2 and 6 October, Mr. Julio Cortés Morales, took part as a delegate in the Pre-session working group meeting for the 44th session of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. 2007: Between 11 and 15 December, Ms. Consuelo Contreras Largo, OPCION's Executive Director, and Ms. Milagros Nehgme Cristi, Assistant Director attended as observers the United Nations General Assembly Plenary Meeting held in New York, to celebrate the 5th Anniversary of the Special Session at which "A world fit for children +5" was approved by world leaders. They also took part in parallel events such as in meetings of the Coalition of Latin American and the Caribbean NGOs in Favor of Children Rights, and in a meeting with the Ambassador of Chile to the United Nations, Mr. Heraldo Muñoz Valenzuela, and Ms. Belén Sapag Muñoz de la Peña, First Secretary of the Chilean Mission to the United Nations. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters. United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF): Since 2005, there has been a cooperation agreement with UNICEF-Chile under which certain cases were undertaken by OPCION to seek legal, psychological, and social or any other type of required intervention. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO): In 2004, OPCION assumed the position of executive secretary of the Education for All Forum in Chile in agreement with UNESCO. Since then, the campaign for Quality Education has been carried out together with UNESCO within the framework of cooperation to seek compliance in the yearly campaign "Global Action Week: Education for All." International Labor Organization (ILO): OPCION cooperated with the ILO at all times between the year 2004 and 2007, mainly with its International Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) program whether at a national level or Latin American, Iberoamerican or global level through the Global March against Child Labor movement. On 14 August 2006 in Santiago, this cooperation was expressed through an exhibition of photos and children's drawings at the Palacio de la Moneda (Official seat of the Chilean Government) during a meeting held with the President of the Republic, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, the Labor Ministry, Mr. Osvaldo Andrade, the Ministry of Education, Ms. Yasna Provoste, the Ministry of Justice, Mr. Carlos Maldonado, the Ministry of Culture, Paulina Urrutia and the Ministry of Planning and Cooperation, Ms. Clarissa Hardy. In 2007, OPCIÓN carried out a study for the ILO on "Characterization and systematization of experiences of boys, girls and adolescents victims of Child Commercial Sexual Exploitation: A reparatory intervention model from a perspective of gender." iii) Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which now form the basis of the global agenda for the 21st century. (a) Goal 2 -- to achieve a universal primary education and commitment to the principles and objectives 5 and 6: Educate every child and protect children from harm and exploitation, respectively, provided in the World Plan "A world fit for children". Every year (12 June) between 2004 and 2007, OPCION took part in the Global Campaign for Education which was based on the international commitments undersigned in 2000 in Dakar, Senegal, in the document "Education for All: meeting our collective commitments", as well as in the activities of the World Day Against Child Labor. 2006 campaign for Education -- workshops and meetings with authorities in five regions of the country included an internet survey at OPCION's web site in which 2,500 children took part. 2007 campaign for Education, OPCION organized 54 workshops and reflection groups with the participation of 1,072 children from schools in the cities of Iquique, Copiapo, Santiago, Rancagua and Coyhaique, as well as an internet campaign with the participation of more than 10,000 people. Additionally, the World Day Against Child Labor Campaigns during 2006 and 2007 included meetings of children with the Ministry of Labor, Mr. Osvaldo Andrade Lara, who in 2007 undersigned with the children a commitment to double all efforts to achieve the eradication of child labor in Chile by the year 2010. (b) In regard to MDG and the Plan of Action: "A world fit for children", OPCION in 2005, carried out activities with the participation of children in different regions of our country. These children diagnosed the force of children's rights established in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and also submitted proposals to high level authorities. This campaign called "A Chile fit for boys and girls" first began in 2005 to celebrate 15 years of Chile's ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It aimed to have Chile comply with the goals of the Action Plan "A world fit for children" by the year 2010 (the year in which the Republic of Chile turns 200 years old). The 2005 campaign included an internet balloting in which 10,500 children voted; meetings of children were held throughout 5 regions and a final meeting held on 20 November, to debate with the presidential candidates. This Debate was transmitted live on Chilean TV to the entire country and it showed how, in front of 300 children, 7 representatives chosen by them, questioned the 4 candidates. The candidates signed a commitment whereby, whoever was elected would meet throughout his/her period (2006-2009) with children-adolescents representatives every 14 August (the date on which Chile ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child). In compliance with the commitments, the Campaign a "Chile Fit for boys and girls" in 2006 and 2007 culminated with a meeting of children's delegates and the President Michelle Bachelet Jeria. In the Campaign of 2007, groups of boys and girls from 5 regions of the country worked on the latest recommendations to the Committee of Children's Rights in Chile. They met with one Committee Member (Rosa María Ortiz, representative of Paraguay), and, based on such recommendations, they proposed to the President a modification to the Civil Code in which all "corporal punishment" is explicitly forbidden. The aforementioned modification is to be approved by the National Congress. (c) During the reporting periods 2004 and 2007, OPCION took part in the four NGO Iberoamerican Forums on Childhood and Adolescence that were held prior to the Iberoamerican Conferences of Ministers and High-level Authorities for Childhood and Adolescence. The main objective of these events was to incorporate the MDGs and the Action Plan of "A World Fit for Children" and into the said meeting while focusing on the rights based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child. First Forum 18-19 October 2004, San Jose, Costa Rica; Second Forum on 26-27 September 2005, Leon, Spain; Third Forum on 6-7 October 2006, Montevideo, Uruguay and Fourth Forum on 28-29 May 2007, Pucon, Chile. OPCION was part of the organizational committee for the last three forums. Part 1 -- Introduction: Global Foundation for Democracy and Development (GFDD) is a non-profit, non-partisan organization dedicated to promote collaboration between organizations in the United States of America, Canada, Latin America and Europe with an aim to study, research, enhance public understanding, design public policies, devise strategies, offer capacity building, and foster exchange in the crucial areas for the social, economic and democratic development of the Dominican Republic, Caribbean and Latin America. GFDD, as a research organization with a multidisciplinary focus, has successfully become a national and international think-tank linked to various universities in over ten countries, as well as research centers, foundations, and other institutions of higher learning. The organization is composed of several centers that respectively study different elements of the United Nations agenda, including: economic, social and sustainable human development; globalization; corporate social responsibility; science and technology; the information society; the consolidation of democracy; corruption; transparency and good governance; trade and development; regional and multilateral cooperation; and culture and world heritage. The organization accomplishes its goals through research projects, training programs, academic exchange programs, publications, seminars and conferences, as well as joint United States-Dominican Republic task force efforts and development programs. It encourages intellectual and professional development of Dominican general audiences and experts, in the country and abroad, while working to offer viable action plans and solutions to domestic and international challenges. Moreover, GFDD is an active participant in international activities that help to keep it abreast of the most important international issues, as well as be an active contributor to solutions for global challenges. In addition to its special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, GFDD also holds accreditation with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Department of Public Information, the Global Compact Office, the Office on Drugs and Crime and the World Summit on Information Society. One of the organization's fundamental goals is to endorse research and investigation, as well as dissemination of information, on topics that are vital to the role of the Economic and Social Council. These include studies and reports that deal with economic, social, cultural, educational, health and related matters, as is stated in Article 62, Chapter X of the United Nations Charter. Part II -- Contribution of the Organization to the work of the United Nations (i) United Nations Secretary-General Visit to the Dominican Republic (4 August 2006): The United Nations Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, delivered his keynote address entitled "The United Nations and Development: Priorities for the Millennium", at GFDD headquarters in Santo Domingo. He praised the efforts the Dominican Republic is making to achieve the 8 Millennium Development Goals. During his visit to the country, he also met with President Fernández to discuss the goals in detail, which seek to reduce extreme poverty by half, halt the spread of HIV/AIDS and provide universal primary education by the target date of 2015. He referred to the nation as a "source of inspiration for the international community and an example to the developing world." (ii) Debate on Climate Change as a Global Challenge (31 July-1 August 2007) United Nations Headquarters, New York City: GFDD attended this debate that sought to promote discussion concerning recent scientific assessment on climate change and holistic multilateral strategies for adaptation and mitigation. (iii) Conference on Climate Change and Human Health (19-20 April 2007) United Nations Headquarters, New York City: GFDD attended the World Information Transfer's 16th International Conference: "Responding to the Climate Crisis: Asking the Right Questions" organized by World Information Transfer, in collaboration with the Government of Croatia, the Government of Ukraine, the Permanent Mission of Japan to the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme, and the United Nations Children's Fund. (iv) Regional Consultation on Migration, Remittances and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (27-28 July 2006): GFDD hosted the United Nations Development Programme Regional Consultation on Migration, Remittances and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. 75 representatives from 13 Latin American and Caribbean nations participated in the conference to discuss ways in which remittances can be utilized to fulfill development goals. The conclusions of the Regional Consultation were to be included in the United Nations Secretary-General's report to the High-Level Consultation on Migration, Remittances and Development, held in New York, 14-16 September 2006. (v) United Nations Department of Public Information/Non-Governmental Organizations Section (DPI/NGO) Orientation Program (22-23 February 2006): Representatives attended the program. (vi) Annual United Nations DPI/NGO Conferences, United Nations Headquarters, New York: Representatives attended the following conferences: 60th Annual DPI/NGO Conference (5-7 September 2007, New York); 59th Annual DPI/NGO Conference (6-8 September 2006); 58th Annual DPI/NGO Conference (7-9 September 2005); and 57th Annual DPI/NGO Conference (8-10 September 2004). The organization also seeks to provide support to the United Nations and its different agencies in carrying-out their missions and achieving their goals. Therefore, GFDD also actively supports the United Nations Association of the Dominican Republic (UNA-DR). UNA-DR is a non-profit, nongovernmental organization dedicated to supporting and promoting the work of the United Nations in the Dominican Republic. UNA-DR coordinates educational and cultural activities that seek to raise public awareness and motivate civic participation since they contribute to the creation of a well-informed citizenry that recognizes and honours the importance of intercultural dialogue, effective negotiations and peaceful conflict resolutions. The following are some examples of joint initiatives: (i) New York-Dominican Republic Model United Nations Conference (NYDRMUN, New York, United States of America) -- Since 2005, every year more than 500 students of the Dominican Republic and the Latin American Region have participated: The Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations has been the main co-sponsor of the initiative. In 2005, the hosting university was Lehman College, City University of New York (CUNY). In 2006, Pace University hosted the Conference in its New York City Campus. John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY hosted the 2007 NYDRMUN; (ii) International Conference of the Americas (CILA) -- 2005, 2006, and 2007. Within the framework of CILA more than 1500 people from around the Dominican Republic, Latin America and the rest of the world, gather together with the aim to tackle the various challenges facing the international community today, in an environment of diplomacy and cooperation. CILA also serves as a venue for different activities such as the high-level regional meeting of the United Nations Information Centers and United Nations Associations, the Dominican-Haitian Youth Forum on the Millennium Development Goals, the Corporate Social Responsibility Fair, and the Stand Up campaign. Furthermore, the Model United Nations summons 12 discussion committees, for which the official working languages are Spanish, English and French. CILA is an annual conference hosted at the Barceló Bávaro Convention Center in Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. The first edition took place from 11 to 15 May 2005. In 2006, the dates were moved to 1115 October. Mr. Kiyo Akasaka, United Nations Under-Secretary General for Communications and Public Information joined President Leonel Fernandez as co-chair and keynote speaker at the closing ceremony of CILA 2007 (10-14 October). The World Federation of United Nations Associations cosponsors the conference. GFDD has also supported UNA-DR efforts to bring aid to communities in Dominican Republic ravaged by the passage of Hurricanes Noel and Olga in 2007, which affected many rural agriculture centers, as well as some urban communities. These efforts were coordinated with the United Nations Volunteers, the United Nations Development Program, the United Nations Children's Fund, and the World Food Program. Furthermore, through the UNA-DR, the organization also helps to support community outreach activities dedicated to improving the lives of people in bateyes (sugar-cane cultivation and processing centers) and other marginalized communities in order to contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty and hunger (Goal 1). There are also projects that are related to economic growth, social equity, job creation and poverty alleviation, such as those done in conjunction with the Young Americas Business Trust, affiliated with the Organization of American States. We also believe that we have an important role to play as an organization that can channel the opinions and demands of organizations all throughout Latin America and the Caribbean, with whom we maintain strong links of cooperation. This will assure that grass roots organizations in traditionally underrepresented countries will find a voice at the United Nations. (Special; 1996) International Federation of Hard of Hearing People (IFHOH) was founded in 1977 as an international, voluntary, non-governmental, non-political and non-sectarian organisation. It represents the interests of hard of hearing people in the world and its purpose is to promote greater understanding of hearing loss issues and to improve access for hard of hearing people worldwide. It provides a platform for co-operation and information exchange among its members and interested parties. IFHOH's constitution was revised in 2006 to clarify that its mandate covers people who experience tinnitus or Menière's disease and those who use varying types of technology including cochlear implants. As well, the constitution was changed to specify that the International Federation of Hard of Hearing Young People should have the status of being a General Member. In 2006 IFHOH's geographical scope expanded with an organization in China becoming a general member of IFHOH. These changes have broadened the membership base for IFHOH. PART II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies IFHOH Past President Marcia Dugan attended the Sixth Session of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, a subsidiary body of the United Nations General Assembly, 1-12 August 2005, United Nations headquarters, New York. Through the Ad Hoc Committee, IFHOH advocated for recognition that a barrier-free enabling environment means the inclusion of text information, speech-to-text interpretation, lip-reading education, and adequate hearing assistive devices such as induction loops and frequency modulated systems and infrared systems. IFHOH representatives, Marcia Dugan, Jan-Peter Strömgren and Barbara Wenk attended the Seventh Session of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities, 16 January-3 February 2006, United Nations headquarters, New York. At the 7th session of the Ad Hoc Committee, IFHOH and the All Japan Association of Hard of Hearing People planned a side event where real-time text interpreting was demonstrated in English and in Japanese in an effort to show a necessary access system for many hard of hearing people. From 27-29 November 2007 Ruth Warick, IFHOH General Secretary, joined representatives of international disability organizations and key players in Madrid to discuss implementing the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The meeting, entitled "Making it work: civil society participation in the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Conference of the Parties", was organized by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, in collaboration with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Government of Spain, and Fundación ONCE. Those assembled hammered out documentation containing recommendations for the implementation of the Convention by United Nations Member States and the United Nations itself, as well as developing recommendations for the disability community to act on. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field IFHOH became a member of the Panel of Experts on 23 November 2007 whose activities focus on providing advice to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Disability who monitors the Standard Rules. In 2004, United Nations Special Rapporteur on Disability Sheikha Hissa Al-Thani was a plenary speaker at the IFHOH Congress in Helsinki. IFHOH promoted the needs and interests of hard of hearing persons in the Convention process and ensured that news of progress related to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was disseminated to its member organizations. In 2007 IFHOH prepared two releases, one about the United Nations Convention and the importance of member states ratification, and the other, on the importance of text interpreting as a form of access for persons with hearing loss. In October 2007 IFHOH provided its views on hearing accessibility with regard to United Nations buildings in both New York and Geneva, in a document produced by the International Disability Alliance, which IFHOH joined in 2005. The cross-disability document on access to United Nations buildings also covered issues important to the hard of hearing community including visible signals, audible hearing signals and levels and an accessible hearing environment. On 15 September 2007, IFHOH representatives, Ruth Warick, Jan-Peter Strömgren and Charlotta Göller attended a meeting of the United Nations Flagship on Education for All, organized by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization which was held in Geneva on 15 September 2007. IFHOH provided subsequent follow-up about the importance of access supports and training needs so that students with disabilities could be full participants in their educational setting. IFHOH maintained close liaison with the World Health Organization's medical officer on deafness and blindness, Dr. Andrew Smith. He was a plenary speaker at the IFHOH World Congress held July 2004 in Helsinki and again at IFHOH's biennial meeting in Dubrovnik, Croatia in April 2006. In 2004 IFHOH attended a meeting organized by the World Health Organization concerning the problems and needs for the provision of hearing detection, hearing aid technology and hearing aid services in developing countries. This initiative led to the creation of World Wide Hearing (WWHearing) aimed at promoting better hearing by the provision of appropriate and affordable high quality hearing aids and services on a long term basis and on a significant scale particularly in developing countries. WWHearing is a coalition of partner organizations involved or interested in hearing aids. Ahiya Kamara, IFHOH Vice-President, represented IFHOH at two WWHearing workshops held in Geneva, Switzerland, 8-9 November 2006 and 9-10 November 2007. IFHOH President Jan-Peter Strömgren and Charlotta Göller, international officer for the Swedish Association of Hard of Hearing People, attended a meeting of World Health Organization-Disability and Rehabilitation to discuss the implementation of the new Convention. Along with other members of the International Disability Alliance, IFHOH emphasized the importance of the implementation of the Convention for persons with disabilities worldwide, held on 14 September 2007 in Geneva, Switzerland. 5. Turkish Foundation for Combating Soil Erosion, for Reforestation and the Protection of Natural Habitats PART I Introduction -- Activities and objectives below constitute the purposes of the Foundation: (i) To help the protection of natural habitats and health within the country, combating soil erosion; protection of soil, water and vegetative cover; protection of agricultural lands; rangeland rehabilitation; educating and raising public awareness on the importance of land protection and reforestation; and leading and assisting in rural development and in the creation of national policies; (ii) To protect trees and forests within the society; (iii) To ensure protection, improvement and establishment of natural habitats, human health, green lands, soil and vegetative cover and forests. Number of Voluntary Supporters: The number of TEMA Foundation's voluntary supporters increased to more than 300,000. PART II Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations TEMA attended the following: 20-23 September 2004, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran: Middle East and North Africa Network conference. The conference aiming to establish a network between Middle East and North Africa countries was granted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, World Bank and United Nations Development Program and organized by Hamyaran (Iranian NGO). TEMA presented Erosion Control, Natural Resources Management And Rural Development: A Case Project In The Kop And Burnazdere Microcatchments in Bayburt Region project. 10-11 March 2005, Rome, Italy: Mediterranean Strategies for Sustainable Development Conference sponsored by the Italian Ministry of Environment and organized by Friends of Earth. TEMA shared its views to be inserted to Mediterranean Strategies for Sustainable Development prepared by United Nations Environmental Program -- Mediterranean Action Plan. 18-19 June 2005, Athens, Greece: NGO's Role in the 30 Year of Barcelona Convention Conference organized by Mediterranean Information Office for Environment, Culture and Sustainable Development. During the conference, a position paper reflecting the proposals of Mediterranean NGOs was prepared mentioning the necessity of strengthening the relations between Euro-Mediterranean Partnership and United Nations Environmental Program -- Mediterranean Action Plan and the necessity of the creation of funds. TEMA's application is accepted to be an accredited NGO to United Nations Environmental Program. 21-24 September 2005, Athens, Greece: United Nations Environmental Program -- Mediterranean Action Plan Focal Point Meeting. During the meeting TEMA was active in the preparation of a recommendation letter covering the proposals to 14 Contracting Parties Conference. 8-11 November 2005, Portoroz-Slovenia: United Nations Environmental Program Mediterranean Action Plan 14th Contracting Parties Conference where Mediterranean Strategy for Sustainable Development was approved. 26-27 November 2005, Athens-Greece: Official Launching of the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development in the Mediterranean Region. 14-18 November 2005, Beirut-Lebanon: United Nations Beirut Water Week Activities organized by Global Water Partnership and Mediterranean Information Office for Environment, Culture and Sustainable Development. 28 September 2005, Bursa-Turkey: Meeting to launch United Nations Non-Governmental Organization Informal Regional Network (UN-NGO-IRENE) in Turkey and organized by the Federation of Balkans Turks and Associations of Emigrees and the Istanbul International Brotherhood and Solidarity Association in partnership with the United Nations-NGO IRENE/NGO Section, Office for Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination of Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and with the support of the Government of Turkey, the City of Bursa, and the UN-NGO-IRENE/Caspian/Central Asia. It was conducted by the UNNGO-IRENE Project Director, Ms Najet Karaborni. 16 June 2006, Ankara-Turkey: TEMA visited United Nations Development Program - Turkey Poverty Reduction Program Manager, Ms. Yeşim Oruç Kaya. TEMA lobbied on the importance of the soil while decreasing the poverty. 19-20 June 2006, Ankara-Turkey: Integration of Sustainable Development into Sectoral Policies Workshop organized by United Nations Development Program Turkey. The workshop's aim was to lead the ideas for the preparation of the National Sustainable Development Action Plan. TEMA contributed on the environment topic. 26-27 June 2006, Ankara-Turkey: The Global Environment Fund National Dialogue Workshop where the participants determined the national environment and development priorities. United Nations Convention on Combating Desertification Turkish National Activity Report: Contributed to the preparation of the National Activity Report that was presented to United Nations Convention On Combating Desertification- Committee of the Review and Implementation of the Convention. The report was sent to the Turkish Focal Point of United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification on 28 April 2006 to be included in the National Activity Report. First National Communication Report of Turkey on Climate Change: Activities on climate change were presented to the First National Communication of Turkey on Climate Change Project Director Dr. Günay Apak in order to add TEMA's activities to Communication Report. The activities were presented on 4 July 2006. Drylands Environmental Sustainability Integrated Research Areas Project: TEMA started to implement a new project on July 2006 called Drylands Environmental Sustainability Integrated Research Areas Project. In Turkey there hasn't been any research to assess the Carbon Sequestration potential of Turkey's soils or to develop land use practices for sequestering more organic carbon in the soil. In order to cover this specific knowledge gap TEMA has commenced the pioneer work on the soil organic carbon management in Turkey. This is an ongoing study. DRYNET (Strengthening civil society networks to address dryland degradation and poverty issues in the context of strategic development frameworks and the UNCCD): During the reported period, 14 NGOs from 17 countries affected by desertification started to implement a project named DRYNET. In this EU funded project in which TEMA is a partner organization the overall objectives are to support developing countries in their efforts to integrate the environmental dimension in development processes in particular on issues related to the United Nations Convention on Combating Desertification and other strategic development policy frameworks (Millennium Development Goals, country strategy papers) including trade related issues. The activities were presented on 4 July 2006. 23-25 January 2007, Brussels-Belgium: attended the NGO preparatory meeting coordinated by the Northern Alliance for Sustainability to assure the effective and active participation of United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) NGOs in the sustainable development issues and the 15th session of the Commission on Sustainable Development. 13 June 2007, Ankara-Turkey: attended the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Country Environmental Performance Evaluation, NGO Consultation Meeting where NGO opinions were gathered on the topics such as air, water, biodiversity, environmental policies, society and nature, international partnership of OECD Turkey Environmental Performance Evaluation Report. 11-13 July 2007, Ankara-Turkey: attended the Technical Consultation Meeting organised by the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) where FAO shared information on the activities of the FAO Middle Asia Regional Office and set up the priorities of this sub-regional office. 12-21 March 2007, Beunos Aires-Argentina: attended United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, 5th Meeting on the Review and Implementation of the Convention where the party countries implementation of the convention is evaluated and improved. TEMA also organized a side-event during the meeting together with the Ministry of Environment and Forestry of Turkey. 3-14 September 2007, Madrid-Spain: attended the 8th Session of the Conference of the Parties, United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, where the strategies and measures on the 10 years strategic plan were discussed to reduce poverty and to set up environmental sustainability. 3-14 December 2007, Bali-Indonesia: attended United Nations Climate Change Conference COP 13 (Conference of the Parties) where the methods and mechanisms to control climate change and the topics that shape the future of the convention were discussed. Activities in Support of Global Principles: TEMA Foundation supported the 2006 International Year of Desert and Desertification and used its logo in all its visuals during 2006 and reported the printed materials to UNCCD secretariat. TEMA Foundation has not fully participated as might be expected in the work of the Economic and Social Council due to lack of funds. Since most of the sessions are held in New York, United States, the transportation and the accommodation is very expensive for TEMA to cover those expenses. TEMA tried to participate in the United Nations activities by searching for some funds to cover its transportation and accommodation fees. 