%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/AWGLCA/2008/7 22 May 2008 Original: English AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON LONG-TERM COOPERATIVE ACTION UNDER THE CONVENTION Second session Bonn, 2 - 12 June 2008 Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda Organizational matters Organization of the work of the session Scenario note on the second session Note by the Chair Introduction The Conference of the Parties (COP), by its decision 1/CP.13 (the Bali Action Plan), decided to launch a comprehensive process to enable the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action, now, up to and beyond 2012. It decided that the process shall be conducted under a subsidiary body under the Convention, the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention (AWG-LCA). The second session of the AWG-LCA will be held in Bonn, Germany, from Monday, 2 June to Thursday, 12 June 2008, in conjunction with the sessions of the other subsidiary bodies under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. The provisional agenda and annotations for the session are available in document FCCC/AWGLCA/2008/4. The purpose of this note is to share with delegations the plans and expectations of the Chair of the AWG-LCA for the session, focusing on the organization of work. Working arrangements to advance the work on the elements of the Bali Action Plan The AWG-LCA, at its first session, agreed to undertake its work, seeking progress on all elements assigned to it by the Bali Action Plan, in a coherent, integrated and transparent manner, and to organize its work at each session to include each of the elements. While developing its programme of work at its first session, in Bangkok, the AWG-LCA also held an initial substantive debate on the elements of the Bali Action Plan. These rich discussions brought out a number of important insights, concerns and concrete proposals that require further in-depth consideration. The Chair's summary of the views expressed at the first session is contained in document FCCC/AWGLCA/2008/6. The main challenge for the AWG-LCA at its second session is to make the transition to undertaking more focused work, leading to negotiations on the elements of the Bali Action Plan. It is expected that the group will make progress on the critical issues to be addressed and will hear concrete ideas and proposals on how to move forward. With only 18 months remaining until the fifteenth session of the COP, it is crucial that each session of the AWG-LCA be used to achieve maximum progress. The AWG-LCA can make progress on its tasks in various ways, building on the useful exchange in Bangkok and the valuable submissions from Parties. Appropriate next steps will need to be determined based on previous work on the issues. Areas for further work will need to be determined. The transition to more focused work can be facilitated, for example, by agreeing on targeted calls for the submission of concrete suggestions and proposals by Parties. For some issues it might be helpful to convene targeted sessional groups to clarify options and bring them back to the larger group. At its first session, the AWG-LCA agreed that its work should be facilitated by workshops. It requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair in consultation with Parties, to organize, at its second session, three workshops on: Advancing adaptation through finance and technology, including national adaptation programmes of action; Investment and financial flows to address climate change; Effective mechanisms and enhanced means for the removal of obstacles to, and provision of financial and other incentives for, scaling up the development and transfer of technology to developing country Parties in order to promote access to affordable environmentally sound technologies; and ways to accelerate deployment, diffusion and transfer of affordable environmentally sound technologies. The workshops will contribute to facilitating the transition to more focused work. The Chair has consulted the coordinators of the negotiating groups to get feedback on his general guidance to the secretariat on the scope, focus and approach to the workshops. The objective of the workshops is to deepen understanding and clarify elements contained in the Bali Action Plan. The interactive exchanges that a workshop setting allows for have the potential to enhance understanding of the concerns and positions of Parties, which in turn can contribute to the emergence of a common understanding of what needs to be negotiated in order to reach an agreed outcome. The Bali Action Plan will guide these discussions. The information note on the workshops by the secretariat lists the relevant elements for each of the three workshops. At the first session of the AWG-LCA, Parties expressed their wish that the workshops be Party-driven, which means that substantive discussions will rely primarily on inputs by Parties. This then places the onus on Parties to bring to the workshops their ideas and proposals for concrete ways to realize the promise of the Bali Action Plan. All Parties are invited to contribute to these interactive exchanges. The workshops will be chaired by the Chair or the Vice-Chair of the AWG-LCA, who will prepare a summary of the views expressed at each workshop to inform the work of the AWG-LCA on the respective issues. These summaries will be issued as conference room papers during the session and will also be included in the Chair's summary of the session. The AWG-LCA will also need to make progress on issues not addressed by workshops in 2008. Time will be allocated to this end during plenary meetings and in other more informal settings. The AWG-LCA has asked the Chair to continue to capture progress through the Chair's summary. The summary of the second session will contain the summaries of the workshop debates. It will also need to capture progress made on the issues not addressed by workshops. The AWG-LCA will meet in the opening plenary in the morning on Monday, 2 June 2008 and then proceed to the first in-session workshop in the afternoon. At the opening plenary the AWG-LCA will take up the organization of work within the session (items 1 and 2 of the provisional agenda). It will also launch consideration of a work programme for 2009 (item 4 of the provisional agenda), focusing on organizational and planning issues. The Chair intends to request the Vice-Chair of the AWG-LCA to hold on his behalf informal consultations with Parties on planning the work for 2009 and to report back to the AWG-LCA on the results of these consultations at the closing plenary on Thursday, 12 June. The main substantive item on the provisional agenda, on enabling the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action now, up to and beyond 2012 (item 3), will be taken up in the opening plenary on Monday, 2 June, and continue on Friday, 6 June, after the completion of the three in-session workshops that the AWG-LCA has scheduled for this session. The Chair intends to present summaries of the workshops (see para. 11 above) and to propose how progress might be made on the respective issues during the remainder of the session. For the second week it will be important for the AWG-LCA to make the transition to a more focused mode of operation. The Chair intends to consult informally with groups during the first week of the session on the appropriate setting for taking the work forward and to present a scenario for the second week to the group at the plenary on Friday, 6 June. 