%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|GREENHOUSE GASES|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBSTA/2008/6 24 July 2008 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-eighth session, held in Bonn from 4 to 13 June 2008 Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes Overview of outputs of activities completed up to the twenty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change 26 Overview of activities to be undertaken and outputs from the second phase of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change 28 III. Main methodological issues 30 IV. Calculation of accounting quantities for activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol 32 V. Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its twenty-eighth session 37 Opening of the session (Agenda item 1) The twenty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the Maritim Hotel, Bonn, Germany, from 4 to 13 June 2008. The Chair of the SBSTA, Ms. Helen Plume (New Zealand), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. She also welcomed Ms. Ermira Fida (Albania) as Vice-Chair of the SBSTA and Ms. Meena Khanal (Nepal) as Rapporteur of the SBSTA. Organizational matters (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 4 June, the SBSTA considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations. Statements were made by representatives of seven Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Umbrella Group, one on behalf of the European Community and its member States, one on behalf of the Environmental Integrity Group, one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the African Group and one on behalf of the least developed countries (LDCs). At the same meeting, following the proposal of the Chair, the SBSTA adopted the agenda without amendment, as follows: Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda; Organization of the work of the session. Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Development and transfer of technologies. Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action. Research and systematic observation. Methodological issues under the Convention: Scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil; Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport. Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol: Implications of the establishment of new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23); Carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as clean development mechanism project activities; Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. Facilitating the exchange of information and the sharing of experiences on policies and measures of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol. Cooperation with relevant international organizations. Other matters. Report on the session. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 4 June, at which the Chair proposed the programme of work. The SBSTA agreed to proceed on the basis of the Chair's proposal. The secretariat informed the SBSTA of the status of documentation. The SBSTA agreed to the provisional admittance of observer organizations that had applied to join the process, on the basis of the provisions of Article 7, paragraph 6, of the Convention, without prejudice to subsequent action by the Conference of the Parties (COP). Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (Agenda item 3) Proceedings The SBSTA considered this item at its 1st and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Umbrella Group, one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, one on behalf of a group of Parties from Latin America and the Caribbean and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. In addition statements were made by a representative of an intergovernmental organization (IGO) and a representative of a non-governmental organization (NGO). At its 1st meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) and Mr. Donald Lemmen (Canada). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Kumarsingh reported on the contact group's consultations. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. Conclusions The SBSTA welcomed the progress made up to its twenty-eighth session in the implementation of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. The SBSTA noted that the outcomes of the activities completed to date, including the workshops and expert meetings, constitute a useful initial contribution to the objective and expected outcomes of the Nairobi work programme. The SBSTA affirmed that its activities under the Nairobi work programme are undertaken to assist all Parties, in particular developing countries, including the LDCs and small island developing States (SIDS), to improve their understanding and assessment of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation, and to make informed decisions on practical adaptation actions and measures to respond to climate change on a sound scientific, technical and socio-economic basis, taking into account current and future climate change and variability in accordance with decision 2/CP.11. The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the Governments of Australia, Canada, the Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, and to the World Meteorological Organization, for their contributions towards the implementation of the Nairobi work programme. It also expressed its appreciation to the Governments of Egypt, Mexico, Thailand, and Trinidad and Tobago, and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, for contributing by hosting activities under the Nairobi work programme, as well as to the experts and representatives of relevant organizations for contributing their time and expertise. The SBSTA welcomed the progress made under the Nairobi work programme in catalysing action by organizations outside the UNFCCC, and expressed its appreciation to the organizations that have undertaken, or stated their intention to undertake, actions in support of the objective of the Nairobi work programme. The SBSTA encouraged organizations to enhance their efforts towards this end, including through the submission of action pledges to the secretariat, and to make the information on the results achieved available to the SBSTA. The SBSTA agreed to promote, both under the UNFCCC process and among relevant organizations, institutions, experts and communities, the consideration of recommendations and calls for action that result from workshops and expert meetings, with a view to undertaking activities at international, regional, national and subnational levels aimed at addressing the gaps and needs identified. The SBSTA, in accordance with its conclusions at its twenty-fifth session and with the aim of contributing to the identification of further activities, as well as appropriate timing and modalities, for inclusion in the Nairobi work programme, considered: The report of the informal meeting of representatives from Parties on the outcomes of completed activities under the Nairobi work programme held in Bangkok, Thailand, 7 - 9 April 2008; The views of Parties on further activities, including the views in document FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.3 and Add.1 and 2; The outcomes of activities completed up to SBSTA 28; Information presented in the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and other new scientific information; Relevant activities from international and regional institutions. The SBSTA recognized that the IPCC AR4 represents the most comprehensive and authoritative assessment of climate change to date and agreed to make use of the information contained in that report in the further implementation of the Nairobi work programme. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to provide a report for consideration at each of its sessions, starting from SBSTA 29, on progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme, including calls for action, whereby endorsement of any calls for action mentioned in the report would be provided by Parties. The SBSTA recalled that a summary report for the first phase of the Nairobi work programme will be made available to Parties and relevant organizations by SBSTA 29, which will consolidate the results of the implementation of the Nairobi work programme for the period up to SBSTA 28. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a summary report on the results of the second phase of the implementation of the Nairobi work programme for the period up to SBSTA 32 for its consideration at SBSTA 33. The SBSTA noted that outcomes of activities completed up to its twenty-eighth session may contain useful information for Parties in the consideration of relevant agenda items under the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI). In accordance with the annex to decision 2/CP.11 and its conclusions at SBSTA 25, the SBSTA agreed to provide at its twenty-ninth session, and is expected to provide at its thirty-third session, relevant information and advice on the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change arising from the implementation of the Nairobi work programme for consideration by the SBI, following consideration by the SBSTA of the summary reports mentioned in paragraphs 19 and 20 above. The SBSTA may also provide any relevant information and advice, as appropriate, on the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change arising from the implementation of the Nairobi work programme to: The Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention (AWG-LCA), with a view to providing input to discussions on enhanced action on adaptation as envisaged in decision 1/CP.13, paragraph 1 (c); The Adaptation Fund Board, if requested, with a view to facilitating the operation of the Adaptation Fund. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA and before its thirty-third session, an informal meeting of representatives from Parties and organizations and experts to consider the outcomes of the activities completed prior to this meeting, taking into account the summary report mentioned in paragraph 19 above and the expected outcomes of the Nairobi work programme outlined in paragraph 2 of the annex to decision 2/CP.11. The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to prepare a report on this meeting, to be made available to the SBSTA by its thirty-third session. The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its thirty-third session, the outcome of the informal meeting referred to in paragraph 24 above, the summary report referred to in paragraph 20 above, new scientific information, as well as relevant activities from organizations and institutions, with a view to reviewing the effectiveness of the Nairobi work programme and reporting on its outcomes to the COP at its sixteenth session in accordance with decision 2/CP.11, paragraph 6 (e). The SBSTA requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the SBSTA, to continue its efforts in engaging a wide range of organizations, institutions, experts, communities and members of the private sector in the implementation of the Nairobi work programme, including those active at the community level and those undertaking education, training and awareness-raising. The SBSTA recalled that it agreed at its twenty-seventh session to consider at SBSTA 29 the possible need for a group of experts, taking into account the outcome of its consideration of the activities completed by SBSTA 28, the future activities to be identified at SBSTA 28 and the summary report to be prepared by SBSTA 29. The SBSTA agreed to take into account relevant outputs of agenda items and work of relevant expert groups under the Convention in the implementation of the Nairobi work programme. The SBSTA took note of the first forum of focal points of engaged organizations and institutions, convened by the Chair of the SBSTA in Bali, Indonesia, on 10 December 2007, and requested the secretariat to regularly organize such meetings with representatives of interested Parties during the sessions of the COP, with a view to taking stock of activities undertaken by organizations and institutions in support of the objective of the Nairobi work programme and to promoting a periodic dialogue between Parties and engaged organizations and institutions. The SBSTA encouraged organizations and institutions that are engaged in the Nairobi work programme and have national and regional representation to develop specific activities at the national and regional level in support of the objective and expected outcomes of the Nairobi work programme. The SBSTA further encouraged those organizations and institutions to make the information on the results achieved available to the SBSTA for its consideration. The SBSTA recognized that regional centres and networks undertaking work relevant to climate change play an important role in enhancing adaptation through supporting adaptation planning and practices, the application of models and tools, the development of adaptation projects and their regional integration, and through providing other forms of technical support related to capacity-building and information sharing. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, before its thirty-second session and under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, a technical workshop with representatives from Parties, relevant organizations, regional centres and networks, and communities, and experts, on how regional centres and networks undertaking work relevant to climate change could collaborate, with a view to: Providing information on the use of different methods and tools for various users and types of assessment; Enabling users to share information on different methods and tools, including details on their application, limitations and usefulness for different types of tasks and users; Facilitating a dialogue between users and developers of methods and tools to encourage the development and application of more demand- and stakeholder-driven methods and tools; Enabling users to exchange good practices and lessons learned in accessing and applying data; Promoting a dialogue between the providers and users of data in order for providers to better meet the needs of different users; Disseminating good practices and lessons learned in the development and application of methods and tools; Providing information on available climate models, scenarios and downscaled projections, including on their application, limitations and usefulness for different purposes and geographical areas; Facilitating feedback between users and providers of climate models, scenarios and downscaled projections, in order to enable or enhance the development and to improve the usability of regional climate models and scenarios. The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to prepare a report on the workshop referred to in paragraph 32 above, to be made available by its thirty-third session. The SBSTA welcomed the wide dissemination of outputs resulting from the implementation of the Nairobi work programme to relevant stakeholders and requested the secretariat to continue, in consultation with Parties, to develop user-friendly outputs and accessible forms of disseminating these outputs, to enhance the Nairobi work programme website and to develop further activities aimed at reaching adaptation practitioners at the national and subnational levels, in particular in developing countries. The SBSTA agreed to enhance outreach and foster a dialogue and exchange of information relevant to the Nairobi work programme among stakeholders involved in impacts, vulnerability and adaptation activities. The SBSTA further agreed to promote existing networks for impacts, vulnerability and adaptation and encouraged the establishment of new networks. The SBSTA also encouraged established networks that are not focused on climate change to consider impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change in their work, as appropriate. The SBSTA agreed that the thematic areas of the Nairobi work programme as contained in the annex to decision 2/CP.11, with their action oriented sub-themes and the nine areas of work identified at its twenty-fifth session, should be the basis for further activities under the Nairobi work programme. The SBSTA agreed to further implement the Nairobi work programme through the activities contained in these conclusions. The SBSTA noted that the implementation of the Nairobi work programme in the period up to SBSTA 33 cannot be fully covered by the resources available from the core budget for the biennium 2008 - 2009, and that supplementary funds are needed for this work given that implementation will be fulfilled subject to the availability of resources for this purpose. The SBSTA urged Parties included in Annex II to the Convention, and other Parties in a position to do so, to provide financial support for the implementation of the Nairobi work programme. Methods and tools The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of methods and tools are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-themes a (i), "Promoting development and dissemination of methodologies and tools for impact and vulnerability assessments, such as rapid assessments and bottom-up approaches, including as they apply to sustainable development", and b (i), "Promoting the development and dissemination of methods and tools for assessment and improvement of adaptation planning, measures and actions, and integration with sustainable development". The SBSTA requested the secretariat to include consideration of relevant matters related to subthemes a (i) and b (i) in the technical workshop referred to in paragraph 32 above. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to develop, by its thirty-second session and in collaboration with relevant organizations, institutions and networks, a user-friendly version of the UNFCCC Compendium on methods and tools. Data and observations The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of data and observations are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme a (ii), "Improving collection, management, exchange, access to and use of observational data and other relevant information on current and historical climate and its impacts, and promoting improvement of observations, including the monitoring of climate variability". The SBSTA requested the secretariat to include consideration of relevant matters related to subtheme a (ii) in the technical workshop referred to in paragraph 32 above. It further encouraged the secretariat to provide links on the UNFCCC website to existing efforts to identify, describe, apply and make accessible terrestrial, atmospheric and oceanic data and available climatic and relevant non-climatic data and information, including socio-economic information and data on climate change impacts. Climate modelling, scenarios and downscaling The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of climate modelling, scenarios and downscaling are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme a (iii), "Promoting the development of, access to, and use of information and data on projected climate change". The SBSTA took note of the discussions that took place during the in-session workshop on climate modelling, scenarios and downscaling. It recognized the importance of regional modelling, scenarios and downscaling and requested the secretariat to include consideration of relevant matters related to sub-theme a (iii) in the technical workshop referred to in paragraph 32 above. The SBSTA encouraged the IPCC Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impact and Climate Analysis to enhance their outreach and sharing of information on the development of new scenarios with a view to increasing awareness among Parties on ways in which these scenarios will be used for impacts, vulnerability and adaptation assessments. Climate-related risks and extreme events The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of climate-related risks and extreme events are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme a (iv), "Promoting understanding of impacts of, and vulnerability to, climate change, current and future climate variability and extreme events, and the implications for sustainable development". The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a technical paper, before its twenty-ninth session, on physical and socio-economic trends in climate-related risks and extreme events in the context of their implications for sustainable development, paying particular attention to the most vulnerable developing countries, especially LDCs and SIDS. The paper should include inputs from experts in the science of climate-related hazards and experts in disaster management, insurance and reinsurance. The SBSTA suggested that this paper could provide valuable input to the workshop on risk management and risk reduction strategies, including risk sharing and transfer mechanisms such as insurance, to be held during AWG-LCA 4. Socio-economic information The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of socio-economic information are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme a (v), "Promoting the availability of information on the socio-economic aspects of climate change and improving the integration of socio-economic information into impact and vulnerability assessments". The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, before its thirty-first session, a technical paper reviewing the existing literature on the potential costs and benefits of adaptation options. The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 18 September 2009, information on efforts undertaken, including methods used, to assess the costs and benefits of adaptation options, as well as their views on lessons learned, good practices, gaps and needs. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile these submissions into a miscellaneous document to be made available by SBSTA 31 and to prepare a synthesis report based on the submissions as well as on other relevant sources to be made available by SBSTA 32. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, a technical workshop on costs and benefits of adaptation options. The workshop should take place before SBSTA 32 and involve representatives from Parties, relevant organizations, communities and experts. It should be held with a view to facilitating the identification of appropriate adaptation practices and measures and avoiding maladaptation, taking into account the miscellaneous document and the synthesis report mentioned in paragraph 52 above. The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to prepare a report on this workshop, to be made available by SBSTA 33. Adaptation planning and practices The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of adaptation planning and practices are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-themes b (ii), "Collecting, analysing and disseminating information on past and current practical adaptation actions and measures, including adaptation projects, short- and long-term adaptation strategies, and local and indigenous knowledge", and b (iv), "Facilitating communication and cooperation among and between Parties and relevant organizations, business, civil society and decision makers, and other stakeholders". The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare by its twenty-ninth session a technical paper on integrating practices, tools and systems for climate risk assessment and management and disaster risk reduction strategies, such as those included in the Hyogo Framework for Action, into national policies and programmes. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, a technical workshop on integrating practices, tools and systems for climate risk assessment and management and disaster risk reduction strategies into national policies and programmes. The workshop should take place before SBSTA 30 and involve representatives from Parties, relevant organizations and experts with a view to facilitating the identification of successful examples of using such tools and integrating such practices into national policies and programmes. The SBSTA further requested the secretariat to prepare a report on this workshop, to be made available by its thirty-first session. The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 20 March 2009: Views and information on approaches to and experiences in integrating and expanding adaptation planning and action at national, subnational, community and local levels, including scaling up of local and community-based adaptation; Views on lessons learned, good practices, gaps, needs, barriers and constraints to adaptation, including implementation of adaptation projects. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile these submissions into a miscellaneous document to be made available by SBSTA 30, and to prepare a synthesis report based on the submissions as well as on other relevant sources, including experiences gained during the national adaptation programme of action process, by SBSTA 31. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, a technical workshop to consider how to advance the integration of various approaches to adaptation planning, including scaling up of local and community-based adaptation. The workshop should take place before SBSTA 31 and involve representatives from Parties, relevant organizations, communities and experts. It should be held with a view to making informed decisions on integrated practical adaptation actions and measures at various levels and for various sectors and livelihoods taking into account the miscellaneous document and the synthesis report mentioned in paragraph 60 above. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to prepare a report on this workshop, to be made available by SBSTA 32. The SBSTA further invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 18 September 2009, information on efforts undertaken to monitor and evaluate the implementation of adaptation projects, policies and programmes and the costs and effectiveness of completed projects, policies and programmes as well as views on lessons learned, good practices, gaps and needs. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile these submissions into a miscellaneous document to be made available by SBSTA 31. It further requested the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report based on the submissions as well as on other relevant sources, to be made available by SBSTA 32, with a view to facilitating the development of indicators for assessing the implementation of adaptation projects, policies and programmes. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to enhance the web-based interface on adaptation practices by its thirtieth session, in order to provide access to information on specific adaptation practices; enable adaptation practitioners to share information on and experiences with different adaptation practices; and disseminate good practices and lessons learned in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of adaptation practices. Research The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of research are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme b (iii), "Promoting research on adaptation options and the development and diffusion of technologies, know-how, and practices for adaptation, particularly addressing identified adaptation priorities and building on lessons learned from current adaptation projects and strategies". The SBSTA encouraged greater consideration of adaptation in future dialogues between international and regional research bodies and programmes and Parties. The SBSTA noted the research needs identified in document FCCC/SBSTA/2007/12 and invited bodies and programmes involved in this type of research to inform the SBSTA of their activities, including during the research dialogue to take place at its thirtieth and thirty-second sessions. The SBSTA encouraged relevant institutions to carry out further research on vulnerability mapping for analysis of the impacts associated with climate change in key areas, including terrestrial and marine ecosystems, in the light of economic, environmental and social indicators. Technologies for adaptation The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of technologies for adaptation are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme b (iii), "Promoting research on adaptation options and the development and diffusion of technologies, know-how, and practices for adaptation, particularly addressing identified adaptation priorities and building on lessons learned from current adaptation projects and strategies". The SBSTA acknowledged the previous work undertaken by the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) on technologies for adaptation and requested the group to take into account outcomes from the Nairobi work programme up to SBSTA 28 for consideration under relevant aspects of its work programme for 2008 - 2009. Economic diversification The SBSTA affirmed that activities in the area of economic diversification are undertaken with a view to advancing sub-theme b (v), "Promoting understanding and the development and dissemination of measures, methodologies and tools including for economic diversification aimed at increasing economic resilience and reducing reliance on vulnerable economic sectors, especially for relevant categories of countries listed in Article 4, paragraph 8, of the Convention". The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 20 March 2009, additional information on examples of measures, methodologies and tools on increasing economic resilience to climate change and reducing reliance on vulnerable economic sectors, including through economic diversification. It requested the secretariat to compile these submissions into a miscellaneous document to be made available to the SBSTA by its thirtieth session. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, before SBSTA 30 and under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, a technical workshop on increasing economic resilience to climate change and reducing reliance on vulnerable economic sectors, including through economic diversification, with the participation of representatives from Parties, business, and communities, and experts. The workshop should be held with a view to promoting understanding and the development and dissemination of measures, methodologies and tools for increasing economic resilience, including the understanding of social aspects, and take into account: Previous submissions from Parties and relevant organizations on this matter and the synthesis report thereon; The submissions referred to in paragraph 72 above. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a report on this workshop, to be made available by SBSTA 31. Development and transfer of technologies (Agenda item 4) The SBSTA considered this item at its 1st and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of a group of Parties from Latin America and the Caribbean, one on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 1st meeting, the Chair invited Mr. Jukka Uosukainen (Finland), Chair of the EGTT, to introduce the programme of work of the EGTT for 2008 - 2009 and to report on relevant activities of the group. At the same meeting, in accordance with decision 3/CP.13, the SBSTA agreed to consider the EGTT rolling work programme in a joint contact group with the SBI, co-chaired by Mr. Holger Liptow (Germany) and by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Fuller reported on the joint contact group's consultations. Mr. Fuller and Mr. Kunihiko Shimada (Japan). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Shimada reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the election of Mr. Uosukainen as Chair and Mr. Arthur Rolle (Bahamas) as Vice-Chair of the EGTT for 2008, and the nomination by Parties of experts to serve on the EGTT for 2008. The SBSTA and the SBI noted the oral report by the Chair of the EGTT on the outcomes of the group's meetings held on 10 - 11 March 2008 and on 29 - 30 May 2008 in Bonn, Germany. The SBSTA and the SBI endorsed the rolling programme of work of the EGTT for 2008 - 2009 and looked forward to receiving the results of the work of the EGTT. The SBSTA and the SBI noted the already heavy workload of the EGTT and invited the EGTT to adjust its programme of work should it be requested to do so by the subsidiary bodies. The SBSTA endorsed the terms of reference for the EGTT for developing a set of performance indicators that could be used by the SBI to regularly monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the technology transfer framework, complemented with the set of actions set out in annex I to decision 3/CP.13, taking into consideration the related work under the Convention and other relevant bodies. The SBSTA also endorsed the terms of reference for the EGTT for identifying, analysing and assessing existing and potential new financing resources and relevant vehicles in supporting the development, deployment, diffusion and transfer of environmentally sound technologies in developing countries. The SBSTA noted the report on the joint expert meeting on technologies for adaptation to climate change. It invited Parties, when elaborating on further activities under the Nairobi work programme, to take into account information contained in that report. The SBSTA welcomed the progress made by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in collaboration with the EGTT, the United Nations Environment Programme, the Climate Technology Initiative and the secretariat in updating the UNDP handbook Conducting Technology Needs Assessments for Climate Change. It looked forward to the updated handbook being made available by early 2009. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the financial support provided by the Governments of Denmark, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European Commission for the implementation of the programme of work of the EGTT, and invited Parties in a position to do so to provide financial support to ensure the timely and effective implementation of this programme of work. The SBSTA agreed to bring forward the second regular meeting of the EGTT, which had been scheduled to take place in conjunction with the twenty-ninth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, in order for the group to advance its work and finalize its interim reports in time for these sessions. It welcomed the offer by the Government of Ireland to host this meeting in October 2008 in Dublin, Ireland. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources: To organize the second regular meeting of the EGTT referred to in paragraph 87 above; To organize a second special meeting of the EGTT in conjunction with the third session of the AWG-LCA and the first part of the sixth session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP) to enable the EGTT to advance its work on this matter. Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action (Agenda item 5) The SBSTA considered this item at its 1st and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 17 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of a group of rainforest countries, one on behalf of the countries of the Congo Basin, two on behalf of a group of Parties from Latin America and the Caribbean, and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. In addition, one statement was made by a representative of an IGO. Ms. Lilian Portillo (Paraguay) and Mr. Audun Rosland (Norway). At the 4th meeting, Ms. Portillo reported on the contact group's consultations. The SBSTA took note of the views of Parties on outstanding methodological issues as referred to in decision 2/CP.13, paragraph 7, and initiated consideration of how to address this matter. The SBSTA identified the main methodological issues that could be included in its report to the COP at its fourteenth session, as provided in annex III. The SBSTA decided to continue consideration of the outstanding methodological issues, including advancing the development of possible methodological approaches, on the basis of annex III, at its twenty-ninth session, taking into account: The outcome of the workshop to be held on 25 - 27 June 2008 in Tokyo, Japan, in accordance with decision 2/CP.13, paragraph 7 (b); The views from Parties referred to in paragraph 92 above; Outcomes that the SBSTA recognizes as methodologically relevant from the consideration of policy approaches and positive incentives on issues relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries; and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries under the AWG-LCA and any other relevant paragraphs of decision 1/CP.13 (the Bali Action Plan). The SBSTA requested its Chair to inform the AWG-LCA, at its third session, of the results of consultations and progress made during SBSTA 28 and at the workshop referred to in paragraph 94 (a) above. The SBSTA also agreed to consider, at its twenty-ninth session, ways to move the process forward, including the possible need for a fourth workshop, expert meetings and/or informal consultations to be initiated before its thirtieth session, subject to availability of supplementary funding. VI. Research and systematic observation (Agenda item 6) 1. Proceedings The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group co-chaired by Mr. Rolle (Bahamas) and Mr. Sergio Castellari (Italy). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Rolle reported on the contact group's consultations. In addition, the Chair provided an oral summary report on the informal discussion on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention, which took place as part of the dialogue in the context of decision 9/CP.11. 2. Conclusions The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information provided, in response to the invitation by the SBSTA at its twenty-sixth session, by regional and international climate change research programmes and organizations (hereinafter referred to as research programmes and organizations) on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention. The SBSTA expressed its appreciation for the valuable information, in particular on emerging scientific findings, provided by the representatives of research programmes and organizations and the IPCC during the informal discussion on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention, which took place as part of the dialogue between Parties and research programmes and organizations in the context of decision 9/CP.11. The SBSTA emphasized the usefulness of continuing and further enhancing this dialogue, including through broadening the participation of relevant regional research organizations. To this end, the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare, prior to SBSTA 30, a list of international and regional programmes and organizations active in areas of research relevant to climate change, and to post this list on the UNFCCC website. The SBSTA agreed that meetings under this dialogue during future sessions of the SBSTA should allow further in-depth consideration to be given to developments in the activities outlined in document FCCC/SBSTA/2007/4, paragraph 47 (a - f), and invited the research programmes and organizations to continue to provide information pertaining to these activities at the thirtieth and subsequent sessions of the SBSTA. It also requested the secretariat to inform Parties about the presentations of emerging scientific findings provided by the research programmes and organizations during sessions of the SBSTA. The SBSTA noted that these research programmes and organizations could further facilitate the dialogue through additional informal discussions with Parties and make use of the opportunities afforded by planned meetings outside the UNFCCC process. The SBSTA invited the research programmes and organizations to notify the secretariat of any such additional informal discussions and requested the secretariat to make such notifications available on the UNFCCC website. The SBSTA recognized the substantial challenges in the areas of research and related observations emerging from the IPCC AR4, the UNFCCC workshops and expert meetings on the AR4 and the Nairobi work programme, and the ongoing research dialogue in the context of decision 9/CP.11. The SBSTA encouraged Parties and the research programmes and organizations to further strengthen their efforts to address these challenges. The SBSTA stressed the need to enhance research and related institutional capacity, in particular in developing countries, through individual, bilateral and multilateral actions and/or through the research programmes and organizations. The SBSTA emphasized the need to enhance research activities aimed at supporting adaptation efforts, as identified by the ongoing work under the Nairobi work programme (see paragraphs 10 - 74 above). VII. Methodological issues under the Convention (Agenda item 7) Scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil (Agenda item 7 (a)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair with the assistance of Mr. Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Zhakata reported on these consultations. The SBSTA took note of the results of the work on scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil and of the views of Parties on the subject. The SBSTA expressed its appreciation for the work of Parties, research institutions and experts on scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil. It also expressed its appreciation to those governments that provided support for this work. The SBSTA agreed that the work carried out has established robust methodologies to quantify historical contributions to climate change and provided useful information that could help Parties to better understand the scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil. The SBSTA noted that there are uncertainties in the underlying historical emissions data, in particular from land-use change and forestry. The SBSTA further noted that the results of the work may be relevant to the work of Parties under other bodies and within other processes under the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. The SBSTA concluded its consideration of this issue. Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport (Agenda item 7 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd, 3rd and 4th meetings, on 4, 5 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 22 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Statements were also made by representatives of the secretariats of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization (IMO). At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would undertake informal consultations with interested Parties at this session on how this item would be considered. At the 4th meeting, the Chair reported on her consultations. The SBSTA received information from the secretariats of the ICAO and the IMO on ongoing work within these two organizations on emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport. The SBSTA took note of the views expressed by Parties on this information. Recognizing the need to continue the cooperation and the exchange of information between ICAO, IMO and the UNFCCC, the SBSTA agreed to continue to receive information from ICAO and IMO on relevant work on this issue in order to enable Parties to exchange views on this information during its next three sessions. The SBSTA agreed to further consider issues relevant to this agenda item at its thirty-second session. VIII. Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 8) (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23) (Agenda item 8 (a)) At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair with the assistance of Mr. Jeffrey Spooner (Jamaica). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Spooner reported on these consultations. The SBSTA recalled that the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol recognized, in its decision 8/CMP.1, that issuing certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23) at new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities could lead to higher global production of HCFC-22 and/or HFC-23 than would otherwise occur and that the clean development mechanism should not lead to such increases. The SBSTA did not complete its consideration of the issue under this agenda sub-item and agreed to continue its consideration of this issue at its twenty-ninth session. Carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as clean development mechanism project activities (Agenda item 8 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 19 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Umbrella Group and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair with the assistance of Ms. Gertraud Wollansky (Austria) and Mr. Mohammad Reazuddin (Bangladesh). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Reazuddin reported on these consultations. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered conclusions proposed by the Chair. However, the SBSTA did not agree to adopt these conclusions and so it could not conclude its consideration of the issue. Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 8 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair with the assistance of Ms. Anke Herold (European Community) and Mr. Nagmeldin Elhassan (Sudan). At the 4th meeting, Ms. Herold reported on these consultations. The SBSTA concluded its consideration of the information included in annex I of its report on its twenty-seventh session. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to integrate the formulae contained in annex IV into the CRF Reporter module being developed in accordance with decision 6/CMP.3, related to the table "Information table on accounting for activities under Article 3.3 and 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol", in order to facilitate reporting by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol. The SBSTA noted that the secretariat, in implementing the international transaction log (ITL), should ensure that, when carrying out the checks needed for operation of the ITL, full account is taken of decision 16/CMP.1. IX. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change (Agenda item 9) The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. In addition, one statement was made by a representative of an NGO. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations convened by the Chair with the assistance of Ms. Ermira Fida (Albania). At the 4th meeting, the Chair reported on behalf of Ms. Fida on these consultations. The SBSTA took note of views of Parties on possible future work on scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. The SBSTA agreed that its work under this agenda item to date, including the in-session workshops, has facilitated useful and informative exchanges of information and views among Parties and practitioners. The SBSTA recognized that the work and negotiations on the comprehensive post-2012 climate agreement under the Bali Action Plan address mitigation. The SBSTA agreed, noting the usefulness of working in a manner that is conducive to enhanced interaction among Parties, to consider this issue, taking into account the best available scientific information on mitigation, including in particular information from the IPCC, at its thirty-second session. X. Facilitating the exchange of information and the sharing of experiences on policies and measures of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 10) The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of three Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would draft conclusions and present them to the SBSTA at its 4th meeting. The SBSTA considered next steps in facilitating the exchange of information and sharing of experiences on policies and measures of Annex I Parties, taking into account the ongoing related work of other subsidiary bodies. The SBSTA noted that Parties have already addressed some aspects of this matter in the context of other agenda items of the SBSTA and the SBI. It also noted that this matter is currently under consideration by the AWG-KP and the AWG-LCA. The SBSTA recognized that duplication of work should be avoided and concluded its consideration of this matter under this agenda item. XI. Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 11) The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 5 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of nine Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and one on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair of the SBSTA informed Parties that the Chair of the SBI had commenced consultations on whether SBI agenda item 10, "Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol", could be considered together with this agenda item. The SBSTA agreed that the Chair would remain in contact with SBI Chair and, on the basis of the outcome, meet with interested Parties. At the 4th meeting, the Chair reported that, in the course of informal consultations, agreement had been reached for the SBI and SBSTA to establish a joint contact group to consider this SBSTA agenda item and the SBI agenda item. The joint contact group will commence its work at the twenty-ninth sessions of these subsidiary bodies. The Chair expressed her appreciation to Parties for their support of this proposal. XII. Cooperation with relevant international organizations (Agenda item 12) The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 4th meetings, on 4 and 13 June, respectively. Statements were made by the Executive Secretary, by a representative of the IPCC and by a representative of the secretariat of the United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF). In addition, written statements from the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and from the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) were distributed. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would draft conclusions and present them to the SBSTA at its 4th meeting. At the 4th meeting, the Chair gave an oral summary report on the in-session workshop on the IPCC AR4, which was organized in response to a mandate from the SBSTA at its twenty-seventh session and took place on 6 June 2008. The SBSTA took note of the statements by representatives of the IPCC and the secretariat of the UNFF. The SBSTA also took note of written statements made available by the secretariat of the CBD and by the IFRC. XIII. Other matters (Agenda item 13) No other matters were raised. XIV. Report on the session (Agenda item 14) At its 4th meeting, on 13 June, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on its twentyeighth session. At the same meeting, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report on the session, with the assistance of the secretariat. XV. Closure of the session At the 4th meeting, on 13 June, the secretariat shared with the SBSTA a preliminary evaluation of the financial impact of conclusions adopted by all bodies that had just met in Bonn, in accordance with decision 16/CP.9, paragraph 20. The secretariat indicated that most of the additional activities that it had been asked to undertake could be covered within resources foreseen in the core budget or had already been envisaged in the initial budget estimates under the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities. Approximately USD 2 million is needed to cover a wide range of activities that the secretariat has been asked to undertake to support the Nairobi work programme. Activities to be undertaken in 2008 and to some extent in 2009 should be covered through existing resources, but further contributions were requested in order to ensure sufficient resources to cover all mandated work. The secretariat will continue to analyse the conclusions to determine the exact amount of additional resources required. At the same meeting, the Chair thanked delegates, the chairs of the contact groups and facilitators of informal consultations for their contributions. Annex I Overview of outputs of activities completed up to the twenty-eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change Area of work Activities Outputs Sharing of information Expert meeting, 4 - 5 March 2008, Mexico City, Mexico Information on methods and tools for impact, vulnerability and adaptation assessments Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.12 and Add.1) Submissions from relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.13) Synthesis of information and views on methods and tools submitted by Parties and relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/8) Report on the expert meeting (FCCC/SBSTA/2008/3) 6 - 7 March 2008, Mexico City, Mexico Work that could contribute to the improved understanding of current and historical climate, and its impacts Submissions from the WMO and its member States and other relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.23) In-session workshop, 7 June 2008, Bonn, Germany Ways to contribute to climate modelling, scenarios and downscaling Submissions from relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.24 and Add.1) Workshop, 18 - 20 June 2007, Cairo, Egypt Relevant programmes, activities and views on the issues relating to climate-related risks and extreme events Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.4 and Add.1 and 2) Submissions from relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.5) Report on the workshop (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/7) 10 - 12 March 2008, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago Information and views on socio-economic information Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.21 and Add.1) Submissions from relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.22) Report on the expert meeting (FCCC/SBSTA/2008/2) 10 - 12 September 2007, Rome, Italy Information on adaptation approaches, strategies, practices and technologies at the regional, national and local levels in different sectors, as well as on experiences, needs and concerns Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.10 and Add.1) Submissions from relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.11) Synthesis of information and views on adaptation planning and practices submitted by Parties and relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/9) Synthesis report on the outputs of the work of the LEG, the CGE and the EGTT, relevant to adaptation planning and practices (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/10) Report on the workshop (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/15) A web-based interface providing information on existing adaptation practices and local coping strategies for adaptation (http://unfccc.int/4363) Synthesis report of ongoing and planned adaptation research and adaptation research needs (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/12) 5 April 2008, Bangkok, Thailand Information on technologies for adaptation Submissions by Parties and relevant organizations as part of submissions on adaptation planning and practices Synthesis report on technologies for adaptation identified in the submissions from Parties and relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/6) Report on the workshop (FCCC/SBSTA/2008/4) Information on economic diversification Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.15 and Add.1) Submissions from relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.16) Synthesis of information on economic diversification submitted by Parties and relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/14) Sharing of views on a group of experts on adaptation Views on the possible need for a group of experts and the role that they could have in the implementation and further development of the Nairobi work programme Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.25 and Corr.1) Sharing of views on further activities Views on further activities under the Nairobi work programme Submissions from Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.3 and Add.1 and 2) Abbreviations: CGE = Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention, EGTT = Expert Group on Technology Transfer, LEG = Least Developed Countries Expert Group, WMO = World Meteorological Organization. Annex II Overview of activities to be undertaken and outputs from the second phase of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change Year SBSTA Session Before/by 29 Before/by 30 Before/by 31 Before/by 32 Before/by 33 Focus area Engagement of organizations, dissemination of outcomesa Dialogue between focal points and Parties Technical workshop on promoting the role of regional centres and networks Report on the workshop User-friendly UNFCCC Compendium Report on the in-session workshopb Climate- related risks and extreme events Technical paper Submissions by 18 September 2009 Miscellaneous document Technical workshop on costs and benefits of adaptation options Synthesis report Submissions by 20 March 2009 Technical workshop on integration of risk management Enhanced web-based interface on adaptation practices Technical workshop on integration of approaches Synthesis report Miscellaneous document Research dialogue Technology for adaptation Technical workshop on increasing economic resilience Generala Progress report Summary report of the first phaseb Report on lessons learned in involving expertsc Informal meeting of representa-tives of Parties Summary report of the second phase Report on the informal meeting a Cross-cutting areas of work. b Mandated at SBSTA 25. c Mandated at SBSTA 27. Annex III Main methodological issues The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, in undertaking its programme of work on methodological issues as referred to in decision 2/CP.13, paragraph 7, based on the views of Parties, identified, inter alia, the following issues for further consideration: Estimation and monitoring Issues for estimating and monitoring changes in forest cover and associated carbon stocks and greenhouse gas emissions, incremental changes due to sustainable management of the forest, reduction of emissions from deforestation, and reduction of emissions from forest degradation, in relation to: National monitoring systems to facilitate results-based, demonstrable, transparent and verifiable estimates; Options for robust, consistent methodologies including forest inventories, ground-based, and remote-sensing approaches, as appropriate; Applicability of the considered methodologies, including those in existing good practice guidance of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), to the assessment of reductions in emissions from deforestation; reductions in emissions from degradation; and incremental changes due to sustainable management of the forest. Reference emissions levels Means to establish reference emission levels, based on historical data, taking into account, inter alia, trends, starting dates and the length of the reference period, availability and reliability of historical data, and other specific national circumstances. Displacement of emissions Means to identify and address displacement of emissions. National and subnational approaches Implications of national approaches, including reference levels, estimates, reporting, and intra-national displacement of emissions if appropriate, taking into account national circumstances; Implications of subnational approaches, including reference levels and estimates, reporting, intra-national displacement of emissions, taking into account national circumstances; How subnational approaches can be used to develop national approaches. Capacity-building Identification of capacity-building needs to implement the methodologies considered in this annex, including, inter alia, technology, data collection, institutional arrangements and national monitoring systems, in order to facilitate technical support and cooperation where appropriate. Effectiveness of actions Effectiveness of actions relating to paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 5 of decision 2/CP.13, and criteria for evaluation of actions including ongoing efforts, emission reductions and/or enhancement of removals achieved, further efforts needed and mobilization of resources; Lessons learned from demonstration activities. Cross-cutting issues Means to address non-permanence; Comparability and transparency in assessment of carbon stocks of diverse ecosystems; Financial implications for implementing methodological approaches; Institutional requirements for implementing methodological approaches; Any implications of methodological approaches for indigenous people and local communities; Implications for the promotion of co-benefits taking note of the aims and objectives of other relevant international conventions and agreements; Implications of methods to verify estimates of emission reductions and enhancement of removals and changes in forest cover; Implications of different definitions of forest and relevant forest-related activities on assessment of emission reductions and enhancement of removals and changes in forest cover; Means to deal with uncertainties in estimates aiming to ensure that reductions in emissions or increases in removals are not over-estimated, including those existing in IPCC guidance. Annex IV Calculation of accounting quantities for activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol Table 1 shows in a tabular format the calculation of the accounting quantity for each of the activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol, for the first commitment period. Symbols and formulae used in the table are explained on the subsequent pages. Table 1. Calculation of accounting quantities for activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4 All values are reported in table 5(KP) of the CRF for the relevant inventory year as reported in the current submission and are automatically entered in this table. In accordance with paragraph 4 of the annex to decision 16/CMP.1, debits resulting from harvesting during the first commitment period following Afforestation and Reforestation since 1990 shall not be greater than credits accounted for on that unit of land. Page 33 In accordance with paragraph 10 of the annex to decision 16/CMP.1, for the first commitment period, a Party included in Annex I that incurs a net source of emissions under the provisions of Article 3.3 may account for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks in areas under Forest Management under Article 3.4, up to a level that is equal to the net source of emissions under the provisions of Article 3.3, but not greater than 9.0 megatonnes of carbon times five, if the total anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks in the managed forest since 1990 is equal to, or larger than, the net source of emissions incurred under Article 3.3. In accordance with paragraph 11 of the annex to decision 16/CMP.1, for the first commitment period only, additions to and subtractions from the assigned amount of a Party resulting from Forest Management under Article 3.4, after the application of paragraph 10 of the annex to decision 16/CMP.1 and resulting from Forest Management project activities undertaken under Article 6, shall not exceed the value inscribed in the appendix of the annex to decision 16/CMP.1, times five. Net emissions and removals in the Party's base year, as established by decision 9/CP.2. Cumulative net emissions and removals for all years of the commitment period reported in the current submission. The values in the cells "3.3 offset" and "FM cap" are absolute values. The accounting quantity is the total quantity of units to be added to or subtracted from a Party's assigned amount for a particular activity in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.4 of the Kyoto Protocol. Key to symbols used in table 1 ARnht = net emissions and removals for category A.1.1 for commitment period year t, in Gg CO2 eq ARhxt = net emissions and removals for a particular land unit (x) in category A.1.2 for commitment period year t, in Gg CO2 eq Dt = net emissions and removals for category A.2 for commitment period year t, in Gg CO2 eq CAP = value inscribed for Party in annex to decision 16/CMP.1, converted to Gg CO2 eq and multiplied by five FMt = net emissions and removals for category B.1 for commitment period year t, in CMBY = net emissions and removals for category B.2 for the Party's base year, in Gg CO2 eq CMt = net emissions and removals for category B.2 for commitment period year t in GLMBY = net emissions and removals for category B.3 for the Party's base year, in GLMt = net emissions and removals for category B.3 for commitment period year t in RVBY = net emissions and removals for category B.4 for the Party's base year, in Gg CO2 eq RVt = net emissions and removals for category B.4 for commitment period year t in Afforestation and Reforestation ARnhT = (ARnht), where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment period AQARnhT = ARnhT ARhxt = net emissions and removals for a particular land unit in category A.1.2 for ARhxT = (ARhxt) for a particular land unit (x), AQARhxT: If ARhxT >= 0, then AQARhxT = 0, else AQARhxT = ARhxT AQARhT = AQARhxT, where U is the last unit of land harvested AQART = AQARnhT + AQARhT Deforestation Dt = net emissions and removals for category A.2 for commitment period year t, in DT = (Dt), where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment period AQDT = DT Forest Management CAP = value inscribed for Party in annex to decision 16/CMP.1, converted to Gg CO2 eq and multiplied by 5 AQART = total accounting quantity for afforestation and reforestation AQDT = total accounting quantity for deforestation OFFARD: IF (AQART + AQDT) <= 0, then OFFARD = 0; else IF (AQART + AQDT) < 165,000, then OFFARD = (AQART + AQDT); else OFFARD = 165,000 FMT = (FMt), where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment period AQOFF: If the total anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks in the managed forest since 19901 is equal to, or larger than, the net source of emissions incurred under Article 3, paragraph 3,2 then if (OFFARD = 0 or FMT >= 0), then AQOFF = 0; else if FMT< OFFARD then AQOFF = FMT; else AQOFF = - OFFARD else AQOFF = 0 AQCAP: If FMT - AQOFF <= CAP, then AQCAP = FMT - AQOFF, else if FMT - AQOFF < 0, then AQCAP = - CAP; else AQCAP = CAP AQFM = AQCAP + AQOFF Cropland Management CMBY = net emissions and removals for category B.2 for the Party's base year, in CMT = (CMt), where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment CPN = number of years reported since the beginning of the commitment period, CPN = N - 2007, where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment period CMnet = CMBY * CPN AQCMT = CMT - CMnet Grazing Land Management GLMT = (GLMt), where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment GLMnet = GLMBY * CPN AQGLMT = GLMT - GLMnet Revegetation RVBY = net emissions and removals for category B.4 for the Party's base year, in RVt = net emissions and removals for category B.4 for commitment period year t, in RVT = (RVt), where N is the most recently reported year of the commitment RVnet = RVBY * CPN AQRVT = RVT - RVnet Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its twenty-eighth session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/SBSTA/2008/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBSTA/2008/2 Report on the expert meeting on socio-economic information. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2008/3 Report on the expert meeting on methods and tools and on data and observations. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2008/4 Report on the joint expert meeting on technologies for adaptation to climate change. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2008/5 Report on the meeting of representatives from Parties on the outcomes of the activities completed under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2008/INF.1 Synthesis of views on issues relevant to the consideration of carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as clean development mechanism project activities. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2008/INF.2 Proposed terms of reference for a report on performance indicators and for a report on future financing options for enhancing technology transfer. Note by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.1 Results of the work on scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.2 Views on the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.3 and Add.1 and 2 Views on further activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.4 and Add.1 - 3 Views on outstanding methodological issues related to policy approaches and positive incentives to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.5 Views on the results of the work on scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.6 and Add.1 Possible future work on scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.7 Need for further events to facilitate the exchange of information and the sharing of experiences on policies and measures of Annex I Parties. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.8 and Add.1 Information provided by regional and international climate change research programmes and organizations on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention. Submissions from regional and international climate change research programmes and organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2008/MISC.9 Information provided by the International Maritime Organization. Submission from an intergovernmental organization FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.1 Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-eighth session. FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.2 Implications of the establishment of new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23). Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.3 Facilitating the exchange of information and the sharing of experiences on policies and measures of Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.4 Development and transfer of technologies. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.5 Research and systematic observation. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.6 Cooperation with relevant international organizations. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.7 Scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.8 Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.9 Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.11 Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.12 Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2008/L.13/Rev.1 Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Revised draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SB/2008/INF.1 Work programme of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer for 2008 - 2009. Note by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer FCCC/SBSTA/2007/16 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-seventh session, held in Bali from 3 to 11 December 2007 FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.17 Views on possible approaches to address the implications of crediting new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 facilities. Submissions from Parties and intergovernmental organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2007/MISC.18 and Add.1 and 2 Consideration of carbon dioxide capture and storage as clean development mechanism project activities. Submissions from Parties FCCC/CP/2007/6 Report of the Conference of the Parties on its thirteenth session, held in Bali from 3 to 15 December 2007 FCCC/SBSTA/2006/5 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-fourth session, held at Bonn from 18 to 26 May 2006 FCCC/SBSTA/2004/INF.10 Options for approaches to sharing experience and exchanging information on "good practices" in policies and measures. Note by the secretariat 