%%%PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|DESERTIFICATION|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|

UNITED NATIONS Convention to Combat Desertification Distr. ICCD/CRIC(7)/2/Add.3 27 August 2008 Original: ENGLISH Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention Seventh Session Istanbul, 3 - 14 November 2008 Item 3 (b) (ii) of the provisional agenda The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention Consideration of the work plans of the Convention bodies The multi-year work plan for the Global Mechanism The 10-year Strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention Note by the Global Mechanism Addendum Consideration of the draft multi-year work plan for the Global Mechanism Summary The Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) adopted a 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (The Strategy) in 2007 through decision 3/COP.8. This decision requests the Global Mechanism (GM) of the UNCCD to revise its strategic and operational planning documents, taking a results-based management approach, to make them consistent with The Strategy, and to present its planned contribution to The Strategy. The GM's four-year work plan is contained in this document. The Strategy identifies three operational objectives where the GM is seen to have a central or supporting role. This document provides a logical framework around these three objectives. As a direct contribution to The Strategy, during 2008 - 2011 the GM will progressively specialize in the provision of support services to focal point institutions on financial issues, including public budget allocations, innovative funding sources and private investments. The GM will continue to use tools such as partnership building, mainstreaming and knowledge exchange on emerging mechanisms, instruments and approaches for the purpose of developing integrated financing strategies leading to investment frameworks as envisaged in The Strategy. The GM works with the UNCCD secretariat to enhance the awareness and outreach of the Convention and to increase political support and interest as necessary components for increasing investments and financial flows into UNCCD-related issues. The present document presents the expected accomplishments of the GM during this four-year period, together with the related performance indicators. The expected accomplishments represent the strategic outcomes that constitute the GM's contribution to the overall achievement of the operational objectives of The Strategy. However, successful achievement of these accomplishments requires the active participation of its partners and other stakeholders. The performance indicators provide the tools for measuring the level of achievement for each accomplishment. CONTENTS Paragraphs Page Abbreviations 3 I. Introduction: Presentation of the Four-Year Work Plan of the Global Mechanism 1 - 18 4 A. Background and context 1 - 4 4 Orientation of the Strategy of the Global Mechanism 5 - 10 5 The Long-term Objectives of the Global Mechanism 11 - 13 6 Alignment with The Strategy and results-based management in the UNCCD secretariat 14 - 18 7 II. The four-year work plan of the Global Mechanism 19 - 25 8 Abbreviations COP Conference of the Parties to the UNCCD CSO civil society organization CRIC Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FC Facilitation Committee of the GM GEF Global Environment Facility GM Global Mechanism of the UNCCD IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development IFS integrated financing strategy JIU Joint Inspection Unit JWP joint work programme of the UNCCD secretariat and GM MOU Memorandum of Understanding MEA Multilateral Environmental Agreement NAP national action plan RBM results-based management RD regional desks of the GM SLM sustainable land management SP Strategic Programmes of the GM UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme Year Work Plan of the Global Mechanism A. Background and context 1. The Global Mechanism (GM) was established as a subsidiary body within the legal framework of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) under Article 21. The GM's core mandate is derived from the Convention itself. Article 21 of the text of the Convention states that in order to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of existing financial mechanisms, a Global Mechanism to promote actions leading to the mobilization and channelling of substantial financial resources, including for the transfer of technology is hereby established. The GM is set up according to this basic mandate and guided by the numerous decisions of the sessions of the Conference of the Parties (COP). The GM functions as a counterpart to the focal point institutions of the UNCCD and other governmental entities, in particular ministries of finance. 2. The GM's governance structure includes the COP of the UNCCD, to which it is accountable. The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is responsible for administrative oversight, based on an MOU with the COP. The GM works closely with IFAD, in particular with the Programme Management Department, which is the operational investment department of IFAD. The Facilitation Committee (FC) of the GM guides the approaches and the strategies of the GM and serves in an advisory role. While the COP is the UNCCD's supreme governing body, the FC, established by the COP at its first session (decision 25/COP1), supports the GM in enhancing systematic institutional linkages with international organizations, such as The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and in particular international finance institutions such as the World Bank and regional development banks. The three founding agencies of the FC - IFAD, The World Bank and the UNDP - support the GM more directly, including through financial contributions, with IFAD being its largest donor. 3. With the GM focusing its work on promoting actions leading to the mobilization of financial resources, the changing international setting for development cooperation and shifting approaches to resource allocation for development - as outlined, inter alia, in the Monterrey Consensus and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness - have had a major effect on the work of the GM, creating considerable challenges. The GM has responded to these various challenges since 2005 by developing new approaches and strategies in support of affected countries. Country Parties have recognized this changing context and at the seventh session of the COP to the UNCCD (COP 7), in Nairobi in 2005, encouraged the GM to implement its Consolidated Strategy and Enhanced Approach, which constitutes an operational response to the challenges described above. 4. The UNCCD 10-year Strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (The Strategy) , adopted at the eighth session of the COP of the UNCCD (COP 8) in September 2007, forms the foundation for the GM's results-based management (RBM) system, its four-year work plan and the revision of the GM's strategies. B. Orientation of the Strategy of the Global Mechanism 5. For the period 2008 - 2011 the GM derives its specific guidance from The Strategy, which contains a set of four (longer-term) strategic objectives and five (short- to medium-term) operational objectives that have the combined aim of increasing the effectiveness of the implementation of the UNCCD between 2008 and 2018. 6. In view of the GM's mandate, the COP decided through decision 3/COP.8 that in the context of The Strategy, the GM has a central responsibility for contributing to: Operational objective 5: Financing and technology transfer - To mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and multilateral financial and technological resources in order to increase their impact and effectiveness. 7. The COP also decided that the GM has a supporting role in contributing to: Operational objective 1: Advocacy, awareness raising and education - To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors in adequately addressing desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues. Operational objective 2: Policy framework - To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought. 8. As a consequence of the decisions taken at COP 8, the GM has implemented a new institutional setting, is currently revising its Consolidated Strategy and Enhanced Approach and is establishing an operational strategy for cooperating with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) as requested by the COP. All the strategic work of the GM that will be considered by the ninth session of the COP of the UNCCD in 2009 is informed by and based on the results of several evaluations, including: external evaluations of the GM undertaken in 2003 and adopted at the sixth session of the COP of the UNCCD in Havana, the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) evaluation in 2005, considered at COP 7; and the Intersessional Intergovernmental Working Group of the UNCCD, which elaborated The Strategy. 9. The GM is responding to The Strategy through an organized in-house institutional change process supported by IFAD in order to improve cooperation between international finance institutions and the GM as well as with other international organizations, including GM FC members, in particular on the nexus between finance and climate change adaptation and sustainable land management (SLM). An important element in this process is the renewed and enhanced coordination and collaboration with the UNCCD secretariat, which aims to increase the Convention's effectiveness through improved working modalities under the joint work programme (JWP) called for by country Parties at COP 8. The decisions taken at COP 8 on The Strategy include an implementation framework that clarifies the different mandates, roles and functions of the secretariat and the GM. This framework will govern future cooperation between the two distinct entities of the Convention. 10. A JIU evaluation of the cooperation between IFAD and the GM will contain recommendations on further strengthening this relationship based on the legal identity of the GM as a subsidiary body of the Convention, and on the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on hosting arrangements between IFAD and the COP. With this evaluation, the GM will be fully positioned as a special service provider on finance for the UNCCD. C. The Long-term Objectives of the Global Mechanism 11. The overarching long-term objective of the GM for the four-year period 2008 - 2011 coincides with strategic objective 4 of The Strategy: To mobilize resources to support implementation of the Convention through building effective partnerships between national and international actors. The outputs of the GM, which are presented in ICCD/CRIC(7)/2/Add.4, will thus contribute to this objective of The Strategy. 12. During 2008 - 2011 the GM will continue progressively to specialize in the provision of support services to focal point institutions on financial issues - including public budget allocations, innovative sources and private investments. The GM will pursue this as a direct response to The Strategy, which calls for integrated financing strategies of country Parties to increase investments in SLM. Indeed, as a result of the new modalities for resource allocation and the increasing importance of national development priorities to driving domestic budgeting processes in developing countries, as well as access to development cooperation finance and to private and public specific vertical funds at the international level, the GM aims to position itself as an innovative entity to enable country Parties to access these sources of finance. Over the next four years, in accordance with its mandate, the GM will offer a range of financial advisory services packaged into national-level programmes and/or subregional initiatives; perform portfolio analysis of multilaterals and bilaterals; engage in data collection and analysis of financial flows; explore new and innovative sources and mechanisms; and assess readiness for accessing market-based mechanisms. 13. The main instrument for the support of country Parties by the GM is the Integrated Financing Strategy (IFS), which guides the establishment of an investment framework for implementing the UNCCD through mobilizing a blend of financing including from innovative sources for the implementation of on-the-ground SLM projects and programmes, and which facilitates the enhancement of the enabling policy as well as the legislative, institutional and incentive frameworks that influence resource mobilization called for in The Strategy under operational objective 5. D. Alignment with The Strategy and results-based management in the UNCCD secretariat 14. The GM has adapted its RBM approach to The Strategy and harmonized it with the UNCCD secretariat's logical framework in terms of nomenclature and approach. These adjustments resulted in 13 expected accomplishments contributing to the outcomes and operational objectives of The Strategy. 15. As is evident from Figure 1, the RBM system of the GM is fully aligned with The Strategy. With regard to responsibilities for achievements, it should be noted that expected accomplishments are the joint responsibility of the GM and the partners with which it works, including the UNCCD secretariat, while the GM is to be held fully accountable for achieving its outputs. It should also be noted that the achievement of the strategic objectives and operational objectives in The Strategy lies with the entire UNCCD community, in particular the country Parties supported by the UNCCD's subsidiary bodies, donor agencies and international organizations. Figure 1: GM alignment with The Strategy 16. The GM is harmonizing nomenclature and its RBM approach with the UNCCD secretariat as part of the JWP for the period 2008 - 2009 as requested at COP 8. The JWP is one of the instruments established by The Strategy to ensure the consistent and complementary delivery of services along the lines of the strategic plan and is fully governed by RBM. The JWP has a standing RBM activity line regarding the continuous improvement of the RBM systems of the secretariat, the Committee for Science and Technology, the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC) and the GM. 17. It should be noted that all the outputs of the JWP are integral parts of the respective two-year work programmes and budgets of the secretariat and the GM. Budget allocations for the activities under the JWP form part of the overall budgets of the secretariat and the GM. In order to meet its overall objectives and expected accomplishments, the GM will: provide technical backstopping for the development of comprehensive integrated financing strategies that blend public, private and innovative sources of financing; provide strategic advisory services to broaden access to financing from non-traditional sources such as through compensation for environmental services, the synergistic implementation of multilateral environmental agreements, adaptation to climate change, trade, the private sector, forestry and civil society; cooperate with national donor partners, and multilateral organizations and financing institutions and enter into partnerships to facilitate harmonization and alignment with national UNCCD priorities; develop knowledge products with partners, particularly analyses of finance-related aspects of land degradation, such as reviews of economic policy, public expenditure and portfolios , institutional mapping and budgetary processes; build the capacity of national counterparts to navigate resource mobilization processes effectively, including national budgetary processes and new and innovative funding sources and mechanisms; and cooperate closely with the UNCCD secretariat and establish working modalities to contribute jointly to the achievement of operational objectives where joint responsibilities have been assigned in relation to advocacy, awareness raising, education and policy frameworks. II. The four-year work plan of the Global Mechanism 19. Based on the GM's overall mandate, The Strategy for 2008 - 2018 calls on the GM under operational objective 5: financing and technology transfer to implement a programme of work to: (i) engage with public financing institutions and the private sector under the IFS ; (ii) advise and assist affected country Parties to develop integrated investment frameworks for leveraging national, bilateral and multilateral resources; (iii) explore new sources of finance and financing mechanisms; (iv) support the development of subregional financing platforms and (v) support the transfer of technology. 20. Given the need to integrate relevant issues into frameworks and programmes to increase financing flows, the GM also, as is mentioned above, has a supporting role in achieving operational objective 1: advocacy, awareness raising and education, in terms of influencing international, national and local processes and stakeholders to adequately address desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues; and operational objective 2: policy framework, in terms of creating the enabling environment for SLM financing to be taken into account in relevant sectors and by stakeholders. 21. It should be noted that the GM is contributing to operational objectives 1 and 2 mostly in terms of financial, mainstreaming and governance issues, and through partnership building in accordance with its mandate and COP decisions. In this regard, most of the expected accomplishments of the GM and its partners identified under operational objective 5 are also contributions to operational objectives 1 and 2. Therefore, the GM's expected accomplishments under operational objectives 1 and 2 should be seen as supporting and being directly relevant to operational objective 5. UNCCD operational objectives: These are the operational objectives adopted in The Strategy for the period 2008 - 20018. UNCCD outcomes: The outcomes for all Parties and stakeholders of the UNCCD, as identified under each operational objective in The Strategy. Expected accomplishments: What the GM is expected to accomplish with its partners, including affected developing country partners, development cooperation partners and investors. Performance indicators: The quantitative dimension of the indicators needs to be agreed by country Parties, since the GM cannot predict the scale of voluntary contributions from country Parties over a four-year period, but only through the two-year planning cycle of the COP. UNCCD operational objective 5: financing and technology transfer To mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and multilateral financial and technological resources in order to increase their impact and effectiveness 22. To support country Parties in mobilizing and improving the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and multilateral financial and technological resources for SLM. UNCCD OUTCOME 5.1: Affected country Parties develop integrated investment frameworks for leveraging national, bilateral and multilateral resources with a view to increasing the effectiveness and impact of interventions. EXPECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS PERFORMANCE INDICATORS EA 5.1: Increased knowledge and use by affected country Parties of IFSs leading to the development of integrated investment frameworks for financing SLM. The number of country programmes supported. The number of integrated financing strategy-related processes supported. The number of countries supported through regional and sub-regional processes. The number of participants reached through training sessions on IFSs. UNCCD OUTCOME 5.2: Developed country Parties provide substantial, adequate, timely and predictable financial resources to support domestic initiatives to reverse and prevent desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought EA 5.2 : Increased mainstreaming of SLM into the development cooperation programming frameworks of developed country Parties, leading to support for affected developing country Parties' initiatives to reverse and prevent desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought (Same as EA2.4). The number of developed countries with which the GM is engaged in order to increase their programmatic and financial support for SLM and for combating desertification, land degradation and drought. The number of subregional and country initiatives contributing to improved effectiveness, harmonization and alignment among development cooperation programmes. UNCCD OUTCOME 5.3: Parties increase their efforts to mobilize financial resources from international financial institutions, facilities and funds, including the Global Environment Facility (GEF), by promoting the UNCCD/ SLM agenda within the governing bodies of these institutions EA 5.3: Increased intergovernmental and interagency collaboration to increase finance flows and investments into SLM. The number of partnership initiatives supported for finance on SLM. The number of portfolio reviews conducted of IFIs and bilateral organizations. Decisions taken in governing bodies to increase finance flows and investments in combating desertification, land degradation and drought. A GM/GEF strategy developed and operationalized. A contribution by the GM to measurable, mobilized financial resources. UNCCD OUTCOME 5.4: Innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms are identified to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought, including from the private sector, market-based mechanisms, trade, foundations and civil society organizations (CSOs), and other financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable use and for hunger and poverty reduction EA5.4: Increased understanding and use of innovative sources of finance and innovative financing mechanisms to combat desertification, land degradation and drought. The number of countries for which innovative sources of finance and innovative financing mechanisms are part of country programmes. The number of tools produced and disseminated to promote an understanding and the use of innovative sources of finance. The number of participants reached through training on IFSs. Decisions and policy recommendations adopted in policy forums, in which UNCCD/SLM are increasingly seen by other sectors as beneficial to other sectors and to the development and poverty reduction agenda. UNCCD OUTCOME 5.5: Access to technology by affected country Parties is facilitated through adequate financing, effective economic and policy incentives and technical support, notably within the framework of South-to-South and North-to-South cooperation EA5.5: Increased South-to-South and North-to-South cooperation in support of measures to facilitate access by affected country Parties to technology and finance. The number of South-to-South and North-to-South SLM initiatives. The number of policy recommendations by the COP addressing incentives for technology transfer and their financing. UNCCD OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 1: Advocacy, awareness raising and education To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors in adequately addressing desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues 23. The GM contributes to advocacy and awareness raising in order to increase financial flows and investments for SLM by working with its partners to achieve the expected accomplishments set out below: UNCCD OUTCOME 1.1: Desertification/land degradation and drought issues and the synergies with climate change adaptation/mitigation and biodiversity conservation are effectively communicated among key constituencies at the international, national and local levels EA1.1: Opportunities for increasing financial flows and investments for SLM, including through synergies with climate change adaptation and mitigation, and biodiversity conservation are strategically communicated. The number of initiatives in country programmes using synergistic approaches to increase financial flows and investments for SLM. The number of communication- and knowledge-based products disseminated on synergies and finance. The number of hits on the GM website. The number of e-newsletters distributed. The number of persons on the GM e-mail list. Increased experience sharing with other Multilateral Environmental Agreement (MEA) secretariats on synergies, shared approaches, and opportunities for and obstacles to sustained and predictable financing and investment. UNCCD OUTCOME 1.2: Desertification/land degradation and drought issues are addressed in relevant international forums, including those pertaining to agricultural trade, climate change adaptation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, rural development, sustainable development and poverty reduction EA1.2: Forums of substantive and political relevance to SLM, including those pertaining to agriculture, trade, adaptation to climate change, etc, are informed on issues related to financial flows and investments for SLM, and increasingly address land degradation issues and take decisions to facilitate increased investments in SLM. The number of substantive inputs and engagements in relevant forums and organizations. UNCCD issues are reflected in the outputs of international, regional and subregional initiatives, conferences and forums. UNCCD OUTCOME 1.3: CSOs and the scientific community in the North and the South are increasingly engaged as stakeholders in the Convention processes and desertification/land degradation and drought are addressed in their advocacy, awareness-raising and education initiatives EA1.3: CSOs and the scientific community are increasingly engaged as stakeholders in promoting investments in SLM and in building evidence for increasing investments in SLM. The number of initiatives and country programmes with civil society components. The number of initiatives in which the scientific and technical community is making the social, economic and development case for investments in the UNCCD and SLM. UNCCD OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 2: Policy framework To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought 24. To contribute to ensuring that the financial and socio-economic drivers of SLM are duly taken into account in relevant policy and planning processes at all levels, as a foundation for increased financial flows and investments in SLM. UNCCD OUTCOME 2.1: Policy, institutional, financial and socio-economic drivers of desertification/land degradation and barriers to SLM are assessed, and appropriate measures to remove these barriers are recommended EA2.1: Improved policy frameworks are developed at all levels that take into account the financial and socio-economic drivers of desertification/land degradation and the barriers to SLM. The number of country programmes with a mainstreaming component for the UNCCD and SLM. The number of inputs to policy forums and deliberations relevant to increasing financial flows and investments and to moving UNCCD concerns higher up the policy agenda. Policy recommendations by the COP that remove barriers to and provide incentives for increased financial flows and investments. UNCCD OUTCOME 2.2: Affected country Parties revise their national action programmes (NAPs) into strategic documents supported by biophysical and socio-economic baseline information and include them in integrated investment frameworks EA2.: Development of IFSs that are mutually reinforcing with the strategic NAP processes and provide a basis for investment frameworks. The number of IFSs and investment frameworks that are informed by strategic NAP documents. EA2.3: Affected country Parties integrate their NAPs and SLM and land degradation issues into national development planning and relevant sectoral and investment plans and policies. UNCCD OUTCOME 2.4: Developed country Parties mainstream UNCCD objectives and SLM interventions into their development cooperation programmes/projects in line with their support to national sectoral and investment plans EA2.4: Increased mainstreaming of SLM into the development cooperation programming frameworks of developed country Parties, leading to support for affected developing country Parties' initiatives to reverse and prevent desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought (same as EA5.2). The number of developed countries with which GM is engaged that increase their programmatic and financial support for SLM and for combating desertification and drought. UNCCD OUTCOME 2.5: Mutually reinforcing measures among desertification/land degradation action programmes and biodiversity and climate change mitigation and adaptation are introduced or strengthened in order to enhance the impact of interventions EA2.5: Increased use of opportunities to increase mobilization of financial resources through synergistic implementation. The number of initiatives and country programmes using synergistic approaches to increase financial flows and investments for SLM. The number of communication- and knowledge-based products and activities developed on synergies and finance. Policy recommendations by the UNCCD COP that address measures to improve opportunities for increased financial flows and investments into SLM 25. In addition to the work of the GM in the framework of operational objectives 5, 1 and 2, information is provided also on its management and administration related tasks. This information is presented as the sixth area of work (in reference to the five operational objectives) and is called Executive direction and management. 6: Executive direction and management The GM, as a strategic partner, actively supports the implementation of The Strategy for the benefit and satisfaction of the Parties to the Convention, its secretariat and the GM's host organization, the IFAD, through effective business and management processes. 6.1: The work programme and change processes are effectively managed. The percentage of outputs delivered. Openness to innovation and change is encouraged and rewarded. 6.2: Adequate and predictable financial and human resources are available for implementation of the work programme of the GM. Budget performance. The level of voluntary funding available. 6.3: Compliance with IFAD policies and procedures with respect to the management of the work programme and of staff and financial resources IFAD audit results are satisfactory. 6.4: Improved geographical representation and gender balance of regular staff and long-term consultants. The gender balance of regular staff and long-term consultants. The geographical balance of regular staff and long-term consultants. 6.5: The JWP with the UNCCD secretariat is developed and implemented based on mutual respect and the efficient delivery of products and services to the Parties to the UNCCD. The JWP is established to the mutual satisfaction of the GM and the UNCCD secretariat. Regular monthly management meetings of the UNCCD Executive Secretary and the Managing Director of the GM are held alternately in Bonn and Rome. Joint messages are sent and positions taken in the CRIC and the COP as well as other international and regional forums to enable the impact-oriented operational strategies of the two entities to support the implementation of the Convention and The Strategy. Sound budget administration for management of the COP financial contribution. Improved teamwork between the staff of the secretariat and the GM based on transparency, confidence and trust between management of the two entities. 6.6: FC Mandate revised in order to provide a strengthened interagency response to The Strategy Mandate revised. 6.7: Timely and relevant documentation prepared for bodies of the Convention and follow-up managed. All documents serve the purposes of the requesting bodies. Follow-up is implemented. 