%%%BIOGRAPHY|ELECTION OF OFFICERS|

Fourteenth session Kingston, Jamaica 26 May-6 June 2008 Election to fill a vacancy on the Legal and Technical Commission in accordance with Part XI, section 4, subsection C, article 163, paragraph 7, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea Note by the Secretary-General 1. The Council is invited to note that Michael Wiedicke-Hombach (Germany), member of the Legal and Technical Commission, has resigned. Mr. Wiedicke-Hombach was elected a member of the Commission on 14 August 2006 (see ISBA/12/C/11), for a term of five years beginning 1 January 2007. 2. In accordance with article 163, paragraph 7, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and rule 80, paragraph 3, of the Rules of Procedure of the Council of the International Seabed Authority, in the event of the death, incapacity or resignation of a member of the Commission prior to the expiration of his or her term of office, the Council shall elect for the remainder of the term a member from the same geographical region or area of interest. 3. Article 163, paragraph 3, of the Convention and rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of the Council provide that members of the Commission shall have appropriate qualifications in the area of competence of the Commission, and States parties shall nominate candidates of the highest standards of competence and integrity with qualifications in the relevant fields so as to ensure the effective exercise of the functions of the Commission. 4. By a letter dated 8 April 2008, the Permanent Mission of Germany to the Authority informed the secretariat of the Authority of the nomination of Christian Reichert, head of the Geophysical subdivision of the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources, as a candidate to fill the vacant seat on the Commission. The curriculum vitae of Dr. Reichert appears in the annex to the present document. a Reproduced in the original language of submission. Curriculum vitaea Christian Jürgen Reichert (Germany) 