%%%PEACEBUILDING|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|BURUNDI|BURUNDI SITUATION|GOVERNANCE|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|IMPUNITY|LAND REFORM|CEASEFIRES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|HUMAN RIGHTS|

Peacebuilding Commission Second session Burundi configuration 23 June 2008 Review of progress in the implementation of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi Paragraphs Page Introduction Analysis of trends and review of progress Promotion of good governance Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of Burundi and PALIPEHUTU-FNL Security sector Justice, promotion of human rights and action to combat impunity The land issue and socio-economic recovery Assessment of mutual engagements Government of Burundi Peacebuilding Commission and international partners Other stakeholders Conclusions and recommendations Annexes Monitoring groups of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi List of chairpersons and group rapporteurs List of resource persons and drafting committee members Reference documents 1. The Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi is a tool that brings together the Government of Burundi, the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and its national and international partners to promote many common peacebuilding objectives. It sets out the commitments of the Government and the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the support expected from other partners, in taking on major challenges in peacebuilding and preventing Burundi from relapsing into conflict. It was prepared by the Government of Burundi in collaboration with the parties concerned and approved by the Peacebuilding Commission on 21 June 2007. 2. On 5 December 2007, with a view to monitoring progress made in the implementation of the commitments made under the Strategic Framework, the Government of Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission and the parties concerned created a mechanism for follow-up and evaluation of the Strategic Framework. 3. The present document constitutes the first progress report of the Framework, which assesses the implementation of the commitments undertaken since its adoption and the adoption of the Monitoring and Tracking Mechanism. All stakeholders, including women's organizations, the private sector, political parties, religious communities, the Bashingantahe institution, the United Nations system and the bilateral and multilateral partners, have actively participated in the drafting of the progress report under the leadership of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). 4. The purpose of the present progress report is to facilitate dialogue between the Government and all of its partners on questions related to peacebuilding that require a political and strategic response. The report comprises three parts: (a) Analysis of the trends and an evaluation of progress made in relation to the five main challenges: (i) Promotion of good governance; (ii) Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of Burundi and the Parti pour la libération du peuple hutu-Forces nationales de libération (PALIPEHUTU-FNL); (iii) Security sector; (iv) Justice, the promotion of human rights and action to combat impunity; (v) The land issue and socio-economic recovery. It was agreed that the three other priorities, namely (a) the mobilization and coordination of international assistance; (b) the subregional dimension; and (c) the gender dimension, will be incorporated into the above-mentioned five main challenges as cross-cutting issues. (b) Assessments of the mutual commitments as defined in the Strategic Framework; (c) Conclusion and recommendations for the stakeholders. II. Analysis of trends and review of progress A. Promotion of good governance 5. In November 2007, within the context of efforts made to control the crisis in the Government and as a result of consensus between political parties, a constitutional government was set up. However, the functioning of this Government remains inadequate up to now because of the lack of a written agreement that clearly spells out the responsibilities of its membership and the sharing of tasks between the ministers and the vice-ministers. 6. In the legislative branch of the Government, disagreements continued and resulted in the delay of parliamentary sessions. The fact that basic laws were not voted on resulted in a freeze in Government activity. In the future, strengthening the links between the Burundian Parliament and the legislative institutions of the East African Community and the African Union should lead to better functioning of the Burundi National Assembly and the Senate. 7. Women's representation in the highest institutions of Government was constant as far as the ministerial positions entrusted to women were concerned. However, the absence of a woman among the three top positions of the executive branch and the failure to meet the agreed quota of 30 per cent in women's representation in public service shows that gender has not been fully taken into account in politics and programmes. 8. The main element in the creation of a favourable political environment remained the launch of the framework for dialogue in February 2008. The stakeholders have shown their support for the dialogue process by electing a monitoring national committee comprised of 24 key figures, whose coordination structure is 60 per cent women. Much hope is pinned on the success of this initiative, whose purpose is to implant a culture of dialogue. One of the objectives of the framework for dialogue is to contribute to a peaceful climate in anticipation of the elections in 2010. However, we notice in this respect that the current context is uncertain. At the Government level, the institutional instability that existed in 2007 continued into 2008. This needs to be addressed. Some partners have expressed legitimate concern that the framework for dialogue is a tool ultimately for propaganda. 9. As far as economic governance is concerned, particularly the strategy against corruption, the Government has made efforts to equip and redeploy anti-corruption personnel (special investigations brigade), and to strengthen the Office of the State Inspector General. The impact of these initiatives is yet to be fully felt as financial scandals have not been legally resolved. This situation is detrimental to the credibility of the Government with regard to the transparent management of public resources. The judicial mechanism exists; however, strong political will is needed to make it work. 10. The creation of the École Nationale d'Administration publique, the functioning of the Independent Commission on Recruitment and the adoption of the policy document on decentralization by the Government constitute noteworthy progress in re-energizing public administration and decentralization. This policy of decentralization will be reinforced by the recent establishment of the Burundian Association of locally elected officials. The current census of Government officials and public officers will contribute to the transparency in compensation management. The results of the general population and housing census to be held at the end of 2008 will allow for development planning based on concrete data. 11. In spite of these efforts, the coordination of administrative and technical matters cannot be separated from the political leadership. Therefore, public service suffers considerably when faced with too many frequent changes in managerial and technical staff positions that come with changes in political leadership. 12. Institutional malfunctions and the lack of administration have contributed to social tensions exemplified by recurrent strikes in many public sectors. In addition to these strikes, social movements among teachers against violence, in particular against rape in school environments, have surfaced. This phenomenon shows a crisis in the educational system. 13. The lack of dialogue on a draft law on the establishment of an independent electoral commission is a source of concern to the partners. This situation could lead to protests and political instability. B. Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of Burundi and PALIPEHUTU-FNL 14. The implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of 2006 has been delayed considerably owing to different interpretations of the Agreement by the two parties. During 2006 and 2007, it became clear that there was lack of interest and trust in the implementation of the Agreement, as exemplified by the many ceasefire violations. The reintegration of PALIPEHUTU-FNL has therefore remained elusive, despite the fact that it is the cornerstone of political stability in the country. The withdrawal of PALIPEHUTU-FNL from the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism triggered renewed insecurity. The resumption of hostilities in April 2008 demonstrated the risks involved when there is stagnation. It also confirmed how vulnerable civilians, in particular specific groups of the population, are, and the price they have to pay when the conflict persists. 15. Through the Regional Peace Initiative, supported since February 2008 by the Political Directorate, the international community has facilitated the reconvening of discussions (May 2008) of the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. A breakthrough was achieved recently with the joint announcement of a ceasefire on 26 May and the return in Bujumbura of the head of PALIPEHUTU-FNL on 30 May 2008. In the Magaliesburg Declaration of 10 June 2008, the Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL mutually agreed to renounce violence and resolve their differences through dialogue. Although the parties remain very far apart on basic questions, including constitutional issues, the current situation brings a new dynamic and carries hope. The consolidation of peace in Burundi depends largely on the success of the current negotiations, the demobilization, the reinsertion and reintegration of all the troops or people associated with PALIPEHUTU-FNL, including children, youth and women, and effective prevention of new recruitment. 16. Any delay in the implementation of the agreement carries the risk of political exploitation connected with this or other conflicts in the Great Lakes region, and will threaten the peacebuilding process, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his third report on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (S/2008/330). C. Security sector 17. Professional training of the defence and security forces supported by different partners is currently under way. While this effort is encouraging, it is too early to make any assessments of its impact. However, mistrust among the population of the security forces is still remarkable. It is not uncommon to see members of the security forces commit violent acts against women or other vulnerable groups. Between January and May 2008, 3 per cent of all human rights violations were attributed to security forces. There has been, however, a reduction of such violations and an obvious willingness to severely punish the perpetrators of such acts. 18. Continued efforts are needed in raising the moral standards of the security forces, especially with regard to enhancing the gender perspective. Furthermore, we note the underrepresentation of women in the defence and security forces, particularly in the military hierarchy. 19. On a positive note, contributions by Burundi to the troops deployed for peacekeeping operations under the auspices of the United Nations and the African Union have increased, which reaffirms the country's support for regional and international peace efforts. This will create a training opportunity for Burundi defence and security forces, particularly in the area of civilian protection and assistance to the most vulnerable, such as women and children, during conflict. 20. The Disarmament Commissions and the Directorate-General of Veteran Affairs have been redirected to better adapt to their missions. To date, 26,000 people -- men, women and children -- have been demobilized. It is noteworthy that there have not been sufficient sensitization efforts on disarmament and demobilization, which could account for the lack of motivation or incentives crucial for these programmes. 21. Difficulties in the socio-economic reintegration of the demobilized population, compounded by lack of psychological readiness and adequate information about demobilization, have raised doubts among those interested in reintegration, and caused delays in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. Moreover, unemployment and despair among the demobilized population may draw them towards more uprisings and crime. 22. Criteria for demobilization have been criticized by some women's groups that regard the established status of combatants as questionable. 23. Persistent insecurity did not facilitate the pace of the voluntary arms hand-over programme, necessitating other measures such as frisking and timely searches. Unfortunately, under these conditions and given the insecurity at the subregional level, the population might take the risk of acquiring more arms. 24. On a positive note, mine clearance programmes and the destruction of antipersonnel mines have ended. Burundi will be a country without mines very soon. 25. The integration of Burundi into regional organizations such as the Tripartite Plus Commission, the Economic Community of Central African States and the East African Community is beneficial to the country from a security standpoint. It offers an opportunity for the national defence and security forces to participate in subregional political and security frameworks. Furthermore, the regional integration process will provide for cross-border cooperation between the political leaders and judicial and police institutions of the Member States. 26. Efforts to coordinate assistance in the security sector have continued through harmonious meetings and interactions among the partners. However, coordination at the strategic level could be improved. D. Justice, promotion of human rights and action to combat impunity 27. There have been delays in the setting up of the judicial institutions and the Independent National Commission on Human Rights. Meanwhile, the transitional justice mechanisms were initiated with the signature of the Framework Agreement and the establishment of the Tripartite Steering Committee in November 2007. However, the delay in starting the transitional justice mechanism consultations is a source of concern, as it might overlap with the preparations for the elections of 2010. 28. A campaign to produce reports on the implementation of rulings and judgments was conducted, and efforts to restore the justice infrastructure were initiated with the support of partners. This has led to a decrease in violent settlement of problems. Unfortunately, the lack of public information on the rights of citizens and the fact that most legal texts are published solely in French do not encourage the general population to have instantaneous recourse to the legal system. In addition, the inadequacy of coordination between the judicial police department and the Prosecutor's office complicates procedures and the development of investigations. 29. Furthermore, impunity regarding various crimes, in particular sexual violations committed by members of the security forces, continued despite demonstrable efforts to condemn the perpetrators. 30. Impunity is also the result of the slow process in the adoption of a revised penal code, notably specific provisions on gender, as well as the non-application of existing legal texts, including on justice for minors. 31. The draft penal code will affirm the abolition of the death penalty, on which a moratorium is already in force. 32. The setting up of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights is under way, and the first draft law should be adopted soon by the Council of Ministers. However, the continued impasse in parliamentary activities might delay the adoption of this law, leaving the mechanisms on the protection of human rights incomplete. 33. There should be acknowledgement of the unprecedented achievements made with respect to social freedom and independence of the media, and recognition of the gender dimension, even if the present context does not confirm that these steps are irreversible. E. The land issue and socio-economic recovery 34. The land issue in Burundi is primarily structural: over 7 million of its inhabitants live on 27,834 km2, with 90 per cent residing in rural areas. 35. Since its independence, Burundi has gone through several socio-political crises, which have forced thousands of Burundians to leave their lands and abandon their possessions, ending up in camps for displaced persons or having gone into exile in other countries. Since 2002, the slow return to peace has led to the return of more than 300,000 Burundians. Many of their old properties are occupied today by other people, and their possessions have been destroyed. The main cause of conflict at the community level is access to land, which feeds the ongoing socio-political crisis. Over 80 per cent of cases brought to courts and tribunals concern land issues. 36. This situation creates tensions among the people and decreases the chance of success of the peace process. If a timely and appropriate response is not found, there is the risk of relapse into conflict in the communities. 37. To address the land issue and problems stemming from the wave of refugees who re-enter the country and to create favourable conditions for the resettlement of displaced persons, the Government created on 4 May 2006 the National Commission of Land and Other Assets. Strengthening of the institutional and operational capacities of the Commission has allowed the start of the litigation process involving land issues. 38. However, the Commission cannot fill the gap of other branches of conflict management that are linked to the Bashingantahe, and the tribunals, which are too few and are overwhelmed with cases. Moreover, the legislative branch has been incapable of dealing with the complexities of these lawsuits. 39. In the meantime, the standard of living of the rural population has eroded as a result of the anarchical sale of lands under the nearly absent property titles, violence, in many forms, against women and opposition to the right of succession by women, and resistance to the new law on successions, marriage settlements and liberty. 40. Women and young girls who have returned home or have become the head of the family as a result of successive crises in the country are in a very vulnerable position owing to limited access to land. In this regard, the Government has started a process of agrarian reform, which could improve the situation. 41. Apart from the land issue, the impoverishment of the peasants, the limited access to basic social services, and the socio-economic recovery of other communities affected by war are further exacerbated by endemic poverty, a high unemployment rate, a low rate of return on investments, the rise in the price of oil, the scarcity of subsidies, etc. 42. Seasonal food crises that are the result of climatic change have been made worse by the recent explosion in food prices worldwide. In Burundi, the food situation could become a security problem and constitute a threat to peacebuilding. 43. Moreover, the effect of economic reforms, in particular the privatization process, remains to be evaluated. Until now, it has generated conflicts mainly because it has not taken into consideration the interests of all partners -- property owners and the workforce. 44. The creation of the Partners' Coordination Group in Burundi is an encouraging indication of the will to effectively make international aid support peacebuilding and reduce poverty on a priority basis. III. Assessment of mutual engagements A. Government of Burundi 45. The Government has begun to honour its commitments to good governance, particularly with respect to dialogue and consultation, action against corruption and decentralization. 46. Despite past efforts, the integration of women in national decision-making organizations in all the national programmes is still inadequate. 47. In 2007, there were setbacks in the implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement between the Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL with the withdrawal of PALIPEHUTU-FNL from the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and the renewal of fighting between the movement and the National Defence Force. However, since the resumption of negotiations on 16 May 2008, the situation has improved. 48. Efforts to professionalize the defence and security forces continue. In addition, Burundi has ratified the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region and continues to seek the ratification of other signatories. It also contributes to efforts of the Tripartite Plus Commission to stabilize the region. 49. With regard to justice, the promotion of human rights and action to combat impunity, certain mechanisms have been put in place -- the Independent National Commission on Human Rights and the transitional justice mechanisms. They must be completed and be made functional by ensuring their independence from the executive power. 50. At the level of commitments to socio-economic recovery, the Government and its partners have established the Partners' Coordination Group, which is the coordination body for the implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding. Nonetheless, the delay in setting up the Partners' Coordination Group has affected some of its subsidiary bodies: most of the sectoral groups are not yet functional, thus causing some inertia in the Partners' Coordination Group. B. Peacebuilding Commission and international partners 51. The Peacebuilding Commission has helped to mobilize international political attention and to sustain attention on Burundi, for example, through high-level discussions bringing together the Commission, the General Assembly and the Security Council, and engaging with non-governmental organizations. The Peacebuilding Commission has also undertaken the following initiatives. Strengthened policy dialogue 52. The Chair of the Burundi configuration visited Burundi in September 2007 to discuss issues that threatened efforts to consolidate peace, including: (a) the fragile budgetary situation; (b) the parliamentary deadlock resulting in the blocking of legislative action; and (c) the withdrawal on 21 July 2007 of PALIPEHUTU-FNL from the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. As a result, the Commission called on the Government and other stakeholders to take the necessary measures to deal urgently with these issues (PBC/2/BDI/2), and urged the Security Council to continue to closely monitor the political situation in Burundi. 53. A delegation of the Burundi configuration travelled to the country in May 2008, to review the situation following renewed confrontations between PALIPEHUTU-FNL and the National Defence Force in April 2008. The mission called for (a) putting an immediate end to hostilities; (b) political parties to resolve their differences and promptly resume the legislative work of the National Assembly; and (c) the start of political and technical preparations for the 2010 elections. Partnership-building to address critical issues 54. The Chair of the Burundi configuration participated in a meeting of the Group of Special Envoys on Burundi convened by the South African Facilitation in Cape Town, South Africa, in February 2008. The meeting agreed to a programme of action to take forward the implementation of the then-stalled Burundi peace process. Following the mission, the Peacebuilding Commission issued conclusions and recommendations on the situation in Burundi (PBC/2/BDI/7), welcoming the active and continued engagement of the South African Facilitation (until 31 December 2008), the African Union, the Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi and BINUB. 55. The Chair also visited the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to discuss the engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission with Burundi and the objectives of the Strategic Framework. The discussion with IMF focused on the mid-to-late 2007 budgetary crisis in Burundi, and possible collaboration in the follow-up to the conclusion of the 6th meeting under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility. Catalysing and monitoring aid flows 56. The Peacebuilding Commission has participated in discussions with the Government of Burundi and its partners on the establishment of the Partners' Coordination Group, which aims to facilitate coordination, monitoring, resource mobilization and aid effectiveness in relation to the implementation of the country's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding. 57. The Peacebuilding Support Office began to map resources and contributions from various stakeholders to peacebuilding in Burundi in the late spring of 2008 to enable the Peacebuilding Commission to better focus its efforts in the areas of resource mobilization and coordination of support of the international community to Burundi. The Commission has been regularly informed about disbursements from the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. Sharing knowledge about peacebuilding challenges 58. A thematic meeting on finding sustainable solutions to land tenure issues was convened by the Burundi configuration on 27 May 2008, which reaffirmed the need for (a) a national land policy to guide legislative and administrative processes; (b) a more efficient land registration system; and (c) an inventory of state-owned land. 59. Members of the Commission have also contributed individually to the implementation of the Strategic Framework. 60. The United Nations system in Burundi, in implementing an integrated approach to planning, programming and management, has facilitated coherent support to the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding. The United Nations system has also sustained efforts to find solutions to various political crises. Constant support has been provided for the consolidation of democracy during the reporting period, by reinforcing national institutions and by encouraging consultations among national partners. The United Nations system has also worked in collaboration with the Government and its local and international partners to develop the Strategic Framework and engender a priority action plan to implement the complementary Poverty Reduction Strategy. The agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system in Burundi have worked in an integrated way to simultaneously put into place the following seven programmes, on: (a) good governance; (b) the promotion and protection of human rights and action in the fight against impunity; (c) security sector reform and reduction of small arms and light weapons; (d) fair access to basic social services; (e) action on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis; (f) improved food security; and (g) reintegration of populations affected by war and other disasters. Furthermore, the United Nations system has contributed to the establishment of frameworks for dealing with questions of gender, aid coordination, community relief, food security and refugee returns. 61. Moreover, the United Nations spared no effort to convince the Government and its national partners to accept the peacebuilding priorities. That action led to the Government's acceptance of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding and to the creation, the implementation and the initial evaluation of the seed projects financed by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. 62. In the context of its participation in the work of the Political Directorate, the United Nations system continued to support the implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement. 63. The Peacebuilding Fund made available US$ 35 million in January 2006, of which US$ 31 million had been allocated to 16 approved projects as at 30 May 2008. The projects are in four priority sectors: security sector reform; democracy and good governance; human rights; and property and land issues. Furthermore, the Peace and Governance Programme of the United Nation University, in collaboration with the Peacebuilding Support Office, has initiated preparations for a lessons-learned workshop, to be held in late 2008 in Bujumbura, on peacebuilding experiences and insights gained from similar post-conflict situations. Key areas of support for the Strategic Framework 64. Following are examples of support for the Strategic Framework by Member States: (a) Belgium supports programmes on good governance, economic and agricultural development, health, and education. It also supports the Parliament, civil society, including the media, decentralization, security sector reform, justice and penal reform, refugee return and the return of IDPs, and the process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration through the multi-country demobilization and reintegration programme; (b) Denmark supports programmes on the advancement of women, the reintegration of returning refugees and HIV/AIDS issues; (c) France supports programmes in the areas of good governance, the security sector, justice, and economic and social recovery; (d) Germany supports programmes for the police, the building of infrastructure and training, water systems, and the reintegration of refugees, displaced persons and ex-combatants; (e) India is providing training to five Burundian nationals and has offered an innovative computer skills programme for underprivileged sections of society. An Indian public sector firm has signed an agreement with Burundi to develop telecommunications and Internet trunk routes in Burundi as part of a larger panAfrican e-project that India is executing for the African Union. India is also undertaking a feasibility study to expand the eastern African railway network, which will eventually link Burundi with other ports and cities on the East African coast; (f) Japan supports programmes in support of the return and reintegration of refugees and IDPs, health and sanitation, food, women and children, and capacity-building for migration management; (g) Luxembourg supports programmes on education, the reintegration of returnees, violence against women, and strengthening of the judiciary; (h) The Netherlands supports programmes on good governance, security sector reform, socio-economic recovery and gender activities; (i) Pakistan supports capacity-building in the diplomatic services and the National Defence Force; (j) The Russian Federation supports police and student scholarships to Russian universities; (k) The United Kingdom supports programmes on health, education, good governance, public financial management reform, and humanitarian response; (l) Norway supports programmes on the advancement of women, reconciliation, effective governance, open dialogue and the reintegration of former child soldiers. Institutional donors and international organizations 65. Following are examples of support for the Strategic Framework provided by institutional donors and international organizations: (a) IMF provides technical assistance to Burundi. Furthermore, IMF supports the Burundi Strategic Framework and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper through its Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility arrangement. The last IMF country review led to a disbursement of US$ 16 million, and the negotiation for a new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility arrangement has been concluded and will be presented to the IMF Executive Board in July 2008; (b) World Bank support for the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi focuses primarily on the areas of good governance, security sector reform, and socio-economic recovery. The World Bank also facilitates budgetary support from individual donors; (c) The European Community has dedicated funds and effort in support of Strategic Framework priority areas such as good governance, conflict resolution, demining, budgetary support and humanitarian aid; (d) The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) has continued to support the Parliament of Burundi by strengthening the capacities of parliamentarians and improving communication services. With the support of the United Nations Democracy Fund, IPU has promoted women's participation in parliamentary decision-making and offered in-depth training to female parliamentarians; (e) The International Conference on the Great Lakes Region has provided technical assistance to the Government of Burundi in the areas of peace consolidation, good governance and democracy promotion, and gender development. Furthermore, the Executive Secretariat of the Conference has conducted a number of consultative meetings with a view to persuading PALIPEHUTU-FNL to return to the peace process. 66. The above summarizes the collective and individual contributions of Peacebuilding Commission members and partners in Burundi to the implementation of the Strategic Framework during the reporting period. C. Other stakeholders Civil society, religious communities and the Bashingantahe institution 67. Civil society, religious communities and the Bashingantahe institution have contributed to the peacebuilding process, particularly in the priority areas of justice, the promotion of human rights and action to combat impunity. 68. They have put in place a coordination mechanism for all contributors to the prosecution, prevention and elimination of gender-based violence. 69. In other areas there are new directions for civil society organizations, and an effort must be made to incorporate their contributions. 70. Particular mention must be made of the alliance of civil society organizations with radio and the independent media. Their synergy has created an independent civil society, committed to the promotion of human rights and to action against impunity. 71. Action has been taken on communal mediation and the reintegration of groups affected by conflict. In general terms, civil society wages a constant struggle against political manipulation of land ownership through information meetings on the peacebuilding process. 72. The Bashingantahe institution, peculiar to Burundi in the amicable settlement of basic litigation, is slowly recovering its independence, social prestige and credibility. It contributes greatly to the mediation of civil matters. Women's organizations 73. Women's organizations have contributed to the acceptance of the peacebuilding process by the population in general and women in particular through a sensitization campaign on the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding directed at the women of all the municipalities of the country. 74. They have pleaded eagerly to those responsible in the Burundi Government, the members of the Political Directorate and some members of PALIPEHUTU-FNL for the resumption of the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and for security issues to be made a priority. 75. They have increased particularly the awareness of the population of the gravity of gender-based violence and assisted in the creation of a mechanism to coordinate all the participants in the prosecution, prevention and elimination of these acts of violence. 76. They militate for the adoption of a law on the right of succession that is nondiscriminatory. They play a leading role in revenue-generating activities that bring together members of the different conflict-stricken groups (repatriated, demobilized, displaced) in the spirit of promotion of ethnic reconciliation and peaceful cohabitation of the communities. Political parties 77. Political parties have been involved in the design and evaluation of the Strategic Framework and in the initiation of the framework of national dialogue. The political parties that are deeply involved in the debates have put pressure on the Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL for the resumption of the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Subregional dimensions 78. Burundi became a full member of the East African Community on 1 July 2007 and was the first signatory of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region to ratify that instrument. These institutional developments, as well as the revival of the Pact and the Tripartite Plus mechanism, have broadened the country's opportunities to deal with subregional security challenges. In addition, the refugee question is managed in close cooperation with the countries of the subregion. IV. Conclusions and recommendations 79. The Government of Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission and the stakeholders have made a considerable effort to implement the commitments and various contributions to peacebuilding. However, the complexity and dynamic character of the challenges require a firmer and more continuous commitment to overcome the principal peacebuilding risks. 80. The following recommendations strengthen the initial commitments and provide in detail the actions to be taken by the different stakeholders in order to contribute optimally to the ultimate objective of peacebuilding. Risk 1. Orchestration of dialogue frameworks for propaganda purposes Government :: Establish the legal framework for the next election by the end of the year :: Provide fair representation of the various actors within dialogue frameworks United Nations Peacebuilding Commission :: Work with the Government and its partners towards an environment that is favourable to transparent elections :: Share successful electoral experiences Civil society, religious communities and Bashingantahe institution :: Undertake educational activities for a responsible citizenship :: Participate constructively in dialogue frameworks :: Pursue dialogue with the decision makers for better gender integration in the dialogue and Government policies and programmes :: Intensify mobilization of women to active participation in dialogue frameworks and the electoral process :: Continue to participate in a constructive manner in dialogue settings and in resolving conflicts peacefully, without paralysing the functioning of institutions :: Play the role of political organizer without manipulating the population United Nations system :: Give technical support to establish the legal framework for the next elections Bilateral and multilateral partners :: Closely follow the political process, using the considerable diplomatic means in place, in order to report on the progress in the country and strengthen the confidence of partners in Burundi's efforts to pull out of the crisis International Organization of la Francophonie :: Pay the contribution to Burundi that it envisaged in the 2006-2009 programme: to help end the conflict and finance peacebuilding activities Risk 2. Discrediting of the administration and institutions :: Respect political neutrality of the public administration and stabilization of the technical training managers in the public service :: Carry out investigations on the main cases of economic embezzlement and their transfer to the tribunals and courts :: Clarify the duties of ministers and vice-ministers Parliament :: Favour consultation approaches over confrontational ones to clear blocks :: Contribute to social dialogue by maintaining a critical and constructive attitude :: Avoid interference by political parties in the daily management of the administration :: Pursue the mobilization of funds to support the strengthening of the administration's capabilities Ceasefire Agreement between the Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL Risk 1. Negotiations stalling due to claims contrary to constitutional measures Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL :: Bring the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism process to an end and implement in good faith each side's commitments Civil society, religious communities, Bashingantahe institution and women's organizations :: Pursue sensitization of the urgency of concluding a definitive peace and the necessity of respecting the spirit of the constitution :: Avoid the political exploitation of negotiation benefits United Nations system, African Union, bilateral and multilateral partners and the subregion :: Participate actively in negotiations through the Political Directorate :: Ensure that appropriate financing is mobilized to implement all components of the programme of action Risk 2. Association of the Burundi conflict with the conflicts of the region in case of delay in implementing the Agreement :: As host country of the Executive Secretariat of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, promote the Stability Pact among the members of the Conference, particularly those that have not yet ratified this instrument United Nations system, bilateral and multilateral partners :: Support the strengthening of capabilities of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region :: Pursue coordination of security issues within the Tripartite Plus Mechanism Subregion :: Continue to involve itself in the search for solutions to the source of conflicts :: Complete the ratification process of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region Risk 1. Deviance of demobilized soldiers to banditry and possible new rebellions :: Re-think the integration strategy of the repatriated and demobilized :: Plead for international assistance aimed at supporting socio-economic integration of ex-combatants and youth into their communities :: Take into account the demobilized, both young and adult, in their programmes at every level :: Pursue their contributions dedicated to economic reintegration and the demobilized community :: Assist the Government in the formulation and implementation of a new strategy of integration of the demobilized Risk 2. Rearmament of the civilian population in the face of ongoing insecurity :: Pursue professionalization of the defence and security forces :: Institute efficient training of the security defence corps so that they are in harmony with the populations they are meant to defend and protect :: Systematically punish defence and security forces perpetrating extortion, punish more severely infractions committed specifically against vulnerable groups :: Implement the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons :: Organize sensitization meetings of the population on moral disarmament :: Exert effective and independent control over the three components of the security forces (Burundi National Defence Force, Burundi National Police, Service national des renseignements), accentuating their professionalism and political neutrality Government and the subregion :: Establish a climate of confidence in the population by improving the national and subregional security environment :: Pursue their multilateral support to the security sector Justice, promotion of human rights and action against impunity Risk 1. Scheduling electoral dates and dates of national consultations on transitional justice mechanisms too closely, with the risk of compromising their implementation :: Accelerate the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms :: Pursue dialogue with the Government on the process and sharing of good experiences of the transitional justice mechanisms Risk 2. Banalization of gender-based violence by prevalent impunity :: Prepare and adopt a specific law on the prevention and repression of gender-based violence by the end of the year :: Continue to feed civil society and the media with pertinent information in the fight against gender-based violence (monitoring and defence) :: Continue to argue for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) Risk 3. Delay in the adoption of essential laws on human rights due to the paralysis within the national parliament :: Prepare and submit draft laws to Parliament within the time period allowed; request of the President of the National Assembly, if need be, a special session to adopt the draft laws :: Convoke a general meeting on justice and strengthen action against impunity :: Reconsider the legislative work :: Adopt on a priority basis draft laws on the protection of human rights, particularly revisions of the Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure :: While waiting for the unblocking of Parliament, arrive at a consensus between the parties to hold at least one special session on the adoption of the draft laws on human rights and the establishment of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights Civil society, religious communities, the Bashingantahe institution and women's organizations :: Plead for the urgent adoption of draft laws on human rights, including the abolition of the death penalty; distribute widely the newly adopted laws to the whole population Inter-Parliamentary Union/Association of European Parliamentarians for Africa :: Pursue the appeal and technical support for the rapid establishment and functioning of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights and the transitional justice mechanisms :: Pursue the appeal for the ratification, harmonization and application of human rights texts having a direct bearing on peacebuilding, in particular, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict Risk 1. Confrontation between the repatriated and the current owners of land :: Strengthen the institutions for settlement of property litigation, start a dialogue on long-term land policies and on the issue of demographics :: Promulgate rapidly the draft law of succession :: Vote on the law of succession, and the laws on marriage and dowry :: Provide a place for thematic debates on property issues, and mobilize funds for litigation :: Encourage amicable settlement of property conflicts; raise awareness of population growth and family planning issues :: Continue to plead for the adoption of the law on succession, and laws on marriage and dowry :: Continue political dialogue and support for the long-term settlement of the repatriated and the peaceful settlement of land conflicts :: Continue to manage the issue of repatriation in strict collaboration with Burundi in an effort to preserve subregional stability Risk 2. Impoverishment and disintegration of the social fabric of the majority of the population :: With the partners, accelerate the implementation of economic and structural reforms :: Strengthen the synergy and coordination of actions towards economic recovery :: Strengthen and complete the planned network of basic social services, and maintain it to perpetuate education, health and capacity-building programmes for the conflict-stricken population :: Assist the mobilization of resources to consolidate the results of the peacebuilding projects particularly worthy of continued support one year after implementation, such as projects for women, youth and micropeace ventures. These projects have allowed target groups access to credit and should be supported in relation to follow-up activities having an impact on peacebuilding and development :: Continue requesting the international community to continue its support for the peacebuilding process and the fight against poverty in Burundi :: Strengthen the request for financing for basic social services :: In the context of institutional paralysis, particularly of the national parliament, the Peacebuilding Commission should mobilize financial assistance from international partners, in the form of budget support or other mechanisms, to allow the Government to respond to the scourge of food insecurity and the increase in food prices :: Sensitization of the population to take responsibility for itself and to reconstitute the social fabric :: Give priority to the economic aspects of their programme :: Continue to support the implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper through integrated action on all aspects of crisis recovery and by assuming a key role in the coordination of all contributors :: Assist the Government in the implementation of actions related to basic social services :: Adapt, with flexibility, the conditionality exercise to the realities of a post-conflict country such as Burundi :: Continue to mobilize funds to implement basic social services priorities :: Coordinate partners' statements through the National Committee on Aid Coordination :: Continue technical assistance for the integration of Burundi into the East African Community :: Take the measures necessary to relaunch economic cooperation in the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries Sectors and entities represented Names of representatives "Tracking-Evaluation" Group Antoine Baza Adolphe Nahayo Pamphile Muderega Gérard Muringa Léon Nimbona Léonidas Habonimana Women's associations Pascaline Barankeba Private sector Ndayishimiye Consolata Civil Society Organizations Forum Raymond Kamenyero Burundian Journalists Association Moise Gahungu Catholic Church Evariste Ngoyagoye Jean-Louis Nahimana National Council of Churches of Burundi Tite Ningejeje Burundi Islamic Community (COMIBU) Sheihk Salum Issa Bagoribarira Bashingantahe Institution Balthazar Habonimana Observatory for the Fight against Corruption and Economic Embezzlement (OLUCOME) Ernest Manirumwa Dismas Bakevyumusaya Movement for the Rehabilitation of Citizens (MRC) -- political party Laurent Nzeyimana National Council for the Defence of Democracy (CNDD) -- political party Munyembabazi William Union for National Progress (UPRONA) -- political party Rubuka Aloys Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU) -- political party Nahayo Darius CNDD/FDD -- political party Gélase Daniel Ndabirabe European Union Joel Louvet Yves Manville United Nations Bintou Keita Boubacar Kane Marie Goretti Nduwayo Pascaline Menono "Good governance" group Papien Ruhotora Emile Nimpaye Marc Rwabahungu Vestine Mbundagu Agnese Ndayikeza Civil society organizations Chantal Nahishubije Kubwarugira Servais International NGOs Anne Street Consolata Baranyizigiye Félix Nzeyimana COMIBU Abdul Nzeyimana Odette Ntiharirizwa OLUCOME MRC -- political party Juvenal Ngorwanubusa FRODEBU -- political party Frédéric Bamvuginyumvira UPRONA -- political party Nzeyimana Spéciose CNDD -- political party Habarugira Guillaume CNDD/Front for the Defence of Democracy -- political party Gervais Ngirigwa Samia Mahgoub Félix Yé Amadou Ousmane Moudjib Djinadou World Bank Alassane Sow "Comprehensive ceasefire agreement between the Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL" group Evariste Ndayishimiye Isidore Hakizimana Perpétue Kanyange Richard Giramahoro Ndikumana Nephtali Révérien Ndikuriyo Domitien Bacamurwanko Edmond Bayisabe Bangaryabagabo Amédée Ahmad Mbaye Faye Jean-Charles Dei Embassy of South Africa Chris Botha Cassien Simbare Embassy of Nigeria Patrick O. Obi Embassy of Kenya Julius Bargorett "Security Sector" group Célestin Ndayisaba Fabien Ndayishimiye Abeé Audace Nzophabarushe Jean Paul Ndayizeye Emmanuel Nshimirimana Benoit Birutegusa Médiatrice Ntakarutimana International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Gilvert Niyonkuru Marianne Gasser Nahimana P. Claver Mabobori Catherine Anselme Hatungimigabo Félicien Nduwuburund Pancrace Ndabatinye Justin Nzoyisaba Nkurikiye Ramadhan Gilles Landsberg Arthur Kibbelaar "Justice, promotion of human rights and action to combat impunity" group Jean Makenga Gaudence Sindayigaya Adalaide Ndayisenga Civil society organizations -- Burundi Association for the Protection of Human Rights and Detained Persons (APRODH) Pierre Claver Mbonimpa Nestor Ntiranyibagira Abbé Charles Karorero Niyonizigiye Gustave Alexis Kubwimana Zénom Nicayenzi ICRC Bertrand Lamon Khaled Feruzi Léonidas Nyamwana Nsabimana Jeanne d'Arc Christien Nkurunziza Bizimana Clotilde Sue Hogwood Ismael Diallo Francis James "Land issues and socio-economic recovery" group Annociate Sendazirasa Thérence Ntitangirageza Monique Rwasa Ndanezerewe M. Goreth Civil Society Organizations Forum -- Forum for Strengthening Civil Society (FORSC) Grégoire Gahungu Dorothée Bigirimana Bernard Ruvuzakinono Mugisha Consolation Nibampa Francine Kabindigiri Christophe Roher Kanyaru Minagri Alexandre Sinzinkayo Nshimirimana M. Louise Rukiya Thomas Petereit Bo Schack Gustavo Gonzalez Priority domains Presidents Rapporteurs Good governance Frédéric Bavuginyumvira Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement between the Government and PALIPEHUTU-FNL General Ndayshimiye Evariste Perpetue Kanyange Major-General Célestin Ndayisaba Mediatrice Ntakarutimana Gustave Niyonizigiye Land issues and socio-economic recovery Francine Nibampa Resource persons :: Youssef Mahmoud :: Ambassador Antoine Baza :: Bintou Keita :: Ambassador Francis Mndolwa Drafting and proofing committee :: Ambassador Adolphe Nahayo :: Yves Manville :: Raymond Kamenyero :: Pascaline Barankeba :: Vincent Kayijuka :: Marc Pellerin :: Marie-Goreth Nizigama :: Moudjib Djinadou :: Commander Souleymane Mounkala :: Jean Keke Tohounkpin :: Hanitra Andriaveloson :: Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi (PBC/1/BDI/4) :: Monitoring and Tracking Mechanism of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi (PBC/2/BDI/4) :: Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), annotated and explained :: Report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/330) :: Dar es Salaam Agreement of Principles towards Lasting Peace, Security and Stability in Burundi, signed 18 June 2006, and its annexes A and B :: Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of Burundi acting in conformity with the country's Constitution and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL, signed 7 September 2006, at Dar es Salaam, and its annexes I-IV :: Law No. 1/32 dated 22 November 2006, on provisional immunity from prosecution of the members of the movement signatory to the Ceasefire Agreement of 7 September 2006 :: Decree No. 100/357 dated 20 December 2006, implementing the provisional immunity provided by the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of 7 September 2006 :: Press release dated 21 April 2008, from the Office of the President :: Press release dated 24 April 2008, from the Office of the President :: Programme of action to advance the peace process in Burundi adopted during the Burundi special envoys' seminar held on 22 and 23 February 2008 in Cape Town, South Africa :: Poll and survey on the perception of the population about law enforcement and human rights documents :: Documents concerning statistics of jurisdictions of military courts from the archives of military courts :: Documents on training on human rights and international humanitarian law :: International Organization of la Francophonie: programming 2006-2009 :: Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, dated 26 May 2008 :: Magaliesburg Declaration dated 10 June 2008 :: May 2008 Peacebuilding Commission mission report 