%%%PEACEBUILDING|SPECIAL MISSIONS|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC|DEMOCRATIZATION|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION|DISARMAMENT|SOCIAL INTEGRATION|RULE OF LAW|GOVERNANCE|

Peacebuilding Commission Third session Central African Republic configuration Report of the Peacebuilding Commission mission to the Central African Republic, 30 October-6 November 2008 Summary The Peacebuilding Commission undertook a mission to the Central African Republic from 30 October to 6 November 2008. The delegation was headed by Jan Grauls, Chairperson of the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The key findings of the delegation are set out below. Key findings Inclusive political dialogue :: A date has been set for the inclusive political dialogue shortly after the visit, partly because of the emphasis that the mission placed on such an effort. :: Inclusiveness of the inclusive political dialogue is of crucial importance to ensure ownership of the dialogue by all, including the opposition, civil society and rebel groups, all of which should have a voice in preparations, the agenda and setting forth the next steps for national reconciliation and reconstruction. Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration :: The National Seminar on security sector reform was a notable achievement. Since then, the implementation of the operational conclusions has incurred delays. :: Parameters of the integration of ex-combatants into the Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA) remain unclear and need to be addressed. :: Impunity, prosecution and compensation of victims must be an integral part of security sector reform. :: Urgent attention from the donor community for a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme will be required after the inclusive political dialogue. :: Ensuring coherence of and coordination among all actors engaged in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is paramount, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has the lead in developing a strategy. :: The elaboration of a new disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme needs to incorporate best practices. Good governance and rule of law :: UNDP has launched two key programmes in this field: "Rule of law and good governance" and "Governance and decentralization". :: Much remains to be done, notably in the field of human rights and management of natural resources. :: Capacity must be strengthened at all levels, particularly as the Government resumes its functions throughout the whole country. Development poles :: The general concept has been well developed; the next step is mapping the specific needs for each pole. :: There is a need for the Government to take strong ownership of the project. :: Infrastructure reconstruction, particularly of the road network through public employment programmes, will contribute to the early success of the development poles project. 1. The key purposes of the mission were (a) to discuss with the Government and other stakeholders the Government's main peacebuilding priorities and challenges faced by the country, the actions being undertaken by the Government to address the challenges and the nature and scope of international support that the country needs; (b) to visit sites of ongoing projects in and outside of Bangui that are relevant to peacebuilding in the country; and (c) to exchange views on the activities of the Peacebuilding Fund with the National Steering Committee. The terms of reference of the mission, the composition of the delegation and the programme of the visit are set out in annexes I and II to the present report. 2. During the visit, the delegation explained the Peacebuilding Commission's role in facilitating and coordinating international support, in particular at a time where the attention given to the country by the international community appears to be on the increase. The head of the delegation provided additional information on how the Commission's work is based on a joint consensus between the Government and the Commission on peacebuilding priorities and steps to be taken. He also clarified the role of the Commission in providing direction and priorities for disbursements from the Peacebuilding Fund for the countries on the Commission's agenda. He also stressed the importance of continued progress towards stability through an inclusive political process, as well as the need for sustained commitment to the work of the Commission by the Government and other stakeholders. 3. The delegation had meetings with the President of the Republic, François Bozizé, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, the Minister of State for Planning, the Economy and International Cooperation, the Minister of Communication in charge of the Political Dialogue, the Deputy Minister of Defence, the Sectoral Committee on Security Sector Reform, the Médiateur de la République (Ombudsman), the National Peacebuilding Fund Steering Committee (which includes, among others, three other Government ministers), political party representatives from the democratic opposition and of the presidential majority, civil society organizations, the partner's coordination group, the United Nations country team, the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA), representatives from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, the Mission for the Coordination of Peace in Central Africa (MICOPAX) and the diplomatic community, and held a press conference. Over the course of its week-long stay, the delegation also met with ordinary citizens of the Central African Republic and with refugees and internally displaced persons. The delegation also had an exchange of views with the departing inter-agency strategic assessment mission, led by the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, on the key findings of their visit. 4. The delegation travelled to Paoua in the north-west and to Boali near Bangui, to assess the situation outside of the capital, Bangui, and met with the local community and members of BONUCA and the United Nations country team in the field. These trips were particularly relevant since one of the country's challenges is the relative absence of state presence and authority outside of Bangui. The field trips also highlighted the country's decrepit infrastructure, such as roads and power plants, as well as the impoverished living conditions of the population outside of the capital. The team also visited a MICOPAX detachment in Paoua. 5. The Chair and his team wish to convey their appreciation to the Government of the Central African Republic and BONUCA for their hospitability and most useful assistance during the mission. II. Main findings and key issues 6. Expectations remain high with regard to the engagement of the Central African Republic with the Peacebuilding Commission, and the Commission's role in focusing international attention on the country's needs. However, the relationship between the activities of the Peacebuilding Fund and those of the Peacebuilding Commission remains a source of confusion for many interlocutors. Therefore the delegation felt the need to clarify the difference between both on several occasions, particularly as the US$ 10 million allocated by the Fund for the Central African Republic is now financing programmes and activities on the ground. 7. The delegation emphasized that the primary responsibility rests with the Government for achieving progress on the three priorities for peacebuilding: security sector reform (including disarmament, demobilization and reintegration), the rule of law and good governance, and the establishment of development poles. The delegation also stressed the paramount importance of achieving measurable progress in the inclusive political dialogue. The delegation underlined the need for concurrent progress on all three priorities, in order to avoid additional tensions among the population. A. Inclusive political dialogue 8. With respect to the inclusive political dialogue, the delegation expressed its disappointment to the Government and the opposition concerning the slow and inconclusive progress since the last visit by the Chair in July 2008, in spite of several meetings involving the stakeholders and financial support for the dialogue from the Peacebuilding Fund. The delegation stressed again the importance of ensuring that the inclusive political dialogue take place before the end of the year with a view to starting activities under each of the three priorities as soon as possible. The delegation also reaffirmed the need to show substantive progress on the inclusive political dialogue before any progress could be achieved in the three priority areas. Making progress in the three priorities would be of limited value without measurable progress in the political dialogue. Most importantly, a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration exercise should not be initiated before the conclusion of the inclusive political dialogue. Finally, the delegation emphasized that the political dialogue should be fully inclusive and that all stakeholders, including civil society, should have a voice in determining the agenda and the way forward. 9. In that regard, the delegation impressed on the relevant authorities the need to ensure that all measures were taken to allow for an expeditious start of the political dialogue, including the announcement of the dates of the dialogue. The recently adopted amnesty law and the release of political prisoners were concrete, albeit insufficient, indications of progress. The authorities recognized that the initial contribution of close to $800,000 from the Peacebuilding Fund for the preparations for the political dialogue had been very helpful. National authorities hoped for additional support from the Fund for the holding of the dialogue and for short-term projects, notably to ensure that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities be initiated immediately after the conclusion of the dialogue. 10. The delegation stressed on numerous occasions that the holding of the inclusive political dialogue constitutes not only an important signal to the population of the Central African Republic that their authorities and other actors have now decidedly turned a page on the past and are ready to move forward in the country's reconciliation process, but also a crucial signal to the international community that the country is determined not to revert to its pattern of recurrent instability. This aspect should not be underestimated by the national authorities, who might still be working under the assumption that the international community is not following the events in the Central African Republic. The Chair stressed that the international community is indeed very closely following the ongoing developments in the country, including the Secretary-General himself, who has met with the President on two occasions in recent weeks. Shortly after the visit, a starting date for the inclusive political dialogue was announced, 5 December, at least partly because of the emphasis that the mission placed on such an effort. B. Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration 11. In the area of security sector reform, the delegation was able to assess progress made based on the timeline agreed to by all stakeholders at the National Seminar on Security Sector Reform held in April 2008. While some delays had occurred, overall the process remained on track. Delays experienced so far had partly resulted from constraints, notably in the area of implementation capacity and technical assistance, and partly from a lack of action on the part of the Government. However, credit should be given to national authorities, who are working in difficult circumstances and have committed to making up for delays before the end of 2008. The latest security developments, related to some renewed rebel activity in the north of the country, could also adversely affect progress in the security sector reform programme. In this respect, the Government is strongly in favour of a continued United Nations military presence in the north-east of the country after the expiry of the mandate of the European Union-led military force (EUFOR) on 15 March 2009. 12. The delegation again stressed the need for a well-conceived, swiftly executed disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. In view of the still active rebellion in parts of the country and its willingness to be part of the inclusive political dialogue, the delegation emphasized the need to start disarmament, demobilization and reintegration immediately after the conclusion of a successful inclusive dialogue. The delegation also inquired about the option of integrating at least some of the ex-combatants into the Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA), but clear parameters have yet to be elaborated in this respect. 13. The delegation was informed that UNDP had initiated the process of designing a new disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme for the country and that two international consultants had already been deployed to the field to conduct an early assessment of the situation and begin initial contacts with rebel groups. A draft programme was to be prepared by UNDP and presented to partners at a meeting on 18 November in Libreville, bringing together the Government, rebels, opposition parties and civil society organizations. Given that a previous disarmament, demobilization and reintegration effort had failed, the delegation emphasized the need to fully incorporate lessons learned, and to better communicate and coordinate all actors contributing to the programme in the Central African Republic with UNDP taking the lead, and with assistance from the European Union (EU) and the World Bank. However, the first stages of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the field will require professional assistance with disarmament and monitoring by a neutral military force. Bilateral programmes in this respect could be envisaged, as well as a role for an international peacekeeping force, possibly MICOPAX. The broad disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme should be coordinated with the efforts of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in child soldier demobilization to ensure a synergistic impact. 14. The delegation was able to ascertain that for security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, a number of partners (EU and UNDP) had expressed their intention to provide contributions, provided the necessary safeguards were in place to ensure transparency and accountability in the use of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration funds, better coordination of efforts, robust management in the field, and full attention to protecting human rights and compensation for victims. As far as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration were concerned, firm commitments on funding would be required in the short term in order to move forward with the programme elaborated by UNDP. 15. Overall the security situation had seen a slight improvement, with reduced activity by the "zaraguinas" (coupeurs de route), as well as a reduced number of reported incidents between rebels, FACA and the population. Some interlocutors stressed that both the rebels and coupeurs de route plunder as a means of making a living and are not necessarily politically motivated. Some of the rebels seem to be to a certain extent disconnected from their leadership, who, for the most part, live in exile and have little means of communicating with their people on the ground. The same interlocutors indicated that unemployment and the overall prevailing poverty levels were as such an incentive to reach for the guns. With the right conditions and the emergence of economic opportunities, interlocutors suggested that rebel activities might rapidly recede, as work or employment opportunities were created. C. Good governance and the rule of law 16. Good governance and the rule of law were again highlighted as key priorities for the country's recovery. While some progress has been made in these areas, notably through the country's adherence to and ratification of a number of international conventions in this regard and the adoption of modernized laws, much remains to be done, notably in the areas of natural resource management and human rights. These two key points were raised with all relevant interlocutors, who recognized the need to act, while also acknowledging that the acute lack of national capacity hampers reforms. The absence of a state presence beyond Bangui was seen as a major obstacle to tackling these two challenges, and provides a breeding ground for rebel activity and illegal trafficking in natural resources and small arms and light weapons. Much goodwill from key partners in developing the country also depends on improving the country's track record in transparency and good governance. The delegation learned that UNDP had launched two programmes in this area: rule of law and good governance and governance and decentralization, but noted that a gap might exist in programmes for strengthening national capacity for management of natural resources. 17. Given the critical importance of broadening the Government's narrow revenue base, the delegation stressed the importance of improving natural resources management as an integral part of strengthening the rule of law and good governance. That was viewed as essential both to increase international confidence in the management of the country and to ensure that the citizens benefited from basic economic activity as well as from the revenues derived from the country's natural resources exploitation, including timber, diamonds, gold and, potentially, oil. Strengthening the rule of law is vital not only for economic governance but also to consolidate the fledging democracy. D. Development poles 18. With respect to the establishment of development poles, the delegation had several exchanges with national authorities and the European Commission. The delegation learned that the concept of development poles has been fully endorsed by the Government of the Central African Republic in its Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), and that the European Commission was fully committed, together with other bilateral donors, to provide the funding necessary for their establishment. The European Commission stressed that the project should not be seen in isolation, but rather as complementary to other ongoing and planned activities and projects by the national authorities and international partners to provide basic social services, security and public administration to the concerned regions. The project itself envisaged the establishment, in a first phase, of 11 development poles, mainly around population centres in the west, followed by a second phase which would establish additional poles in the rest of the country. The delegation expressed concern about the current unbalanced geographical distribution of development poles in the first phase, which could be a trigger of additional tensions between those areas with development poles and those without them. 19. The delegation recognized that implementation of the development pole concept should proceed in parallel with rehabilitating the national road system, both main roads and feeder roads from village to regional markets. There was a need to ensure that the country's infrastructure should be improved, notably the road system, which would allow for better transportation between commercial centres, thus improving free circulation of goods and people, including to neighbouring countries. Some ongoing projects and planned projects by some of the donors (bilateral and others) have envisaged such road construction as part of "roads for works" public works programmes that could provide a "peace dividend". The delegation also took note of the European Commission's willingness to fund further analysis (by UN-Habitat) for the remaining second phase development poles, should the Peacebuilding Commission consider supporting the development of the second phase development poles, through funding and other assistance from its membership. Interconnection among priorities 20. The delegation realized the particular importance of the interconnection between and among the various priorities. While there is a general recognition that no progress could be achieved in the three priorities unless there is concrete and substantive progress in the inclusive political dialogue, there is also a general awareness that progress has to be simultaneous on all three fronts, namely, the security sector, the rule of law and good governance and the establishment of development poles. It was difficult to envisage a security sector reform/disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process without the establishment of development poles that provided the newly demobilized with employment opportunities and alternative means to provide for their own and their family's needs. Similarly, the establishment of development poles would have less impact without proper reforms in the sector of the rule of law and good governance, notably as it relates to creating an enabling environment to attract foreign private investment into the country, to provide basic services and to re-establish Government authority throughout the territory in a decentralized way. 21. The delegation made extensive contacts with a wide range of actors on the ground covering all parts of society, including the political leaders, political parties of the majority and the opposition, civil society, the private sector as well as the international community on the ground, both bilateral and multilateral donors and actors, including the United Nations presence. The goals of the mission, as laid out in its terms of reference, were fully met. 22. The visit by the Peacebuilding Commission delegation to the Central African Republic proved once more the usefulness of such visits to the field, where the Commission can learn from a wide diversity of viewpoints. The visit allowed for members of the delegation to gain a better understanding of the country's challenges as they relate to peacebuilding. Furthermore, beyond seeing the situation in Bangui, the visits to other areas of the country, in particular the north-west (Paoua) and the capital's main power plant (Boali), allowed the delegation to observe conditions outside the capital. 23. With regard to the specific priority areas, the delegation realized the particular importance of concurrently addressing the challenges in security sector reform/disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the rule of law and good governance, and the establishment of development poles. That realization has highlighted the particular challenge the Peacebuilding Commission will face in the Central African Republic to coordinate the action of all relevant stakeholders to ensure not only progress, but also careful sequencing of the various actions and projects, ongoing and planned. 24. All three priorities are either covered or about to be covered by individual frameworks and/or programmes. In the area of security sector reform, the seminar held in April 2008 resulted in a detailed timeline (chronogramme) of implementable actions. With respect to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, a detailed plan is in the process of being elaborated by UNDP and will be finalized by the middle of November. With respect to the rule of law, at the time of the delegation's visit to Bangui, UNDP had just launched a comprehensive project to strengthen the rule of law through justice and security. The Government has made significant progress recently in the area of good governance by signing and ratifying a set of international conventions in this field. With respect to the establishment of development poles, the European Commission has elaborated a detailed project proposal, in two phases, which is budgeted and ready to be implemented. 25. The delegation stressed repeatedly the importance of seeing progress on the inclusive political dialogue, without which any efforts made in the three priority areas might be considerably hampered. Soon after the departure of the delegation, the Government announced that the inclusive political dialogue would take place in Bangui from 5 to 22 December 2008. 26. In this regard, and having had the chance to discuss the matter with the departing strategic assessment mission led by the Department of Political Affairs as well as other relevant stakeholders on the ground, the delegation came to the conclusion that an integration of the United Nations presence on the ground would ensure better coherence and coordination among the relatively small number of active actors present on the ground. This should also be seen in the perspective of possible additional actors joining as a consequence of the increased international attention given to the country at this stage. Within such an integration, a dedicated capacity to support the engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission would be very useful to help in fulfilling the objectives of better coordination and sequencing. The debate in the Security Council on the latest report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic (S/2008/733) will be a crucial moment in support of the Peacebuilding Commission's work in the country, as it relates to the request to the Secretary-General by the Security Council, in a press statement read out by the President of the Council on 27 June 2008, to make recommendations on the matter of integration. 27. The Government has requested that consideration be given to using the remaining amount of the country's first allocation from the Peacebuilding Fund towards implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration strategy. The delegation agreed to take the request into consideration and discuss the matter with UNDP, which is leading the effort to develop the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. The Peacebuilding Commission should lend its support to the UNDP-led process as an expression of its commitment to strengthening coherence and coordination in implementing the various aspects of the priorities of the Central African Republic. 28. The delegation was struck by the overarching need to strengthen support for national capacity-building through additional assistance and other innovative ways. A serious shortage of qualified personnel at all levels, within and outside the Government, is hampering the transition from humanitarian intervention to sustainable development and could jeopardize the Government's capacity to deliver basic social and other services throughout the country. Note on the field visit of the Peacebuilding Commission to the Central African Republic (30 October to 6 November 2008): Objectives and key messages I. Objectives of the visit 1. For the Peacebuilding Commission delegation, the purposes of the mission will be: (a) To engage with the Government of the Central African Republic and other key stakeholders; (b) To discuss with the Government and other stakeholders the Government's main peacebuilding priorities and challenges faced by the country, the actions being undertaken by the Government to address the challenges, and the nature and scope of international support that the country needs; (c) To visit sites of ongoing projects in and outside of Bangui that are relevant to peacebuilding in the country; (d) To exchange views on the activities of the Peacebuilding Fund with the National Steering Committee. II. Key messages A. Instruments of engagement with the Central African Republic: the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund 2. The engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission is aimed at maintaining sustained international attention on and support for the country's efforts to consolidate peace by bringing together all the relevant actors, marshalling resources and advising on integrated strategies for peacebuilding. Achieving these objectives must include efforts to enhance coordination and forge stronger partnerships between national, regional and international actors. 3. The deliberations of the Peacebuilding Commission will keep informing the priority plans, which focus on immediate priorities from among the broader peacebuilding challenges under discussion in the Commission. These priorities, in turn, form the basis for developing concrete projects for possible funding by the Peacebuilding Fund. B. Framework document for peacebuilding in the Central African Republic 4. The Peacebuilding Commission is committed to ensuring and supporting national ownership of the peacebuilding process. The development of a framework document will be firmly vested with the authorities in the Central African Republic, supported by the United Nations and other concerned stakeholders (civil society, the private sector, international actors). 5. The process of developing the framework document should be based on inclusive consultations with all stakeholders. 6. The framework document will be used to assess progress and ensure follow-up to agreed commitments. It may also serve as the framework to mobilize additional resources and ensure sustained international attention for the Central African Republic's peacebuilding process. C. Relationship between the strategic framework and the Peacebuilding Fund disbursement 7. The Peacebuilding Commission's process of articulating a framework document for the Central African Republic is not directly linked to the disbursement from the Peacebuilding Fund, although future Fund priorities will be guided by the framework document. The framework document will be used to govern the long-term relationship between the Commission and the Central African Republic and therefore will extend beyond the short-term role of the Peacebuilding Fund in providing an immediate and short-term response to peacebuilding challenges. 8. It is envisaged that the Peacebuilding Fund will be disbursed in two tranches, one of which is in the process of being disbursed. A second tranche could be allocated once the framework document for peacebuilding in the Central African Republic has been finalized. D. The importance of continuity and stability 9. At a time when the international community, and the Peacebuilding Commission in particular, is actively strengthening its engagement with the Government of the Central African Republic, in recognition of the wide challenges the country is facing to consolidate peace, it is vital that the authorities of the country give priority attention to the process of developing the framework document and make all efforts to ensure political stability. In this regard, ensuring that measurable progress is achieved in the inclusive political dialogue process will be an important sign of political and institutional stability and commitment. E. Sustained commitment from the Government of the Central African Republic 10. The Peacebuilding Commission is committed to a serious engagement with the Central African Republic, at all levels of the Government. Closely linked to the importance of continuity and stability is the question of sustained engagement. The intensification of efforts will be particularly important now that the country will initiate the drafting of a framework document for peacebuilding. 11. To facilitate that engagement, we commend the Government for having identified a national focal point at the Ministerial level who will act as coordinator of the Government's engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission, Sylvain Maliko, Minister of State for Planning, the Economy and International Cooperation. Minister Maliko's engagement with the Peacebuilding Fund process so far, as coChair of the country's Peacebuilding Fund National Steering Committee, is a definite advantage. 12. It is widely recognized that the Central African Republic could be at a turning point in its development. Having recognized that, the international community has stepped up efforts in support of the country and has indicated its willingness to continue to do so. A matching commitment, political will and strength on the part of the Government, combined with the help of the international community, will result in great benefits for the country and its population. III. Composition of the delegation 13. The delegation was composed of the following members: Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative, Chairperson of the country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission on the Central African Republic, Belgium Fernand Poukré-Kono, Permanent Representative, Central African Republic Simeon Selby Ripinga, Ambassador of South Africa to the Central African Republic Karel Komarek, Minister Counsellor, Czech Republic Michel Régis Onanga M. Ndiaye, First Counsellor, Gabon Douglas J. Meurs, Adviser, United States of America Filip Van den Bulcke, First Secretary, Belgium Abdurrahman A. H. Elgannas, Second Secretary, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Dan Schreiber, Belgium Ejeviome Eloho Otobo, Director, Deputy Head of Office, Peacebuilding Support Office Philip Helminger, Peacebuilding Officer, Peacebuilding Support Office Programme of the visit Time Activity Thursday, 30 October 2008 Meeting with United Nations country team Meeting with the Minister of State for Planning, Economy and International Cooperation Meeting with representatives of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund Meeting with the Ambassador of France and Head of the European Commission Delegation Meeting with the Humanitarian and Development Partners Team Meeting with the outgoing Strategic Assessment Mission to the Central African Republic Friday, 31 October 2008 Meeting with the Union des forces vives de la nation (UFVN) Meeting with the Committee of External Partners (COPESPOD) Meeting with representatives from civil society (trade unions) End of day debriefing Saturday, 1 November 2008 All-day visit to Paoua (Sous-préfet, Multinational Force of the Central African Republic (FOMUC)/MICOPAX, representatives of internally displaced persons, representatives of women associations, meeting with the United Nations team in Paoua, visit of various projects in agriculture, youth employment and vocational training, etc.) Sunday, 2 November 2008 Visit to Birao Monday, 3 November 2008 Meeting with the presidential majority parties (Groupement des partis politiques de la mouvance présidentielle) Meeting with the Speaker of the National Assembly Meeting with the Minister of Communication, in charge of the political dialogue Meeting with the Deputy Minister in Charge of Defence Meeting with the Prime Minister Meeting with the Ambassador of the United States of America Meeting with the Head of State Tuesday, 4 November 2008 Meeting with the United Nations country team Meeting with the Sectoral Committee on Security Sector Reform Follow-on meeting with the World Bank Meeting with representatives from the civil society (women's and human rights NGOs) Wednesday, 5 November 2008 Meeting with the Médiateur de la République (Ombudsman) Meeting with the UNDP Rule of Law, Good Governance Unit Follow-on meeting with the European Commission (on development poles, security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration) Thursday, 6 November 2008 Meeting with the Peacebuilding Fund National Steering Committee Press conference 