%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|AFRICA|AMERICAS|ASIA|EUROPE|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PEACEBUILDING|SANCTIONS|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|NEGOTIATION|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|SUBSIDIARY BODIES|TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|

Letter dated 25 February 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit to you the assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Indonesia for the month of November 2007 (see annex). This assessment has been prepared under my responsibility, after consultation with the other members of the Security Council. I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa Ambassador Permanent Representative Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Indonesia (November 2007) Introduction Under the presidency of Indonesia in November 2007, the Security Council held 26 meetings, including 12 consultations of the whole, two private debates, three open debates, two debates, two briefings, and one private meeting. The Council adopted two resolutions and two presidential statements, and agreed on four statements to the press. On 2 November, the Security Council adopted its programme of work for the month in its first consultation under Indonesia's presidency, and, following the adoption of the programme, the President of the Council briefed the press on its contents. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, N. Hassan Wirajuda, presided over an open debate on the role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security on 6 November. Africa Great Lakes region: northern Uganda On 13 November, in consultations of the whole, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Lord's Resistance Army-affected areas, the former President of Mozambique Joaquim Chissano, briefed the Council on the recent talks between the Lord's Resistance Army and the Government of Uganda and the Juba peace process. The President made a statement to the press, in which Council members stated that they were encouraged by the progress to date and the improvements in the security and humanitarian situation in northern Uganda. Council members reiterated their support for a negotiated settlement and their hope for an expeditious conclusion to the peace process. They stressed the importance of the international community and the Government of Uganda maximizing the opportunity provided by the peace process to make further sustained progress on improving living conditions in northern Uganda. Council members also reiterated that those responsible for serious violations of human rights and international law should be brought to justice. The Council members urged the Lord's Resistance Army to release immediately all women, children and other non-combatants. Ethiopia and Eritrea On 13 November, consultations of the whole were held on Ethiopia and Eritrea, in which the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions (Department of Peacekeeping Operations), Dmitry Titov, briefed the Council. At the end of the consultations, members of the Council agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/43), in which the Council members urged both Ethiopia and Eritrea to take concrete steps to implement the decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission to delineate their disputed border, as well as to comply fully with the Algiers Agreements and prior Security Council resolutions and statements of its President including on the issue of demarcation. The Council further called upon the parties to refrain from using force, to normalize their relations, to promote stability between them, and to lay the foundations for sustainable peace in the region. The Council commended the operations of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea. Sudan On 14 November, in consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, about preparations for the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). On 27 November, the Council held a debate, followed by consultations, on the Sudan. During the debate, the Council received briefings by the Special Envoy Jan Eliasson, and the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. The Permanent Representative of the Sudan participated in the debate. The Council evaluated the progress on the recent political developments as well as preparations for the transfer of authority from the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to UNAMID. The Special Envoy stressed that the humanitarian, security and political situation had an impact on the deployment of the peacekeeping operation, adding that the first two elements continued to deteriorate. He said that the discussion had reinforced the facilitators' efforts to get all parties to engage. Those who had not yet participated would, it was hoped, do so, and Member States should help in that regard. The humanitarian and peacekeeping operations required huge expenditures. It was essential that political conditions be made conducive to success. The Special Envoy reiterated the importance of the participation of civil society groups in talks and thanked Council members, along with the Sudan, for their support for civil society participation. The Under-Secretary-General said that the UNAMID deployment process was at a crossroads. There were a number of issues to be resolved. The first issue was the security and humanitarian situation on the ground. The second issue was that of fundamental challenges faced by UNAMID in the areas of force generation, the final determination of the composition of the force, and a number of impediments to deployment being put in place by the Government of the Sudan. He also said the first elements of the heavy support package for AMIS had been deployed, including a 140-strong formed police unit from Bangladesh and a 135-strong engineering unit from China. A second formed police unit was expected on 15 December 2007. Most of the staff officers were expected in the force and sector headquarters by the end of December. Following that intervention, representatives of all 15 Council members made statements in which they all agreed on the need for progress on the political, humanitarian and security fronts in order for the deployment of UNAMID to succeed. Most speakers expressed concern over the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation, the obstacles to deploying UNAMID, and the lack of cohesion among rebel groups. Council members also emphasized the need for enhanced cooperation by the Government of the Sudan with the deployment of UNAMID. Somalia On 19 November, in consultations of the whole, the Council received a briefing on recent developments in Somalia from the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Haile Menkerios. The President of the Council, in an oral statement to the press, expressed the strong concern of the Council members about the deteriorating political, security and humanitarian situation in the country. The President said that the members also underlined the need to continue to actively develop contingency plans for the possible deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force as part of an enhanced United Nations integrated strategy in Somalia. The Council members also called on all Somali stakeholders to renounce violence and engage in an all-inclusive peace process, and expressed support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, in promoting dialogue, consultations and reconciliation, as well as support for the transitional federal institutions in implementing the Transitional Federal Charter and the conclusions of the National Reconciliation Congress. The Council also expressed support for the African Union Mission in Somalia and underlined the need to continue to actively develop contingency plans for the possible deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force as part of an enhanced United Nations integrated strategy in Somalia, as well as for the provision of international assistance to this area. Democratic Republic of the Congo In response to the signing of a joint communiqué by the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda on 9 November in Nairobi, the Council agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/44) on 21 November. The joint communiqué contained a common approach to end the threat posed to peace and stability in both countries and the Great Lakes region, particularly to the definitive settlement of the problem of illegal armed groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the presidential statement, the Council noted that the communiqué was an important milestone towards the definitive settlement of the problem of illegal armed groups, in particular the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), ex-FAR/Interahamwe and the dissident militia of Laurent Nkunda, and reiterated its demand that those groups lay down their arms and engage voluntarily and without preconditions in their demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration. The Council also encouraged the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to implement fully their commitments in the communiqué and to continue to cooperate to solve their common security concerns. It stressed its readiness to facilitate and support the implementation of those commitments, in particular through measures against additional individuals and entities, including FDLR and ex-FAR/Interahamwe, pursuant to resolutions 1596 (2005) and 1649 (2005). On 29 November, the Council held a meeting with the troop-contributing countries for the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, followed by consultations of the whole. During the consultations, the Council members heard a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, William Lacy Swing. Burundi On 28 November, the Council heard a briefing from the Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process and Minister for Safety and Security of South Africa, Charles Nqakula, at an open meeting about Burundi. In his briefing, the Facilitator said, inter alia, that, according to a comprehensive ceasefire agreement signed by the Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-Forces nationales de libération (FNL) on 7 September 2006, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process should have started within 72 hours of signing. He stressed that, although that had not happened, there were now some Palipehutu-FNL combatants ready to submit to the process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, but help was needed to start and complete the process. He also said that, with help from the international community, in coordination with the political directorate of the mediation, he intended to resolve some of the political problems in the search for peace, which would be made more possible if the FNL leadership would come into Burundi for that purpose. He pleaded for United Nations assistance to oversee the disarmament and reintegration of FNL, so that the facilitation programme could be successfully completed. At the end of the briefing, the President of the Council read a statement to the press, already agreed by the Council members, in which the Council members commended the role played by the Facilitator, the Regional Initiative, the African Union and the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi in support of the Burundi peace process. They also noted with appreciation the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in helping Burundi to achieve long-term peace and stability. Members of the Council also welcomed the Government's efforts to promote dialogue, national reconciliation and social harmony in Burundi, and called on all political stakeholders there to maintain the spirit of consensus-building and inclusiveness that had enabled them to achieve a successful transition in their country. Asia and the Middle East Lebanon The Council was briefed in its consultations of the whole on 5 November by the Special Envoy, Terje Roed-Larsen, about the Secretary-General's recent report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), concerning Lebanon (S/2007/641). In the report, the Secretary-General stated that political dialogue must allow the election of a new president before the constitutional deadline of 24 November 2007. He also expressed concern at signs that most political parties in Lebanon were apparently preparing for the possible further deterioration of the situation. At the end of the consultations, the Council members agreed on elements of an oral statement of the President of the Council to the press. In the statement, the Council members stressed the need to hold free and fair presidential elections in conformity with the Lebanese Constitution and without any foreign interference and influence. They also reaffirmed the need for all parties to resolve all political issues on the basis of reconciliation and national dialogue. Afghanistan In response to the suicide attack on 6 November against a visiting parliamentary delegation in Baghlan, northern Afghanistan, upon the agreement of the Council members, on 8 November, the President of the Security Council read a statement to the press, in which Council members condemned in the strongest terms the suicide attack that had caused numerous deaths in the town of Baghlan. They noted that the terrorist attack was one of the deadliest in Afghanistan in recent years and urged the Afghan authorities to make every effort to bring the perpetrators and organizers to justice. The members of the Council reiterated their concern at the increasing threat to the local population, national security forces, international military and international assistance efforts posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, illegal armed groups, criminals and those involved in the narcotics trade, and reiterated that no terrorist act could reverse the path towards peace, democracy and reconstruction in Afghanistan, which is supported by the people and the Government of Afghanistan and the international community. Myanmar On 13 November, the Council held a debate on Myanmar, to receive a briefing from the Secretary-General's Special Adviser, Ibrahim Gambari, on his recent visit to the country and the region. Delegations of concerned countries, including Japan, Myanmar and Singapore also participated in the debate. Following the debate, the Council held consultations of the whole which ended with an agreement of the members on elements regarding the situation in Myanmar to be orally presented by the President of the Council to the press. On 14 November, the Council members agreed on a formal statement to the press containing the same elements as those of the oral statement made by the President the day before. In the formal statement, members of the Council, inter alia, welcomed the mission of the Secretary-General's Special Adviser, and reaffirmed their support for the continued efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser. They reaffirmed the expectations of the Security Council as set out in its presidential statement of 11 October 2007. They looked forward to the earliest possible return of the Special Adviser to Myanmar, and encouraged the Government of Myanmar to meet its commitment to cooperate fully with the United Nations. They also confirmed their intention to keep developments in Myanmar under close review. The situation in the Middle East On 30 November, the Council heard a briefing from the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. The Under-Secretary-General informed the Council members about the conference in Annapolis, at which the Prime Minister of Israel, Ehud Olmert, and the Palestinian President, Mahmoud Abbas, had reached a joint understanding. The joint understanding includes an agreement to launch immediate good-faith bilateral negotiations to conclude a peace treaty, resolving all outstanding issues without exception before the end of 2008; an agreement on a joint steering committee that would meet continuously; and a commitment to immediately implement their respective obligations under the road map. The Under-Secretary-General said that the Annapolis conference had also included extensive discussion of international support for building the institutional capacity of the Palestinian Authority, setting the stage for the upcoming Conference in Paris. In preparation for Paris, he said, the Palestinian Prime Minister, Salam Fayyad, had circulated a summary of the Palestinian reform and development plan for 2008-2010, which demonstrated fiscal responsibility and political commitment to reform. It also laid out what Israel and the international community should do to assist the Palestinian Authority. The Under-Secretary-General also said that the Secretary-General looked forward to Robert Serry of the Netherlands becoming the new Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and his Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority. Turning to developments in Lebanon, he said there had been six postponements of a parliamentary session to elect the country's new President in the past two months, despite extensive diplomatic efforts, continued mediation and a visit by the Secretary-General. With regard to the reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared Palestinian refugee camp, estimated to cost $200 million, he said the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East had received only $28 million of its flash appeal for $54 million to meet immediate and longer-term needs. Europe Bosnia and Herzegovina After extensive consultations held on 15 and 16 November, the Council decided that the meeting of 16 November on the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina would be a closed (private) meeting. Under this format, on 16 November, members of the Council and Nikola Spiric, Acting Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina; Miroslav Lajcak, High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the representatives of Portugal (on behalf of the European Union) and Serbia had an exchange of views. On 21 November, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1785 (2007), by which it authorized the Member States acting through or in cooperation with the European Union to establish for a further period of 12 months a multinational stabilization force (EUFOR) as a legal successor to SFOR under unified command and control. Thematic issues International Court of Justice The Council held a private debate on 2 November to consider the item entitled "Briefing by the President of the International Court of Justice". Members of the Council heard a briefing from Judge Rosalyn Higgins, President of the International Court of Justice, and had an exchange of views with her. Role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security On 6 November, the Council held an open debate on the role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security, presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, N. Hassan Wirajuda. The Secretary-General was present and made a statement, and more than 40 other speakers participated, including representatives of regional and subregional organizations that had been invited. In his statement, the Secretary-General said that United Nations partnerships with such organizations were stronger and more active than ever, and that he was committed to helping build up the capacity of regional and subregional organizations to undertake conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping tasks in their respective regions. The Secretary-General noted the joint African Union-United Nations peacekeeping force and political mediation in Darfur, and the cooperation with the European Union in the protection of civilians in Chad and the Central African Republic, as well as the work of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on Myanmar, among other partnerships developed during the year. Other collaborations had been pursued with the Economic Community of West African States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Organization of American States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Such cooperation had made it possible to respond more quickly at the outset of crises and more effectively in post-conflict peacebuilding. As an outcome of the thematic debate, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/42), in which it recognized the important role of regional and subregional organizations in the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, and invited all Member States to contribute to strengthening the capacity of those organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security, underlining their importance in peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the fight against terrorism and illicit weapons, and other collective efforts. The Council also reaffirmed that it had the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, recognized that regional organizations were well positioned to understand the root causes of conflicts close to home and to influence their prevention and resolution, and encouraged regional and subregional organizations to strengthen and increase cooperation among them. It stressed that contributions by regional organizations must be made in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council also recalled its determination to further cooperation with such organizations and welcomed recent instances of cooperation between the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union. Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies On 14 November, the Council held an open debate to hear briefings by the Chairmen of three subsidiary bodies of the Council, namely the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Speaking on behalf of the Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies, Ambassador Johan Verbeke (Belgium) stated that the three Committees strove to work closely together, both directly and through their respective group of experts, who had, for instance, jointly participated in visits to States. The common strategy of assisting the non- and late-reporting States was currently being jointly implemented. The three subsidiary bodies recognized the importance of sharing information and analyses, and working together in their relations with other relevant international, regional and subregional organizations. The three expert groups were also cooperating within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. Although the primary responsibility for implementing the obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions is vested in Member States, the interaction with them was deemed to be essential. In his capacity as the Chairman of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, Ambassador Verbeke said that the sanctions regime set out in resolution 1267 (1999) continued to be a powerful instrument in the fight against terrorism related to Al-Qaida and the Taliban. While the Committee had been striving over the past six months to further improve the quality of the consolidated list and was committed to continue to do so, an appeal was made to all States to increase their support and assistance to the Committee and the Monitoring Team. The Committee continued to explore ways and means to enhance a mutually beneficial dialogue with States, including through open briefings by the Chairman, visits to selected countries, meetings with representatives of Member States, and cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations. Speaking as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Ambassador Ricardo Alberto Arias (Panama) said the Committee's work was divided into three categories, namely, monitoring and promoting the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001); facilitating technical assistance; and full implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). With regard to resolution 1373 (2001), the Committee continued to analyse the preliminary implementation assessments for all Member States. The Committee held its fifth special meeting with international, regional and subregional organizations in Nairobi from 29 to 31 October 2007. The main focus in the future would be to work proactively with States on both the monitoring and assistance parts of the mandate. As the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate would expire at the end of the year, he encouraged Member States to present their ideas in that regard for the Council's due consideration. In his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, Ambassador Peter Burian (Slovakia), said that the Committee had adopted new measures to speed up the reporting process. A thematic discussion, held in October 2007, had recognized the need to pursue a phased approach to the Committee's outreach activities and determined that future activities would focus less on reporting and more on helping States to fully implement the resolution. An effort was made in all outreach activities to explain the need for States to be specific in their requests for assistance, and to make it easier to match them with offers of assistance. Protection of civilians in armed conflict On 20 November, the Council held an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Present at the open debate were the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes. Representatives of 33 members and non-members of the Council took part in the open debate and made statements. In his opening remarks, the Secretary-General expressed regret that civilians continued to suffer grievous violence in conflict situations around the world. He urged the Council to create a working group to ensure their protection. Stressing that the Council's words must have their greatest impact on the ground, he pointed out the timeliness of the meeting, since it was on the same date in 1945 that the war crimes trials had begun in Nuremberg, Germany. Sixty-two years later, civilians continued to pay a dreadful toll in conflicts, from the Sudan to Afghanistan and Iraq. Women, men, girls and boys suffered unimaginable violations of humanitarian and human rights law. Introducing the Secretary-General's report on the subject (S/2007/643), the Under-Secretary-General said its recommendations were critical to more systematic consideration by the Council of civilian protection. He said that suicide attacks, a feature in a growing number of conflicts, were a particularly disturbing way of deliberately targeting civilians. However, he said, any military response must itself comply with humanitarian law and show respect for the human and cultural dignity of those already endangered. The Secretary-General's report contained a number of proposals with regard to compliance with international humanitarian law in situations of asymmetric warfare, including the use of cluster munitions. The Under-Secretary-General also said that consideration should be given to referring grave incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence to the proper national, local and regional mechanisms. The Council should seek creative ways to support States in holding perpetrators accountable, for example through the establishment of ad hoc judicial arrangements. Other actions proposed in the report concerned more robust legal protections for humanitarian workers, against whom attacks continued to increase. There was also a need to address housing, land and property issues much earlier in a conflict to prevent violence arising from disputes over them. Most speakers agreed with the urgent need to protect civilians more effectively, systematically and proactively. International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia On 28 November, the Council, by resolution 1786 (2007), appointed Serge Brammertz as Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, for a term of four years, beginning on 1 January 2008. Other activities Annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly On 12 November, the presidency of the Council introduced the Council's report for the period from 1 August 2006 to 31 July 2007 at a meeting of the General Assembly. Among other highlights, the representative of Indonesia said that the Council had held 224 formal meetings, 184 of which were public, as well as 22 meetings with troop-contributing countries. The Council held 192 consultations and adopted 71 resolutions in addition to 52 presidential statements. The President of the Council also stressed the importance of effective working methods and continued to enhance effectiveness and transparency. The participation of non-members had been accommodated in various open debates and Council members continued to pay attention to the Security Council mandate review within the relevant ad hoc committee. Tarrytown workshop On 15 and 16 November, representatives of Council members, as well as representatives of the newly elected members of the Council, attended the fifth annual workshop for newly elected members of the Security Council, which was hosted at the Tarrytown House Conference Center by the Permanent Mission of Finland to the United Nations, in cooperation with the Center on International Organization of Columbia University, the Security Council Affairs Division of the Secretariat, and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research. The objective of the workshop was to help to familiarize the newly elected members with the practice, procedures, and working methods of the Council so that they might "hit the ground running" when they joined the Council. Security Council Mission to Timor-Leste The Security Council sent a mission to Timor-Leste from 24 to 30 November 2007, led by Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa). The mission was aimed at, inter alia, discussing and exchanging views with the Timorese authorities on the ways and means to assist the country in developing the capacities necessary to build on security and democratic and other gains achieved thus far, as well as underlining the long-term commitment of the international community to stabilization and development in Timor-Leste, and the need for the continuing support of bilateral and international partners to Timorese efforts towards self-reliance. International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People On 29 November, the Permanent Representative of Indonesia, on behalf of the Council members, made a statement at the special meeting held at United Nations Headquarters to observe the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. In his statement, he said, among other things, that the Day of International Solidarity with the Palestinian People provided an opportunity for the international community to reflect upon its role and contributions in advancing the objective of the two States vision. It was the day when the international community reaffirmed its commitment to the Palestinian people and the establishment of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine. In addition, he said, the Council recognized the crucial need to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which would contribute to the security and stability of the Middle East, and to put in place a process with the goal of creating an independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State as envisioned in the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, and the joint understanding announced at Annapolis. In that regard, he added, the Council underlined the importance of the donor conference to be held in Paris on 17th December to mobilize the donors, following on from the Annapolis conference, and to provide financial and political support for the Palestinian Authority to enable it to build a viable and prosperous Palestinian State. He concluded that, as mandated by the Charter, it is the responsibility of the Council to assist Palestine to achieve sustainable peace and to maintain peace and security in the region. The Council will, therefore, continue to be actively seized of the matter. 