%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|PROGRAMME PLANNING|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|

Letter dated 20 March 2008 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council Annexed hereto is the work programme for the Committee established pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), covering the period from 1 January to 30 June 2008 (see annex). The activities of the Committee will proceed pursuant to the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1535 (2004), 1566 (2004) and 1624 (2005). The Committee will continue to work with Member States on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), guided by the principles of cooperation, transparency, even-handedness and consistency in approach. The Committee will remain focused on monitoring and promoting the implementation by Member States of resolution 1373 (2001) and on taking practical measures to enhance the counter-terrorism capacity of States, including measures aimed at facilitating technical assistance. Furthermore, the Committee will maintain dialogue with States on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005), and it will discuss its contribution to the implementation of the United nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Counter-Terrorism Committee welcomes the support it has received from Member States, the United Nations Secretariat and international, regional and subregional organizations and appreciates the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Neven Jurica Chairman Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism Work programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2008 I. Introduction 1. The Counter-Terrorism Committee is required to promote and monitor implementation by Member States of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), in accordance with the provisions of the resolution. 2. In December 2006, in accordance with its decision of 21 December 2005 (S/PRST/2005/64), the Security Council conducted a comprehensive review of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and endorsed the review report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (S/2006/989). Together with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 20 December 2006 (S/PRST/2006/56), the review report constitutes guidance for the future work of the Committee and the Executive Directorate, notably providing the following: (a) The guiding principles of the Committee's work shall be cooperation, transparency and even-handedness, as well as consistency in approach; (b) The Committee shall continue to strengthen its relations with international, regional and subregional organizations in assisting States in their implementation of resolution 1373 (2001); (c) The Committee shall work on identifying and promoting best practices in all key areas of resolution 1373 (2001); (d) The Committee shall ensure that any measures taken by Member States to combat terrorism comply with all their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights law, refugee law and humanitarian law; (e) The Committee shall attach great importance to coordination with experts from other counter-terrorism-related subsidiary bodies of the Security Council in preparing visits and in streamlining reporting; (f) The Committee shall play a part in the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288); (g) In the fulfilment of its mandate, the Committee shall be assisted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, under the policy guidance of the plenary. In this regard, the Executive Directorate will implement the policy guidance of the Committee through its eighth work programme (see appendix). II. Work programme 3. The Committee will focus its work on the following five priority objectives: A. Review of the Executive Directorate 4. In accordance with the request of the Security Council in its resolution 1787 (2007), the Committee will consider and endorse, prior to 31 March 2008, the revised organizational plan prepared by the Executive Director in consultation with the Committee. B. Monitoring and promoting the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) 5. The Committee, on the basis of initial assessments by its subcommittees, will continue to consider the preliminary implementation assessments and to approve, where appropriate, recommendations prepared by the Executive Directorate. It will then send the preliminary implementation assessments and the recommendations to the Member States concerned, for the appropriate action, in accordance with the procedures for the updated working methods of the Committee. 6. On the basis of an updated and more detailed global analysis to be prepared by the Executive Directorate, the Committee will consider the status of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all States, including detected gaps of particular concern, and elaborate possible additional measures to enhance implementation. 7. On the basis of the updated analysis prepared by the Executive Directorate, the Committee will reassess the status of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all States and report its findings to the Council. 8. In close cooperation with the Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004) and in accordance with its mandate, the Committee will pay special attention to States that are late in submitting relevant information to it, and discuss how best to address the issue. The Committee continues to call for the closest cooperation among the three expert groups, including, as appropriate, on information-sharing and visits. 9. The Committee will also continue to reflect on additional ways to address the cases of States that do not meet the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001). 10. The Committee will take steps to ensure that visits conducted to States with their consent have the effect of enhancing their implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), assess the results of such visits, and consider the appropriate follow-up action. 11. In order to enhance transparency, the Chairman of the Committee will hold periodic informal briefings for Member States, as appropriate, on the work of the Committee. C. Facilitating technical assistance to States in a twofold and proactive manner 12. The Committee will continue to pay close attention to facilitating technical assistance with a view to strengthening its contribution. In this context, the Committee will further develop the practice of holding informal forums targeting present and potential donors/providers in order to enhance the dialogue between the donor community and recipient countries and to achieve better results in the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). D. Maintaining dialogue with States on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) 13. The Committee will submit its second report on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005), adopted in October 2007, to the Council for its consideration. Furthermore, the Committee will continue to encourage States that have not yet submitted a report on their implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) to do so. 14. On the basis of the reports received from States and the information gathered during its on-site visits, the Committee will initiate a discussion to explore the needs of States for technical assistance in implementing resolution 1624 (2005) and facilitate the provision of such assistance, as appropriate. E. Implementing the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy 15. The Committee, also on the basis of the assessment by the Executive Directorate of its participation in the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, will discuss its contribution to the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. III. Next work programme 16. By the end of June 2008, the Committee will formulate and agree an updated work programme for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2008. Work programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2008 1. The eighth work programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate covers the period from 1 January to 30 June 2008. It has been prepared in accordance with the relevant provisions of the report of the Committee on its revitalization (S/2004/124) and takes into account the additional tasks assigned to the Executive Directorate in the Committee's review report (S/2006/989) and the Committee's twenty-third work programme. 2. The Executive Directorate will continue to help the Committee to achieve its objectives in the areas defined in the Committee's work programme; deliver regular reports on its work to the Committee, including the semi-annual report; and respond to any additional requests made during the reporting period. II. Review of the Executive Directorate 3. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 1787 (2007), the Executive Director will, within 60 days of the adoption of that resolution and in consultation with the Committee, recommend changes to the organizational plan of the Executive Directorate referred to in paragraph 4 of Council resolution 1535 (2004). Once the revised plan has been adopted by the Committee, a priority activity of the Directorate will be to initiate the new structure of groups and units and commence work on establishing criteria for, and harmonizing judgements across the full range of the Directorate's work. III. Monitoring and promoting implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) 4. The Executive Directorate will prepare drafts of those preliminary implementation assessments not already approved by the Committee (those for States visited and States to be visited) for the consideration and approval of the Committee. 5. The Executive Directorate will complete the revised analysis of the status of implementation by all States of resolution 1373 (2001), by region and subregion and on a thematic basis, and will submit the analysis to the Committee before the end of March 2008 for its consideration and endorsement. 6. In close cooperation with the relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, the Executive Directorate will prepare and conduct visits to the Niger (February), Jamaica (February), Saudi Arabia (March), Cambodia (May), the Lao People's Democratic Republic (May) and South Africa (tentatively planned for June). It will continue to update the Committee regularly on follow-up to its previous visits to Member States and will prepare proposals for the consideration of the Committee on future, more flexible or tailored visits, as set forth in the organizational plan. 7. The Executive Directorate will enhance its cooperation with relevant United Nations bodies, including the Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the Expert Group of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and other international, regional and subregional organizations, including in the context of the Committee's visits to Member States. 8. The Executive Directorate will continue to implement the common strategy for non-reporting/late-reporting States, jointly developed with the Monitoring Team of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the Expert Group of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). In cooperation with these bodies and with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Directorate will develop a proposal for a workshop for northern and eastern African countries on the drafting of responses to the three Security Council Committees dealing with counter-terrorism. It is envisaged that the workshop will be similar to the two previous workshops, held in Senegal and Botswana, respectively, in 2007. 9. Under the guidance of the Committee, the Executive Directorate will contribute to the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288) through active participation in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. It will also contribute, as appropriate, to preparations for the review of the implementation of the Global Strategy to be conducted by the General Assembly in September 2008. IV. Facilitating technical assistance to States 10. The Executive Directorate will redouble its efforts to facilitate technical assistance to States where vulnerabilities have been identified, by strengthening its relations with bilateral and multilateral donors and by developing innovative strategies to link recipients and donors. This important work will be driven within the Directorate by the newly formed Technical Assistance Group, under the direction of the Head of the Assessment and Technical Assistance Office. 11. The Executive Directorate will maintain and regularly update the technical assistance matrix posted on the website, the password protection system for access to different parts of the matrix, and the directory of donors and providers of assistance. 12. The Executive Directorate will continue to identify, post on the website and actively promote best practices in all key areas of resolution 1373 (2001), in accordance with the action plan approved by the Committee. 13. The Executive Directorate will strengthen its engagement with regional and subregional organizations in all parts of the world in order to assist them in preparing and/or implementing relevant counter-terrorism action plans and to involve them more directly in addressing the capacity-building needs of relevant countries, identified by the Committee through the preliminary implementation assessments and country visits. V. Implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) 14. The Executive Directorate will continue to include the issue of implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) in its dialogue with States, and will actively encourage those States that have not yet submitted a report on their implementation of the resolution to do so. 15. The Executive Directorate will prepare a proposal for the Committee on the technical assistance needs of States in their implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). The Directorate will also inform the Committee about the status of best practices of relevant human rights bodies. VI. Other activities 16. The Executive Directorate, working through the newly created Quality Control Unit, will seek to ensure that all documentation and reporting submitted to the Committee is accurate, consistent and in conformity with the Committee's decisions. The Directorate will also work on developing a more proactive communications strategy, through its Public Communications and Outreach Unit, so as to facilitate better understanding of the work of the Committee and the Directorate. The Executive Directorate will participate in briefings to this effect, aimed in particular at the wider United Nations membership. 17. The Executive Directorate will chair regular (weekly) meetings of the entire office staff to encourage greater communication within the Directorate and to ensure that all staff are fully informed of the priorities and activities of the Committee and the Directorate. Those meetings will also be used to review general issues of relevance to the Committee's work with the aim of both encouraging a more creative and dynamic approach to the work of the Directorate and generating new ideas on how the Organization might more effectively address the evolving terrorist threat. 18. The Executive Directorate will work closely with the Tower Records and Information Management (TRIM) system vendor to reprogram the Directorate's database, consistent with the regulations and standards of the Information Technology Services Division, so as to make access to the database through the Committee's website as user-friendly and effective as possible. 19. The Executive Directorate will continue to fill vacancies in the Professional and General Service categories, prepare end-of-cycle evaluations in the Personnel Assessment System for all Directorate staff, and prepare a human resources action plan for 2008-2009 for the Office of Human Resources Management. The Administration and Information Office will also begin to consider the Directorate's financial resource requirements for 2009, in anticipation of preparing a budget submission to the Comptroller, which will include a request for funding two Junior Professional positions currently not covered by its budget. 