%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SUDAN|FOREIGN RELATIONS|CHAD|PEACEMAKING|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|

Letter dated 9 June 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith the statement of H.E. Mr. Omer Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir, President of the Republic of the Sudan, to the Security Council mission to the Sudan from 3 to 5 June 2008 (see annex). I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex were circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Akec Khoc Chargé d'affaires a.i. Annex to the letter dated 9 June 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Statement by H.E. Mr. Omer Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir, President of the Republic of the Sudan, at the opening of talks with the Security Council mission, in Khartoum on 5 June 2008 - Your Excellencies, - Distinguished Members of the Council - Respected Members of the Sudanese Side - Ladies and Gentlemen It is for me an honour as it is a pleasure to warmly welcome you, and to extend the felicitations and best wishes of the Sudan Government and people for a pleasant stay and successful outcome of your visit. Our pleasure is compounded to see the entire Council membership in our midst, reflecting a partnership towards peace and prosperity which we greatly cherish. Your visit is doubtedly testimony to the constructive engagement happily in existence between the United Nations and our Country, being one of its oldest members. As its history reveals, and as exhibited in the natural confluence of two great rivers at the heart of its Capital, Sudan has always been a champion of the United Nations ideals of solidarity, inclusion and unity in diversity. We are confident that your visit would reinforce our peoples' determination to and aspirations for the attainment of a prosperous future. It is one year since the Council undertook its last visit, at the invitation of the Government of the Sudan as part of its Golden Jubilee celebration of independence. Like the current one, previous visits underscored the vitality and centrality of dialogue and constructive interaction. Experience has shown that it is through positive engagement and transparency that issues of mutual concern could be addressed and difficulties surmounted. I would like to assure the representatives of this august Council that Sudan is fully committed to the path of dialogue and mutual beneficial interaction. The talks we have now embarked upon afford us with a great opportunity to continue on this path towards greater understanding and ultimately achievements with respect to our common endeavours. I have made reference to the Council's previous visit to Sudan on 17 June 2007, which was followed few weeks later by the adoption of Security Council Resolution 1769 on 31st July 2007. While this resolution has crystallized and embodied the consensus and workable agendas on Darfur between the Sudan and the Security Council arrived at during the Addis Ababa High Level meeting of 16 November 2006, and consequent platforms through which four tracks we identified and agreed upon, namely peace-keeping, peace process, the humanitarian, rehabilitation and development, the implementation of the CPA on the other hand confirmed in no uncertain terms that peace in our country is no longer a dream as it has become an irreversible strategic choice. In translating the CPA provisions into reality all the constitutional and governance institutions necessary to implement the peace agreement have been formed. At the executive level, all institutions including the Presidency, the Government of National Unity, The Government of Southern Sudan, and the States' Governments have been set up. The legislative institutions at the National, Southern Sudan and States' levels have been also made operational. At the judicial level, I am delighted to inform that the National Judicial Service Commission along with the Constitutional Court have been set up. Likewise, all the Commissions stipulated in the CPA, such as the National Constitutional Review Commission, the Assessment and Evaluation Review Commission, the National Petroleum Commission, the National Public Service Commission, the Commission on the Rights of Non-Muslims in the National Capital, and the Ad hoc North-South Border Commission have been formed and are all now carrying out their duties diligently and conscientiously. While we were able to establish and operationalize the constitutional and legal structures as well as necessary mechanisms and modalities of implementation and follow-up in the form of commissions, committees and councils, the formation of the Government of National Unity in which more than 14 political parties and organizations are represented reflected the diversity and richness of our political life, and the successful implementation of the National Census gave credence also to the commitment of the partners to implement the CPA in letter and spirit. Distinguished members of the Security Council would recall that the implementation of the CPA is in accordance with specific time frames. With respect to the provisions whose time has come, few sections of the CPA remain to be implemented and we are striving hard to reach a common understanding on them. The top most remaining issue is Abyei. I am pleased to inform you that it would soon be settled through on-going consultations between the two partners who are fully committed to add it to the list of CPA achievements. The commitment and determination of the two partners to settle outstanding issues in spirit of cooperation and partnership is the CPA greatest asset, a sine qua non for the smooth implementation of the entire body of the agreement. Whilst my country holds dearly the CPA obligations, it looks forward to the international community to deliver on its pledges towards the essential peace requirements, namely the pledges made at Oslo 2005 Donor Conference and the ones that have recently been made in Norway early May 2008. We also look forward to see similar move towards prompt cancellation of my country's external debt as well as the lifting of unilateral sanctions which defeat the very objective and essence of the CPA itself and hinder the reconstruction and development efforts, as the Sudanese citizen has long been waiting for the peace dividends. Apart from the imperative of reconstruction and development, we earnestly look forward for the international community's assistance in our efforts to achieve the goal of Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) as well as support for the Joint Integrated Units (JIUs). The CPA is indeed one of my country's major national achievements. We look with pride to the remarkable gains and achievements realized, fully committed to continue with the implementation processes, including remaining issues, within the CPA specified mechanisms, while also refining our performance. I can assure you of our resolve in this regard. I would like also in this connection to commend the kind assistance of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) within its current agreed upon mandate. - Excellencies the Co-Chairs, - Distinguished Members, The Darfur problem remains the center of the preoccupation and concern of the Sudanese Government and people as it is their responsibility, first and foremost. There is no person or entity more concerned or more determined to stop bloodshed and realize peace and stability in Darfur than the Sudanese Government and its people. In our search for lasting peace, the Government is adamant on leaving no stone unturned towards reaching a political settlement commensurate with our firm conviction that it is only through peaceful means as opposed to military options that a durable solution could be found. In the twist and turns of the Darfur problem, my country which is credited by the international community for ending one of Africa's longest wars, has been a subject of an unfair an ill-intentioned campaign from some quarters bent on exploiting the crisis in Darfur to serve their agendas and designs. This vicious campaign has targeted policies and stance of my country and strived to exaggerate and distort facts along with tarnishing the image, heritage and values of our people. The recent attack on our national capital by the rebel group Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) is yet another reminder of the real impediments and obstruction, namely the rebel groups and the vicious external interferences and influences. My country that has repeatedly reaffirmed its full adherence and commitment to the objective of peace and stability, renews its resolve to realize peace and stability in Darfur. In so doing, we will consolidate our constructive engagement and partnership with the African Union and the United Nations. Indeed since the adoption of Security Council Resolution 1769 Sudan took seriously and delivered on its commitments with regard to the deployment of UNAMID. A high level Committee was established comprising all relevant Government authorities to ensure that the deployment goes as planned. Land and other logistical requirements were given. Issues pertaining to prompt custom clearance and visas were streamlined and enhanced. The legal framework was arrived at through the signing of the Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) despite the DPKO's four month delay in handing over the draft document to the Sudanese side, contrary to Resolution 1769 provisions. Regular meetings continue to be held between all relevant institutions and the UNAMID leadership. UNAMID is increasing its activities with each passing month as confirmed by the latest briefing by the Secretary General to the Security Council on 14 May 2008. Discussions are continuing between the Government authorities and UNAMID, in the spirit of cooperation and partnership, on best ways and means to enhance UNAMID deployment, on ensuring smooth and safe movement of goods from the seaport to Darfur, including the plans for other land routes envisaged by the Department of Field Support as well as the building of new camps. While the Government has exhibited in no uncertain terms its full commitment to the deployment of UNAMID, it is disheartening to note that the failures or shortcoming of other actors are, from time to time, unfairly abortioned or attributed to the Sudanese side. Indeed the United Nations has not been able to implement the Light and Heavy Support Packages as planned; a matter that has undoubtedly affected UNAMID operational requirements in terms of needed rehabilitation of roads and airports to augment the capability of the Mission including its ability to perform night flights. While my Government if fully committed to continue with its cooperation, we urge other stakeholders to discharge their responsibilities through providing the critical assets needed and also ensuring the African Character of the operation, including undertaking required technical visits to the African troop contributing countries. And as has been decided by the UN General Assembly resolution on financing UNAMID, we urge similar attention be given to local procurements and contractors. There is no doubt a consensus in the international community that the political process should be accorded necessary priority. The centrality and priority of the political process has not only been underscored in the various platforms and forums including the Addis Ababa High Level Consultations, the AU Peace and Security Council decisions and Security Council resolution 1769 itself, but recent developments have also made such task a compelling and urgent necessity. The Government of National Unity, while expressing its commitment and support to the AU-UN Joint Mediation in order to having peace to keep, looks forward for the rejuvenation of the mediation, including the long-awaited appointment of a Chief Negotiator. The Sudan Government has long made the peaceful resolution of the Darfur problem a major an overriding responsibility. Your august body would recall that the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) under the auspices of the African Union and the support of the international community on 5 May 2006 marked a turning point in the search for a peaceful solution. Despite the fact that the activities of the DPA non-signatories had negatively impacted on the efforts aimed at lasting peace and security in Darfur they have not barred the DPA partners from attaining considerable grounds in various aspects. In power-sharing, the Darfur Transitional Authority was formed and necessary appointments to the executive and legislative positions for the sons and daughters of Darfur at all levels of the Government were made. All aspects of power and wealth-sharing along with the security arrangements have been put in place in accordance with the agreement and in full cooperation with its partners. The hostile activities of the non-signatory factions and their insistence to pursue violence and destruction continue unabated in flagrant defiance of the will to peace that has prevailed after the signing of the DPA. This august body would also recall that in its resolution 1679 on 16 May 2006 the Security Council pledged to consider taking strong and effective measures against any individual or group that violate or undermine the Darfur Peace Agreement. Unfortunately, rather than making pressure on the nonsignatories to opt for negotiation and dialogue the pressure has instead been directed against the DPA signatories themselves. This, coupled with the negative signals emanating from certain quarters in the international community, made the rebel factions more intransigent as they continue to endanger the humanitarian situation and the peace prospects. The Government of National Unity, you would recall, has further demonstrated its commitment to the peace process when it dispatched a high-level delegation to the Sirte meeting organized under the auspices of the AU-UN Joint Mediation on 27 October 2007, and also announced a unilateral cease-fire therein. Unfortunately the rebel factions chose to paralyze the process and the objectives of attaining lasting peace in Darfur. In reiterating the primacy and centrality of the peace process, we call on all countries harboring leaders of the rebel factions to demonstrate their commitment to peace, and to exert necessary pressure on them to come to the negotiating table. - Distinguished Participants, The Government of National Unity continues to attach great importance to the humanitarian situation in Darfur. My country has consistently been fully committed to facilitating unhindered access of the flow of relief to the affected and needy population. It has also endeavoured to facilitate the work and movement of the many humanitarian organizations operating in Darfur. The Government's efforts were crowned with the agreement for the facilitation of humanitarian work signed with the United Nations on March 28, 2007 and which is successfully being implemented through a joint mechanism comprising the Government, the United Nations and national and international non-governmental organizations. Despite statements to the contrary, the humanitarian situation is witnessing clear improvement confirmed by the health and humanitarian indicators and supported by the absence of epidemics, hunger and food shortages; indicators that are better than many other states in the country. The 'Fast Track' mechanism has greatly helped to augment the humanitarian processes. On the other hand, the movement of the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to their villages bear witness to this improvement. While my country will continue to seek all avenues and means to improve the humanitarian situation, we caution against statements exaggerating the status of the humanitarian realities in Darfur including those relating to the number of deaths who unfortunately fall victims to the conflict. Your Excellencies would agree with me that does not auger well with required credibility and professionalism. The Security Council has on many occasions been briefed on the overall situation in the region relating to the Sudan-Chad relations and the Chadian destabilization acts against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan. The Chadian Government open and flagrant involvement has not only caused the prolongation of the Darfur problem and the sufferings of our people but has also taken a dangerous turn when Chad fully supported and designed the most condemnable attack on the Sudan national Capital on 10 May 2008. The Chadian aggressive and most unfriendly policies of destabilization has shown to the entire world the extent of its dangerous interferences in the internal affairs of our country which resulted in more destruction of properties and terrorizing of the innocent civilians. The attack further demonstrated the real agendas of the so-called Justice and Equality Movement that have nothing to do with the issues and demands of the Darfurians in power and wealth-sharing. My Government has consistently briefed the Security Council on the Chadian and JEM designs through its various communications to the Security Council. If left unchecked, the Chadian Government's policies have the effect of jeopardizing the international community's efforts to finding durable peace and stability in Darfur as it would also endanger regional stability and tranquility in violation of bilateral and regional agreements, including the Dakar Accord. We are hopeful that the wide condemnation of the attack on the Sudanese capital would signal a moment of truth for the international community towards addressing the real impediments to peace in the Sudan and in our region. The thematic debates on Africa and the periodic tradition by the Council to visit the Continent is a praiseworthy move that would give it first hand information on the realities and complexities of issues and situations that are more than ever impacted by climate change, environmental degradation, poverty, current economic and trade scenarios. We note also with appreciation the commendable initiative by South Africa in ably convening a summit meeting last April under the Chairmanship of H. E. President Thabo Mbeki to consider relationship between the United Nations and regional organizations, particularly the African Union, in the maintenance of international peace and security. While anxiously awaiting the outcome of the Security-Council proposed eminent group study on institutionalizing predictable resources and funding for operations undertaken by regional organizations on behalf of the international community, we take pride in the Sudan in constantly endeavouring to tap the resource of our regional organizations, the AU, and its comparative advantage, as seen by the experiences of both AMIS and the hybrid operation. Allow me in conclusion to seize this opportunity to, once again, welcome your historic visit to the Sudan as part of your African tour. We are hopeful that the visit would generate better understanding of our situation and acquaint you of our national efforts towards lasting peace and stability in the country. Your visit is a demonstration of our common and shared partnership premised on dialogue, as it is only through dialogue and constructive engagement, not confrontation or coercion, that we can together build a bright future for our people. As has already been emphasized, the Government of National Unity is determined to pursue and promote its positive interaction with your august Council to fully implement our four-track engagement in seeing the peace process reinforced, the hybrid operation deployed, the humanitarian situation augmented and improved and the rehabilitation and development ensured as answers to underdevelopment being the root cause of the conflict. It is an opportunity as well to extend our country's sincere appreciation to the Security Council's repeated commitment to the unity, independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Sudan. I wish you an enjoyable and fruitful stay. 