%%%TRIALS|WITNESSES|WAR CRIMINALS|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS|

Letter dated 24 July 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Serbia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to forward herewith a letter from Rasim Ljajić, President of the National Council of the Republic of Serbia for Cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, addressed to you (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated to the members of the Security Council and published as a document of the Council. (Signed) Pavle Jevremović Ambassador Permanent Representative It is my privileged honour to address you once more in relation to the case of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia Trial Chamber witness, Aleksandar Dimitrijevic, and the letter the President of the Tribunal sent to the Security Council on 17 June 2008, claiming the Republic of Serbia's lack of cooperation with the Tribunal in the case of Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinovic and others. I am pleased to inform you that the issue of Mr. Dimitrijevic's testimony before the Tribunal has been successfully brought to an end. Following the Trial Chamber's Order of 25 June 2008 to the Government of the Republic of Serbia to serve the new summons on Mr. Dimitrijevic in order to ensure the appearance of the witness before the Trial Chamber on 8 and 9 July 2008, the Republic of Serbia did confirm its willingness to cooperate with the Tribunal, as stated in my letter to you of 26 June 2008. The Republic of Serbia acted upon the new summons for Mr. Dimitrijevic and the summons was served on 30 June 2008. In addition, and following the Trial Chamber's Order on Testimony via Videoconference Link of 1 July 2008, Mr. Dimitrijevic gave his testimony via videoconference on 8 and 9 July 2008, from the Tribunal's field office in Belgrade. Taking into consideration that the new summons was issued by the Trial Chamber (in spite of the Tribunal's contention that no new summons would or should be issued subsequent to the summons of 15 May 2008), that the Republic of Serbia acted within the time frame requested by the Tribunal, as well as that the witness appeared and testified before the Trial Chamber on the days he was requested to do so, the Republic of Serbia considers this matter to be completed. (Signed) Rasim Ljajić President of the National Council for Cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 