%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|AFRICA|ASIA|AMERICAS|MIDDLE EAST|EUROPE|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PEACEBUILDING|CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC|CHAD|LIBERIA|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|DARFUR (SUDAN)|SUDAN|ERITREA|ETHIOPIA|SOMALIA|WESTERN SAHARA|BURUNDI|COTE D'IVOIRE|LEBANON|IRAQ|NEPAL|TIMOR-LESTE|HAITI|CYPRUS|GEORGIA|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|SERBIA|SMALL ARMS|

Letter dated 25 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to enclose the assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of South Africa for the month of April 2008 (see annex). This assessment has been prepared under my own responsibility. I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Dumisani S. Kumalo Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Republic of South Africa Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of South Africa (April 2008) Introduction During the South African presidency the Security Council held 23 meetings, including an open debate on peace and security in Africa focusing on the relationship between the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of peace and security, and a debate on small arms. The Council adopted six resolutions and five presidential statements. The Council also held 15 informal consultations. Africa Central African Republic, Chad and the subregion On 9 April, the Council held closed consultations of the whole on the situation in the Central African Republic, Chad and the subregion. The reporting covered major developments since the last report of the Secretary-General on 17 December 2007 and included the deployment of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). The Council was briefed on the assessment of the Mission's deployment, timelines and the challenges before it. Although the conflict which broke out in February 2008 delayed the deployment, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, reported that the deployment had resumed and was continuing. He informed the Council that almost half of the total strength authorized was already deployed. The Council was informed that of $23 million in donor funding needed to support the operations of the Police tchadienne pour la protection humanitaire, only $15,899 million had been contributed to the MINURCAT Trust Fund. The Council President read out a statement to the press reiterating the Council's concern at the humanitarian situation in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African Republic and condemning the continuing activity of rebel armed groups in Chad. Liberia On 14 April, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia, Ellen Margrethe Løj, pursuant to resolution 1777 (2007), by which the Council had requested the Secretary-General to report on the progress made on meeting the benchmarks for the drawdown phase and withdrawal plan by 20 March 2008. The Special Representative informed the Council that the drawdown process of the United Nations Mission in Liberia had commenced and was being carried out in a well planned manner so as to minimize threats to the security of the State. Democratic Republic of the Congo On 15 April, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Alan Doss, on the current situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo pursuant to resolution 1794 (2007). In his reporting, the Special Representative focused on the activities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, and informed the Council that the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in a joint initiative with the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, had begun to increase the momentum in relation to the demobilization of the armed groups. He also informed the Council about the establishment of a government programme for the security, pacification, stabilization and reconstruction of North and South Kivu and on the possible early release of funds by the International Monetary Fund after its investigation into the country's budgetary slippages. Members of the Council expressed their strong concern at the sexual and gender-based violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and stressed the need for those responsible to be brought to justice. Sudan Africa Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur On 22 April, the Council was briefed by the African Union/United Nations Special Representative for Darfur, Rodolphe Adada, on the current security, humanitarian and political situation in Darfur. The Special Representative also read out a statement by the United Nations and African Union Special Envoys, Jan Eliasson and Salim Salim, updating the Council on the political process in Darfur. The Special Envoys informed the Council that they were now focusing on reducing the levels of violence and preparing for the cessation of hostilities, since there were no prospects for comprehensive talks between the parties at this stage. The Council was also briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, on the humanitarian situation in Darfur. The Under-Secretary-General informed the Council that the situation in Darfur had worsened in the past 12 months despite the efforts of the international community. He said that the number of displaced persons was growing and that hostilities were continuing, including violence against women, together with increasing humanitarian needs and limited access to beneficiaries. United Nations Mission in the Sudan On 24 April, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, on the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). The Under-Secretary-General informed the Council that, while neither party wanted a return to war and the parties continued to cooperate on some issues, they had not demonstrated the political will necessary to move forward with the major political elements of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, such as the Abyei issue and the North-South boundary of 1956. On 30 April, the Council adopted resolution 1812 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of UNMIS for a year, until 30 April 2009, taking into account the Secretary-General's recommendations as to how UNMIS could best support the parties in moving the peace process forward. Eritrea/Ethiopia On 22 April, the Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on developments regarding the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE). The Under-Secretary-General updated the Council on the relocation of UNMEE and also recalled the main developments since the armed conflict came to an end in 2000. He informed the Council that it would be important to send an unequivocal signal that the parties would be held to their commitments. On 30 April, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/12), in which it stressed that the primary responsibility for achieving a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the border dispute rested with the parties themselves. The Council also stated that it stood ready to assist the parties to overcome the current difficulties and that it would, in consultation with the parties, decide on the terms of a future United Nations engagement and on the future of UNMEE. Somalia On 29 April, the Council adopted resolution 1811 (2008), extending the mandate of the Monitoring Group for Somalia for a further six months. The mandate of the Group expired on 29 April 2008, and the Group submitted its final report, though the sanctions Committee, on 24 April 2008 (S/2008/274). Western Sahara On 22 April, the Council received, in private consultations, a briefing from the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, Peter van Walsum, and from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Julian Harston, on the latest report of the Secretary-General concerning Western Sahara (S/2008/251). On 30 April, the Council adopted resolution 1813 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) for 12 months, until 30 April 2009. By that resolution the Council reaffirmed its commitment to assist the parties to achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which would provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. The Council called on the parties to continue negotiations, without preconditions and in good faith, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, with a view to achieving that political solution. It also endorsed the Secretary-General's recommendation that realism and a spirit of compromise by the parties were essential to maintain the momentum of the process of negotiations. Burundi On 24 April, in private consultations under "Other matters", the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, following the fighting that erupted between Palipehutu-FNL and the government forces on 17 and 18 April 2008. After the briefing, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/10), in which it expressed its concern at the confrontations between Palipehutu-FNL and the National Defence forces of Burundi, and called on the two parties to renounce violence, respect the ceasefire agreement and resume the dialogue. Côte d'Ivoire On 29 April, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d'Ivoire, Choi Young-Jin, pursuant to resolution 1795 (2008), by which the Secretary-General was requested to keep the Council regularly informed, in particular on the preparation of the electoral process. The Special Representative briefed the Council on the latest political and security developments in the country. Following the consultations, a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/11) was adopted. Asia and the Middle East Lebanon International Independent Investigation Commission On 8 April, the Council received a public briefing from the Commissioner of the International Independent Investigation Commission, Daniel Bellemare, on the tenth periodic report of the Commission (S/2008/210). The Commissioner stated that the Commission could now confirm, on the basis of evidence, that a network of individuals (which he termed a "criminal network") had acted in concert to carry out the assassination of the former Prime Minister of Lebanon, Rafiq Hariri. He further stated that the Commission's priority was now to gather more evidence about the "Hariri network", its scope, the identity of all of its participants and their role in the attacks, and their links with others outside the network. He stressed that the investigation required time and could not be rushed. He noted that the work of the Commission would not be completed by the end of its current mandate, which would expire on 15 June 2008. Council members convened in private consultations after the briefing to discuss the report. Resolution 1701 (2006) On 15 April, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/8) regarding resolution 1701 (2006). In its statement, the Council reiterated its commitment to the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and reaffirmed its support for the Secretary-General in this regard. The Council called on all concerned parties, in particular in the region, to intensify their efforts in implementing resolution 1701 (2006), including by fully cooperating with the Secretary-General. The Council once again reiterated its full support for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and called on all parties to abide by their obligations to respect the safety of United Nations personnel. The Council also stressed the importance of, and the need to achieve, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on all of its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The situation in the Middle East On 23 April, the Council convened for its monthly meeting on the situation in the Middle East pursuant to resolution 1322 (2000), by which it had invited the Secretary-General to continue to follow the situation in the Middle East and keep the Council informed of developments. The Council received a briefing on the developments in the region by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Angela Kane. Her briefing focused on the political process, the humanitarian and security situation and the situation in Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. Council members then discussed the briefing in closed consultations. Iraq On 28 April, the Council held a debate on the situation in Iraq. The Council had before it the latest report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2008/266). The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, on behalf of UNAMI, as well as by the Permanent Representative of the United States of America on behalf of the multinational force in Iraq. In addition to Council members, the representative of Iraq delivered a statement. Nepal On 21 April, the Council heard an informal briefing from the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the electoral process in Nepal. In her briefing, the Assistant Secretary-General noted that the Constituent Assembly election, held on 10 April, was generally conducted in an orderly and peaceful atmosphere. Following the briefing, Council members agreed that they would wait for a detailed report from the Secretary-General on the subject prior to discussing the electoral outcome in Nepal. Timor-Leste On 23 April, the Council received a preliminary briefing by the Police Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Andrew Hughes, on the expert mission on policing that visited Timor-Leste. The Police Adviser indicated that there was holistic commitment on the side of the Government of Timor-Leste and commitment to help from bilateral donors. He also indicated that some of his team's findings included a broad improvement in law and order as well as a decrease in criminal acts; serious concern with the country's national army owing to rampant impunity; and the lack of a comprehensive policy on security sector reform within the national army. The speaker noted that the Secretary-General would issue a full report on the major findings and recommendations of the visit (see S/2008/329). The Americas and Europe Haiti On 8 April, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Hédi Annabi, on developments in Haiti since August 2007. In his briefing, the Special Representative stated that he was encouraged by "real and significant political, security and institution-building progress", as well as by "initial signs of improvement" in the socio-economic situation. However, he warned that progress remained "extraordinarily fragile and subject to swift reversal". This statement proved to be accurate, as the situation, even while he was speaking, deteriorated as a result of riots provoked by food shortages. Some facilities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and Haitian government buildings, including the palace, were targets. In response, the Council issued a statement to the press highlighting the Council's concerns over the situation in that country. Owing to the worsening situation, a further press statement was issued on 14 April 2008. Cyprus On 15 April, the Council held consultations during which it received a briefing from the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on his recent assessment mission to Cyprus, as well as his talks with the authorities in Athens and Ankara. The Council welcomed the agreement reached on 21 March 2008 by the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders and commended them for the political leadership they had shown. On 17 April, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/9), in which it welcomed the agreement reached and commended the political leadership shown. The Council also reaffirmed its commitment to the reunification of Cyprus based on a bicommunal, bizonal federation and political equality, as set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions, and its willingness to support the efforts of the Secretary-General to that end. Georgia On 15 April, the Council met to discuss and renew the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). The Council adopted resolution 1808 (2008), by which it extended the mandate for a period of six months, until 15 October 2008. On 23 April, the Council met, at the request of the Permanent Mission of Georgia to the United Nations contained in a letter dated 17 April 2008 (S/2008/257), to address what the Government of Georgia deemed a threat to Georgian territorial integrity and the alleged shooting down of a Georgian unmanned aerial vehicle by a Russian military aircraft. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia called upon the Security Council to address what his country perceived to be a threat to peace in the region, to prevent the dangerous escalation of tensions and to preserve the territorial integrity of Georgia. The Council members, although not in consensus on the issue, expressed their concern and stressed the need for all parties to refrain from provocative actions and for a return to genuine dialogue. Council members reiterated that resolution 1808 (2008), having been approved by all members of the Security Council, should be respected. The Council again called for confidence-building measures. United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo On 21 April, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Joachim Rücker, briefed the Council on the Secretary-General's latest report on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The private meeting was also addressed by the President of Serbia, Boris Tadić, and Hashim Thaci, the de facto "Prime Minister" of Kosovo. This was the first UNMIK report since Kosovo declared independence on 17 February. Other matters Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) On 2 April, the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) and Permanent Representative of Italy, Ambassador Marcello Spatafora, briefed the Council on the activities of the Committee during the period from 5 January to 2 April 2008. Debate on peace and security in Africa On 16 April, the Council held a high-level debate on the topic "Peace and security in Africa", focusing on strengthening the relationship between the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union. The President of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, presided over the meeting, and the participants included the Prime Ministers of Italy and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as Foreign Ministers and Deputy Foreign Ministers and Special Envoys. Among the invited guests were Heads of State and Government of African countries, led by the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania. Following the debate, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1809 (2008), in which it stressed the utility of effective partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in order to enable early responses to emerging crises in Africa, and expressed its determination to enhance that relationship. The Council also welcomed the Secretary-General's proposal to set up, within three months, an African Union-United Nations panel to consider in depth the modalities of how to support operations undertaken by regional organizations, in particular with regard to start-up funding, equipment and logistics. Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) On 25 April, the Council adopted resolution 1810 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) by a further three years. By resolution 1810 (2008), the Council reiterated its decisions in and the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) and emphasized the importance for all States to implement fully that resolution. The Council decided that the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) should continue to intensify its efforts to promote the full implementation by all States of resolution 1540 (2004) through its programme of work, which includes the compilation of information on the status of States' implementation of all aspects of resolution 1540 (2004), outreach, dialogue, assistance and cooperation, and which addresses in particular all aspects of paragraphs 1 and 2 of that resolution, as well as paragraph 3 which encompasses (a) accountability, (b) physical protection, (c) border controls and law enforcement efforts and (d) national export and trans-shipment controls including controls on providing funds and services such as financing to such export and trans-shipment. The Council also requested the Committee to provide opportunities for interaction with interested States and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations to promote the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The Council urged the Committee to encourage and take full advantage of voluntary financial contributions to assist States in identifying and addressing their needs for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire On 29 April, the Council was briefed by the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) and Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Johan C. Verbeke. He gave members of the Council an overview of the activities of the Committee since his last update on 27 October 2007 and also provided members with a summary of the midterm report of the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire (S/2008/235). By resolution 1782 (2007) the Security Council had decided, inter alia, to carry out a review of the sanctions measures imposed by resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1643 (2005) by 30 April 2008. No changes to the current sanctions regime as set out in resolution 1782 (2007) were effected. Zimbabwe On 29 April, the Council heard a briefing on the situation in Zimbabwe by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, in which he reviewed the events in Zimbabwe since the elections in March. He informed the Council that the current political crisis in Zimbabwe was compounding the already grave humanitarian situation and that the economic conditions were deteriorating and leading to large refugee flows. Further, he informed the Council that the Secretary-General was ready to assist, with the consent of the Government of Zimbabwe. Small arms On 30 April, the Council held an open debate on the issue of small arms and light weapons. The Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on small arms (S/2008/258), which, inter alia, contained 13 recommendations on curbing the illicit proliferation of small arms, six of which were directly addressed to the Security Council. The small arms report was submitted in compliance with the presidential statement of 29 June 2007 (S/PRST/2007/24), in which the Council had requested the Secretary-General to submit reports on a biennial basis containing an analysis, observations and recommendations on the issue, as well as observations on the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. The 15 members of the Council and 32 non-member States that participated in the open debate emphasized the impact of small arms and light weapons on international peace and security, and welcomed the Security Council's continuing consideration of the issue. 