%%%DISPUTES|BOUNDARIES|CAMBODIA|THAILAND|CULTURAL HERITAGE|HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS|

Letter dated 15 September 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Cambodia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to enclose herewith a letter dated 14 August 2008 from Mr. Hor Namhong, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Kingdom of Cambodia, addressed to Mr. Tej Bunnag, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Thailand, regarding Thailand's occupation of the Tamone Temple complex of Cambodia, which evidently constitutes another violation of Cambodia's sovereignty and territorial integrity and of international law (see annex). I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Sea Kosal Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations I have the honour to draw your kind attention to the fact that, according to the Minutes on the Demarcation (No. 22 on Sector 4) of the Commission for the Delimitation of Frontiers between Indochina and Siam, entitled "The Route named Prasat Tamone", dated 30 December 1908, and the topographic plate indications, the Tamone Toch and Tamone Thom Temples are very clearly situated within the territory of Cambodia, despite the loss of the boundary pillar No. 23 demarcating the border in that area. On 26 July 2008, the Thai armed forces moved troops into the Tamone Temple Complex and began to occupy the temples by constructing a fence and other structures in the area. At present, Thai soldiers continue to camp approximately 40 metres from the Temple of Tamone Thom. The soldiers of the Thai armed forces have also prevented the Cambodian people, who have always visited the temples to worship, from entering the Tamone Temple complex. This action of the Thai armed forces clearly constitutes a violation of Cambodia's sovereignty and territorial integrity and of international law. To avoid a problem similar to that which we have at the Keo Sikha Kiri Svara Pagoda, and pending the work of the jurists from both sides to find a peaceful solution to the current problem, I would like to call on you to immediately undertake the following for the sake of good neighbourliness between our two kingdoms and the spirit of the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia: (a) To remove the fence and other structures in the area of the Tamone Temple complex; (b) To withdraw Thai troops from the area and to pull down the military camp from the Temple of Tamone Thom; (c) To restore the Tamone Temple complex and the nearby area to the status quo ante, i.e., before it was occupied by the Thai armed forces. (Signed) Hor Namhong Deputy Prime Minister Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation 