%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TROOP WITHDRAWAL|IRAQ|IRAQ SITUATION|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|

Letter dated 19 November 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Upon instruction from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Poland regarding the decision taken by the Republic of Poland to withdraw its military contingent from Iraq (see annex). I would highly appreciate if you would circulate the present letter and its annex as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Pawel Herczyński Chargé d'affaires Warsaw, 13 November 2008 Republic of Poland Minister of Foreign Affairs Radoslaw Sikorski 1. On 16 July 2008 Poland transferred to the Iraqi authorities control of the province of Al-Qadisiyah, for whose security and stabilization Poland had been responsible in the framework of the multinational force. The process of withdrawing Polish military personnel from Iraq was concluded by the end of October 2008. 2. The Polish military contingent had been deployed to Iraq in response to the appeal of the Security Council for assistance to the people of Iraq in their efforts to reform their institutions and rebuild their country, as contained in its resolution 1483 (2003). 3. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland, in his letter of 8 September 2003, to the President of the Security Council, elaborated the nature, goals and premises of Poland's military and civilian participation in the stabilization force. 4. In Iraq, Poland pursued the basic goal of ensuring the security of the Iraqi people and assisting them in the social, economic and political reconstruction of the country, including the creation of durable bases for the observance of universally recognized human rights, good governance, the protection of territorial integrity and control by the Iraqis of their own national resources. 5. Poland performed its mission in Iraq with due respect for the ethnic, cultural and religious diversity of the Iraqi people and concern for the protection of the country's rich cultural heritage. 6. The decision of the Government of the Republic of Poland to withdraw the Polish military contingent was taken within the framework of the multinational force in Iraq, in collaboration and after prior consultations with the Iraqi authorities at Government and local levels. The decision takes into account the legitimate strivings and attained capability of the Iraqi authorities to ensure the security and effective administration of the mission area of the Polish Military Contingent. 7. In implementing its mission in Iraq, Poland fulfilled its goals and made a multifaceted contribution to building a new, democratic State, sharing with Iraq its unique experience gained in the course of Poland's own systemic (political, social and economic) transformations after 1989. 8. Poland's five-year participation in the stabilization mission required substantial organizational, human and financial efforts on the part of the Polish Armed Forces and the country as a whole. Sixteen thousand troops served in Iraq in ten shifts. Twenty-two officers and soldiers lost their lives during the mission. 9. Throughout the deployment of its forces in Iraq, Poland devoted much effort to the social and economic reconstruction of the country. It was obvious from the outset that military action needed to be coupled with peacebuilding. That is why the Polish-led Multinational Division Centre-South pursued reconstruction and development projects worth many millions of dollars, designed to improve life for the local population and create conditions for long-term development of the province. These projects included, inter alia: - the transfer to the Iraqis in June 2008 of agricultural equipment worth 5.6 million USD, including tractors, trailers, pumps and water tanks; - the transfer in June 2008 of humanitarian aid to the Mother and Child Hospital in Al-Diwaniyah, including wheelchairs, and disposable and sanitary medical materials; - the transfer in May 2008 of seven fully equipped ambulances for the use of the medical service of the province of Al-Qadisiyah; - ongoing provision of medical services to the local population; each week assistance was provided to some 150 Iraqi patients. 10. Despite the progress made towards normalization, Poland is aware of the challenges facing Iraq. The Polish Government believes that the United Nations should continue to play a leading role in supporting the efforts of the Iraqi people and the country's Government to consolidate national sovereignty and bring about social, economic and political reconstruction of the country. 11. Poland is prepared to continue supporting the Iraqi authorities in their efforts to ensure the effective security of the citizens of Iraq and their endeavours to rebuild and develop the country, both in the framework of international organizations and through development cooperation on the basis of mutually advantageous bilateral accords. 