%%%TRUCE SUPERVISION|MAPS|MIDDLE EAST|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|MILITARY PERSONNEL|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 1 July 2008 to 31 December 2008 I. Introduction 1. The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past six months pursuant to the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 1821 (2008) of 27 June 2008. II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force 2. During the period under review the ceasefire in the Israel-Syria sector was maintained and the UNDOF area of operation remained generally quiet. UNDOF supervised the area of separation by means of fixed positions and patrols to ensure that military forces of either party were excluded from it. The Force also carried out fortnightly inspections of equipment and force levels in the areas of limitation. Liaison officers from the party concerned accompanied the inspection teams. As in the past, both sides denied inspection teams access to some of their positions and imposed restrictions on the Force's freedom of movement. UNDOF continued to adapt its operational posture to the ongoing Israel Defense Forces (IDF) training activities in the area of limitation on the Alpha side and Syrian civilian settlement growth in proximity to the ceasefire line in the area of separation. Both sides continued to construct new and renovate existing defensive positions in the respective areas of limitation. The security forces of both sides also undertook anti-smuggling actions. Israeli national Customs officials continue to operate periodically at the IDF post at the UNDOF crossing gate between the Israeli-occupied Golan and the Syrian Arab Republic. Both parties took steps to ease limitations on the movement of UNDOF supplies through the Alpha and Bravo gates. 3. The Force continued to assist the International Committee of the Red Cross with the passage of persons through the area of separation. During the past six months, UNDOF has assisted in the crossing of 536 students, 388 pilgrims, 1 bride, 5 civilians and the mortal remains of 1 person. UNDOF also provided medical treatment to 183 civilians. 4. In the area of operation, especially in the area of separation, mines continued to pose a threat to UNDOF personnel and local inhabitants. Owing to the long-term presence of the mines and the deterioration of their detonation systems, the threat has increased. UNDOF continued to carry out operational mine clearance. UNDOF remained available to support the United Nations Children's Fund in activities to promote mine awareness among the civilian population. 5. The Force Commander and his staff maintained close contact with the military authorities of Israel and of the Syrian Arab Republic. Both sides generally cooperated with the Force in the execution of its tasks. 6. As at 15 November 2008, UNDOF comprised 1,039 troops, from Austria (381), Canada (2), Croatia (95), India (188), Japan (30) and Poland (343). A total of 15 personnel were employed by Japan as a national support element. In addition, 75 military observers from the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) assisted the Force in carrying out its tasks. III. Financial aspects 7. The General Assembly, by its resolution 62/264 of 20 June 2008, appropriated the amount of $45.7 million for the maintenance of UNDOF for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009. Therefore, should the Security Council approve my recommendation set out in paragraph 12 below with respect to the extension of the mandate of UNDOF, the cost for the maintenance of the Force during the extension period will be limited to resources approved by the General Assembly. 8. As at 30 September 2008, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for UNDOF amounted to $23.7 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $4,014.1 million. As at 31 October 2008, amounts owed to troop contributors to UNDOF totalled $2.4 million. Reimbursement of troop and contingent-owned equipment costs have been made for the period up to August and June 2008, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule. IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) 9. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 1821 (2008) to renew the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 31 December 2008, also called upon the parties concerned to implement immediately its resolution 338 (1973) and requested me to submit, at the end of the period, a report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the efforts undertaken at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in my report on the situation in the Middle East submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 62/84 and 62/85 (A/63/361). 10. The situation in the Israel-Syria sector has remained generally quiet. UNDOF, which was established in May 1974 to supervise the ceasefire called for by the Security Council and the agreement on disengagement between Syrian and Israeli forces of 31 May 1974, has continued to perform its functions effectively, with the cooperation of the parties. 11. Nevertheless, the situation in the Middle East is tense and is likely to remain so, unless and until a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East problem can be reached. I hope that determined efforts will be made by all concerned to tackle the problem in all its aspects, with a view to arriving at a just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973). In this context, I encourage the parties to resume the indirect peace talks initiated under the auspices of Turkey, aimed at a comprehensive peace in accordance with the Madrid Conference terms of reference for peace. 12. Under the prevailing circumstances, I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area to be essential. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2009. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has given its assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel has also expressed its agreement. It is hoped that both sides will continue to make efforts to ease the limitations on the mobility of the Force and the movement of its supplies. 13. In making this recommendation, I must draw attention to the shortfall in the funding of the Force. As at 30 September 2008, unpaid assessments amounted to $23.7 million. At the same time, as at 31 October 2008, $2.4 million was owed to the troop contributors to UNDOF. The outstanding contributions impede the ability of the Secretariat to support the operations of the Force and to reimburse Member States contributing troops to the Force. 14. In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to Major General Wolfgang Jilke and to the men and women serving with UNDOF and UNTSO. They have performed with efficiency and devotion to duty the important tasks assigned to them by the Security Council. I take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Governments contributing troops to UNDOF, and to those which provide the UNTSO military observers assigned to the Force 