%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|GAZA STRIP (STATE OF PALESTINE)|ISRAEL|PALESTINE QUESTION|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|

Identical letters dated 27 December 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I should like to convey to you Jordan's deep concern regarding the dangerous developments, the escalation of violence and the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip as a result of the Israeli military aggression that started this morning in Gaza. Jordan condemns this unjustified aggression, which has led to a large number of civilian deaths, and firmly requests that the international community assume its political, legal and moral responsibilities by exerting pressure on Israel to halt immediately all military operations, end the policy of collective punishment directed at Palestinian civilians and end the enormous suffering created by those operations, which are a clear violation of international humanitarian law, in one of the most densely populated areas of the world. The only way to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is to return to negotiations. The establishment of Palestinian State on its national soil, in accordance with relevant international terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, is the only means by which peace can truly be achieved. Israel's use of excessive military force threatens not only regional stability, but the credibility of the entire peace process and the prospects for successful negotiations in the future. It also serves to increase tensions and extremism. Jordan hopes that your sincere and unflagging efforts will end this situation as soon as possible, for the sake of a better future for the entire region. My Government would be grateful if you would have this letter circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Khalid Shawabkah Chargé d'affaires a.i. 