%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|PEACEBUILDING|INTERNATIONAL POLICE|POLICE|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|STAFFING|ORGANIZATIONAL REFORM|ORGANIZED CRIME|PROSECUTION|CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION|PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION|

Letter dated 30 December 2008 from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council With reference to Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 22 December 2008, which I received from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the fifteenth report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 June to 31 August 2008 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Ban Ki-moon Letter dated 22 December 2008 from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations In accordance with the provision of United Nations Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), I attach the fifteenth three-monthly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 June to 31 August 2008. I should be grateful if you would transmit the report to the President of the United Nations Security Council. (Signed) Javier Solana Report by the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on the activities of the European Union military mission (EUFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina I. Introduction 1. This report covers the period 1 June to 31 August 2008. 2. United Nations Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008) request that Member States, acting through or in cooperation with the European Union (EU), report to the Council on the activities of EUFOR, through the appropriate channels and at least at three monthly intervals. This document is the fifteenth such report. II. Political background 3. The key political event in the reporting period was signature of the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) on 16 June. An interim agreement, which regulates a series of political, economic and technical relations, entered into force on 1 July. In addition, the EU presented a visa liberalization road map to the Bosnian authorities, which sets out the requirements for establishing a visa-free regime between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Schengen States. 4. On 24 and 25 June, the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board met to review progress on the five objectives and two conditions (one of which was fulfilled with signature of the SAA) to be delivered by the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to allow for closure of the Office of the High Representative (OHR) and transition to a reinforced EU Special Representative (EUSR). While progress was reached on some of these requirements, work remains to be done in others. The PIC Steering Board also reminded Bosnia and Herzegovina political leaders of the need to fully comply with the Dayton Peace Agreement and to avoid inflammatory statements or actions that could threaten or violate the Agreement. Despite this, political parties continued to engage in negative rhetoric and, on occasions, challenged the constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the run up to the 5 October municipal elections. 5. The commemoration season passed off peacefully. The main event -- the 11 July Srebrenica commemoration -- took place without incident. III. Security situation and EUFOR activities 6. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained calm and stable throughout the reporting period. Although nationalistic rhetoric continued, it had no impact on the safe and secure environment. EUFOR continues to closely monitor the overall security situation. 7. The force of some 2,500 EUFOR troops is concentrated in Sarajevo, with liaison and observation teams deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. EUFOR continues to conduct operations in line with its mandate: providing deterrence; ensuring continued compliance in relation to the responsibilities specified in the General Framework Agreement for Peace, annexes 1a and 2; and contributing to the maintenance of the safe and secure environment. EUFOR continues to support the Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies in fighting organized crime in close cooperation with the EU Police Mission; and the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in the search for persons indicted for war crimes (PIFWCs). 8. During the reporting period, EUFOR, in response to ICTY requests, and with the support of NATO and local police, intensified search operations against PIFWC support networks. The Serbian authorities arrested Stojan Zuplijanin in June; and Radovan Karadzic in July. Although the latter's arrest led to some minor incidents in Bosnia and Herzegovina, these were capably handled by local police. EUFOR was not requested to assist, but remained ready to do so if necessary. 9. There was further progress during the period in the area of Joint Military Affairs. Responsibility for the management of the radio frequency spectrum allocated to defence services in Bosnia and Herzegovina was transferred to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence on 31 July. EUFOR and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina (AF BiH) continued to conduct joint inspections of AF BiH ammunition storage sites, as a result of which more than 33,000 out of 36,000 tons of ammunition have now been inspected. EUFOR also continued to assist and support AF BiH with ammunition disposal. 1,580 small arms and light weapons were transported to a collection point in Banja Luka for destruction. The destruction was financed by the United Nations, through the United Nations Development Programme small arms control project in Bosnia and Herzegovina (SACBIH). Finally, and as previously reported, EUFOR has made the necessary technical preparations on Civilian Movement Control (control of the movement of weapons and ammunition by Bosnia and Herzegovina contractors), and is ready to hand over responsibility to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities once they have adopted the necessary legislation and established suitable arrangements for implementation. 10. During the reporting period, EUFOR and AF BiH continued further to develop combined training. In July EUFOR and the BiH Ministry of Defence signed a memorandum of understanding covering the participation of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina in EUFOR exercises. IV. Outlook 11. The security situation is expected to remain stable despite the prospects of continuing political tension, particularly in the run-up to the 5 October municipal elections. 