%%%SANCTIONS|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|NORWAY|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) Note verbale dated 25 April 2008 from the Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations addressed to the Chairman of the Committee The Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and has the honour to present to the Committee Norway's report, pursuant to paragraph 13 of resolution 1803 (2008) (see annex). Norway's implementation of Security Council resolution 1803 (2008) The legal basis for the implementation of the sanctions against Iran, imposed by resolution 1803 (2008) and resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007), is Section 1 of Act of 7 June 1968 No. 4 relating to the implementation of mandatory decisions of the Security Council of the United Nations. The Act provides for the King in Council to issue such regulations as are necessary in order to implement mandatory decisions by the Security Council. Pursuant to section 1 of this Act, the King in Council adopted 9 February 2007 Regulation No. 149 relating to sanctions against Iran. Pursuant to section 3 of Regulation 149, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been given authority to amend the provisions in the Regulation. Security Council resolution 1803 (2008) was implemented by Regulation No. 308 of 27 March 2008, amending Regulation No. 149. The Regulation contains prohibitions on the supply, sale or transfer of all items, materials, equipment, goods and technology as set out in the resolutions and the procurement of such items from Iran. In addition, vessels and aircrafts under Norwegian flag are prohibited from transporting any of the said items. The Regulation furthermore prohibits the provision to Iran of any technical assistance or training, financial assistance, investment, brokering or other services and the transfer of financial resources or services related to the supply, transfer, manufacture or use of the said items. A freeze of all funds, financial assets and economic resources of persons or entities listed by the Security Council or the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) concerning Iran has also been laid down. Annex I to the Regulation has been replaced by a new Annex I, which implements the annexes I-III to Security Council resolution 1803 (2008). Any wilful or negligent contravention of the regulations or assistance thereto, is punishable by fines, imprisonment or both. Furthermore, objects which are imported or exported in contravention of the regulations, or in regard to which an attempt to import or export has been made, as well as any means of payment or securities employed in contravention of the regulations, may be confiscated by court order. No violations of the above-mentioned regulations have been registered. The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has furthermore informed relevant Norwegian authorities about paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution 1803 (2008), whereby the States are called upon to exercise vigilance in entering into new commitments for public provided financial support for trade with Iran, including the granting of export credits, guarantees or insurance, to their nationals or entities involved in such trade, and to exercise vigilance over the activities of financial institutions in their territories with all banks domiciled in Iran, in particular with Bank Melli and Bank Saderat, their branches and subsidiaries abroad. The relevant authorities have also been informed about the resolution's paragraphs 11 and 12, whereby the States are called upon to inspect the cargoes to and from Iran, of aircraft and vessels, at their airports and seaports, owned or operated by Iran Air Cargo and Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Line, provided there are reasonable grounds to believe that the aircraft or vessel is transporting goods prohibited under the applicable Security Council resolutions, and have been informed about the duty to submit to the Security Council written reports on such inspections. Pursuant to Act No. 64 of 24 June 1988 concerning the entry of foreign nationals into the Kingdom of Norway and their presence in the realm (Immigration Act), the Norwegian Directorate of Immigration and the Norwegian Immigration Appeals Board will be instructed by the Ministry of Labour, Immigration and Social Inclusion to prevent the entry into or transit through Norwegian territory of individuals as described in paragraphs 5 and 6 in resolution 1803 (2008), and to exercise vigilance and restraint regarding the entry into or transit through their territories of individuals as described in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the resolution. 