%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|GEORGIA|GEORGIA SITUATION|

General Assembly Security Council Sixty-third session Sixty-fourth year Agenda item 13 Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development Identical letters dated 22 January 2009 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit four statements of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex were to be circulated as a document of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 13, "Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development", and of the Security Council. (Signed) Irakli Chikovani Chargé d'affaires a.i. Enclosure 1 Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia regarding the shooting of a Georgian policeman from the occupied territory Based on the reports of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, as a result of fire opened from the occupied territory on 16 January 2009, at 10 a.m., Mamuka Kakhniashvili, a policeman of the Kvemo Kartli Regional Police Division, was killed near the police checkpoint in the village of Knolevi, Kareli district. According to the information available to the Georgian side, the fire came from a sniper rifle equipped with a silencer. As a result of the incident, the death toll of Georgian policemen shot from the occupied territories within the last two months increased to 11. It is evident that the Russian occupiers and the proxy regimes under their control are continuing with their insolent and targeted provocative actions, keeping death numbers on the rise. The Georgian side would like to underline, once again, that in order to create firm security guarantees and eventually put an end to such terrorist acts, it is necessary to provide international monitors with immediate access to Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region of Georgia and to urgently deploy international peacekeeping and/or police missions in the occupied territories. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia once again emphasizes that all responsibility for the actions carried out from the occupied territories will rest exclusively with the Russian Federation. Tbilisi, 16 January 2009 Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia On 16 January 2009, after Mamuka Kakhniashvili, a policeman of the Kvemo Kartli Regional Police Division, was killed in the village of Knolevi, Kareli district, as a result of a terrorist act committed from the occupied territory, Russian occupation airborne troops landed by military helicopters on the territory in the vicinity of the village. After a certain period of time the troops were withdrawn. A. Tarasov, a military representative of the Russian occupation troops, claimed that the landing of troops was aimed at avoiding further aggravation of the situation. Thus, Russian occupiers first committed a terrorist act, killing a law enforcer, and then carried out a military landing operation in the conflict zone. Against such a background, the actions and statements of the Russian side can be viewed as yet another culpable provocation and cynicism utterly beyond comprehension. It should be emphasized that the criminal actions of the Russian occupation troops took place on the same day as the presentation of credentials ceremony that was held by the President of Russia in the Kremlin. "Ambassadors" of the pseudo-states of Abkhazia and South Ossetia participated in the ceremony on an equal footing with the Ambassadors of internationally recognized States. The Russian Federation is persistent in its efforts to force upon the international community its own virtual reality, acceptable only to itself. We are fully confident that such attempts aimed at the legitimization of the proxy regimes is, a priori, doomed to failure. We would like to remind the Russian Authorities dragging their own country and people into confrontation with, and isolation from, the international community that this policy of mixing an objective reality with a virtual one will result in disastrous consequences for both an individual and a state. On a closing note, we would like to rephrase a well-known maxim: "each country has the allies it deserves". Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia on the shootings near the village of Dvani, Kareli district Based on reports of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, on 19 January 2009, at 5 p.m., Russian occupiers and illegal armed gangs under their control opened fire and riddled with bullets a police pick-up truck patrolling a Georgian checkpoint area in the vicinity of Dvani village, Kareli district. As a result of intensive gunfire attack, two policemen of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia were wounded. It needs to be emphasized that this is the third attack on Georgian policemen on the territory adjacent to the administrative border in the last two days. An increased series of shootings left one policeman dead and three others wounded. It is important to note that this, yet another, insolent attack coincided with the release of the Russian President's Decree on the prohibition of the supply of military and dual-use equipment to Georgia, by which Russia tries to impose an embargo on Georgia and warns the international community rejecting such restrictions of imminent sanctions. The provocative actions of the Russian side provide ample proof for the international community to see which country provides a real source of threat to peace and stability in the Caucasus region. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia expresses its strong protest over Russia's aggressive acts that have taken place in the last few days and is confident that the international community will make a proper assessment of Russia's provocative actions and will draw logical conclusions from the aforementioned facts. Tbilisi, 19 January 2009 Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia on the attack carried out in the village of Koki, Zugdidi district Based on the reports of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, on 18 January 2009, at 5 a.m., a Georgian police checkpoint situated in the village of Koki, Khurcha area, Zugdidi district, came under fire from the territory controlled by Russia and the Sokhumi proxy regime. The attack involved both rifles and grenade launchers. As a result, a policeman was wounded and taken to hospital. Criminal proceedings have been instituted for this terrorist act, as for other previous attacks, under applicable provisions of Georgian legislation. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia expresses extreme concern and strong protest over this, yet another, act of provocation committed from the occupied territory and reaffirms that all responsibility for all other culpable actions will rest exclusively with the Russian Federation. This attack and the killing of the Georgian policeman on 16 January 2009, as well as tens of previous provocations which have left 11 Georgian policemen and two peaceful citizens dead and tens of others wounded, provide a chain of well-thought-out and deliberate attempts aimed at destabilizing the situation and dragging the Georgian side into another large-scale military provocation. It becomes increasingly obvious that the existing situation calls for urgent and effective action from the international community. The Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism discussed during the Geneva talks on 17 and 18 December 2008 and blocked, as is widely known, by the Russian Federation and the proxy regimes under its control, was designed to prevent and investigate facts similar to those indicated above. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia expresses hope that the issue of creating such mechanism will be decided positively within the February round of the Geneva talks. At the same time, in order to prevent a recurrence of such provocations in the future, it is necessary to carry out effective international monitoring, first of all on the territories occupied and fully controlled by Russia. European Union (EU) monitors, as well as Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and United Nations observers, should be immediately given a right to free movement throughout the occupied regions and to unhindered implementation of their mandated tasks. The incident of 18 January confirms once again the necessity of launching a complex large-scale peacekeeping operation based on the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). In terms of removing the threat emanating from the occupied territories and preventing a possible military confrontation, it will be extremely important to grant this new mission increased peacekeeping, police and observer capabilities on both sides of the administrative border, and in the occupied territories in particular. Tbilisi, 18 January 2009 