%%%AGENDA|WORK ORGANIZATION|

V.98-50298 (E) E UNITED NATIONS Economic and Social Council Distr. GENERAL E/CN.7/1998/PC/1 20 January 1998 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH COMMISSION ON NARCOTIC DRUGS ACTING AS PREPARATORY BODY FOR THE SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY DEVOTED TO THE FIGHT AGAINST THE ILLICIT PRODUCTION, SALE, DEMAND, TRAFFIC AND DISTRIBUTION OF NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES AND RELATED ACTIVITIES Second session Vienna, 16-20 March 1998 ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS Provisional agenda 1. Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters. 2. Preparations for the special session of the General Assembly to consider the fight against the illicit production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related activities and to propose new strategies, methods, practical activities and specific measures to strengthen international cooperation in addressing the problem of drug abuse and illicit trafficking: (a) Consideration of the draft provisional agenda of the special session of the General Assembly; (b) Consideration of the reports of the informal inter-sessional meetings of the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly on international drug control; (c) Consideration of elements for inclusion in a draft political declaration; (d) Consideration of the draft declaration on the guiding principles of demand reduction; (e) Consideration of any other proposals to be submitted to the special session in accordance with the objectives set out in General Assembly resolution 51/64; Page (f) Review of the international drug control regime: strengthening United Nations machinery for drug control; (g) Other matters. 3. Adoption of the report of the preparatory body on its second session. Annotations Pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/17 and General Assembly resolution 51/64, section IV, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs will act as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly devoted to the fight against the illicit production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related activities, to be held from 8 to 10 June 1998. The first session of the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly was held at Vienna from 26 to 27 March 1997. Subsequently, the Economic and Social Council adopted decision 1997/234, by which it decided that, at its forty-first session, the Commission should meet for three days for its regular segment, during which the Commission will carry out its role as a functional commission of the Council and as governing body of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme, and for five days for its special segment, during which it will act as the preparatory body for the special session of the Assembly. The present document contains the provisional agenda, annotations and provisional timetable for the special segment of the forty-first session, to be held from 16 to 20 March 1998. The provisional agenda, annotations and provisional timetable for the regular segment of that session, to be held from 11 to 13 March 1998, will be issued separately (E/CN.7/1998/1). Item 1 The provisional agenda for the second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly was approved by the Council in its decision 1997/239. Following the adoption of the agenda, the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session, normally establishes the timetable for its session. The provisional timetable is contained in the annex to the present document. The provisional agenda and timetable contained in the present document concern only the activities of the Commission from 16 to 20 March 1998, when it will act as the preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly. For the period from 11 to 13 March 1998, when it will act as a functional commission of the Economic and Social Council, the Commission will have a separate agenda and timetable. Documentation Provisional agenda and annotations (E/CN.7/1998/PC/1) Item 2 (a) At its first session, the preparatory body proposed elements for possible consideration and possible inclusion in the provisional agenda for the special session of the General Assembly on international drug control. A note by the Secretariat on the draft provisional agenda of the special session of the General Assembly will be before the preparatory body at its second session to assist it in its consideration of item 2 (a). Note by the Secretariat on the draft provisional agenda of the special session of the General Assembly (E/CN.7/1998/PC/8) Item 2 (b) At its first session, the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly, in its decision 1/1 (E/1997/48), decided to hold three informal open-ended inter-sessional meetings. The first inter-sessional meeting, held at Vienna from 7 to 9 July 1997, agreed to the texts contained in the document on the action plan against manufacture, trafficking and abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants and their precursors (E/CN.7/1998/PC/2) and on the document on the control of precursors (E/CN.7/1998/PC/3). The second inter-sessional meeting, held at Vienna from 7 to 9 October 1997, agreed to the texts contained in the document on measures to promote judicial cooperation (E/CN.7/1998/PC/4) and in the document on countering money-laundering (E/CN.7/1998/PC/5). The third inter-sessional meeting, held at Vienna from 3 to 5 December 1997, agreed to the text contained in the document on international cooperation on eradication of illicit drug crops and promotion of alternative development programmes and projects (E/CN.7/1998/PC/7). The preparatory body will have before it for its consideration the five above-mentioned documents containing the texts agreed to at the three inter-sessional meetings. Comments submitted to the Secretariat after the inter-sessional meetings regarding any of the topics mentioned above will also be made available to the preparatory body. In addition, the preparatory body will have before it the reports on the outcome of the first (E/CN.7/1997/PC/5), second (E/CN.7/1997/PC/7) and third (E/CN.7/1997/PC/9) inter-sessional meetings. Action plan against manufacture, trafficking and abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants and their precursors (E/CN.7/1998/PC/2) Control of precursors (E/CN.7/1998/PC/3) Measures to promote judicial cooperation (E/CN.7/1998/PC/4) Countering money-laundering (E/CN.7/1998/PC/5) International cooperation on eradication of illicit drug crops and promotion of alternative development programmes and projects (E/CN.7/1998/PC/7) Report on the outcome of the proceedings of the first informal open-ended inter-sessional meeting (E/CN.7/1997/PC/5) Report on the outcome of the proceedings of the second informal open-ended inter-sessional meeting (E/CN.7/1997/PC/7) Report on the outcome of the proceedings of the third informal open-ended inter-sessional meeting (E/CN.7/1997/PC/9) Item 2 (c) At its third inter-sessional meeting, initial consideration was given to possible elements for inclusion in the political declaration. It was agreed that the Chairman of the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly would prepare a draft political declaration for consideration by the preparatory body at its second session. A non-paper prepared by the Chairman will be available to the preparatory body at its second session. Item 2 (d) An intergovernmental working group met at Vienna from 13 to 17 October 1997 to review and further advance work on the draft declaration on the guiding principles of reduction of illicit demand for drugs. The agreed text of the draft declaration on the guiding principles of drug demand reduction (E/CN.7/1998/PC/6) will be before the preparatory body for its consideration. The preparatory body will also have before it the report on the outcome of the proceedings of the meeting of the intergovernmental working group on the draft declaration on drug demand reduction (UNDCP/DDR/2). Draft declaration on the guiding principles of drug demand reduction (E/CN.7/1998/PC/6) Report on the outcome of the proceedings of the meeting of the intergovernmental working group to review and further advance work on the draft declaration on the guiding principles of reduction of illicit demand for drugs (UNDCP/DDR/2) Item 2 (e) The preparatory body may wish to consider any other proposals to be submitted to the General Assembly at its special session in accordance with the objectives set out in General Assembly resolution 51/64, section IV, in addition to those already discussed at the informal open-ended inter-sessional meetings and considered under agenda item 2 (b). Item 2 (f) On the recommendation of the Commission at its fortieth session, the Economic and Social Council adopted resolution 1997/37, entitled “Review of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme: strengthening the United Nations machinery for international drug control within the scope of the existing international drug control treaties and in accordance with the basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations”. In that resolution, the Council requested the Secretary-General to convene a small group of experts to undertake a comprehensive review of how the efforts against illicit drugs have evolved within the United Nations system since the creation of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme. The group of experts will hold its first meeting early in March 1998. The Commission will be informed of the progress made by the group of experts. Item 2 (g) The preparatory body may wish to consider under item 2 (g) any procedural matters relevant to the preparations for the special session of the General Assembly. Item 3 It is expected that the preparatory body will adopt the report on its second session on the afternoon of the last day of that session. Annex PROVISIONAL TIMETABLE The timetable shown below is subject to approval by the preparatory body. As soon as discussion on an item or sub-item has been finished, the following one will be taken up, time permitting. Suggested meeting times are from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. No topics are being proposed by the Secretariat for consideration by the Committee of the Whole to allow the preparatory body maximum flexibility in organizing its work. The resources available for the Committee of the Whole can be used at the discretion of the preparatory body. Monday, 16 March 5th meeting 10 a.m.-1p.m. Item 1. Adoption of the agenda and organizational matters Item 2 (b). Consideration of the reports of the informal inter-sessional meetings of the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly on international drug control 6th meeting 3 p.m.-6 p.m. Consideration of the reports of the informal inter-sessional meetings of the Commission acting as preparatory body for the special session of the General Assembly on international drug control (continued) Tuesday, 17 March 7th meeting 10 a.m.-1 p.m. Item 2 (c). Consideration of elements for inclusion in a draft political declaration 8th meeting Consideration of elements for inclusion in a draft political declaration (continued) Wednesday, 18 March 9th meeting Item 2 (d). Consideration of the draft declaration on the guiding principles of demand reduction 10th meeting Item 2 (f). Review of the international drug control regime: strengthening United Nations machinery for drug control Item 2 (e). Consideration of any other proposals to be submitted to the special session in accordance with the objectives set out in General Assembly resolution 51/64 Thursday, 19 March 11th meeting Item 2 (a). Consideration of the draft provisional agenda of the special session of the General Assembly Item 2 (g). Other matters: organizational matters concerning the special session of the General Assembly 12th meeting Friday, 20 March 13th meeting Other matters (continued) 14th meeting Item 3. Adoption of the report of the preparatory body on its second session 