%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|MAPS|LIBERIA|RESULTS-BASED BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|STAFFING|PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|COSTS|ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|

Sixty-third session Agenda item 143 Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia Budget for the United Nations Mission in Liberia for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Mandate and planned results Overall Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives Regional mission cooperation Partnerships, country team coordination and integrated missions Results-based-budgeting frameworks Financial resources Non-budgeted contributions Efficiency gains Vacancy factors Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Training Quick-impact projects Analysis of variances Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the decisions and requests made by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/276 and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the Assembly, and of the United Nations Board of Auditors Annexes Organization charts Information on funding provisions and activities of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes Map Summary The present report contains the budget for the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, which amounts to $593,436,000, exclusive of budgeted voluntary contributions in kind in the amount of $52,800. The budget provides for the deployment of 133 military observers, an average of 9,635 military contingent personnel, an average of 470 United Nations police officers, 845 formed police unit personnel, 546 international staff and 1,038 national staff, including 3 positions funded under general temporary assistance, 237 United Nations Volunteers and 32 Government-provided personnel. The total resource requirements for UNMIL for the financial period have been linked to the Mission's objective through a number of results-based-budgeting frameworks, organized according to components (security sector, peace consolidation, rule of law and support). The human resources of the Mission, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of executive direction and management, which can be attributed to the Mission as a whole. The explanations of variances in resource levels, both human resources and financial resources, have been linked, where applicable, to specific outputs planned by the Mission. (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010.) Category Expenditures Apportionment Cost estimates Variance Amount Percentage Military and police personnel Civilian personnel Operational costs Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements Human resourcesa Military observers Military contingents United Nations police Formed police units Govern-ment personnel Inter-national staff National staffb Temporary positionc United Nations Volunteers Total Executive direction and managementd Approved posts 2008/09 Proposed posts 2009/10 Components Security sector Peace consolidatione Rule of lawf Supportg Net change a Represents highest level of authorized/proposed strength. b Includes National Officers and national General Service staff. c Funded under general temporary assistance. d Reflects the realignment to executive direction and management, compared with 2008/09, of the Communications and Public Information Office from the peace consolidation component and of the Legal Affairs Section from the rule of law component. e Reflects the realignment to the peace consolidation component, compared with 2008/09, of the Gender Adviser Unit from the rule of law component and of the HIV/AIDS Adviser Unit from the Support component. f Reflects the realignment of the Legal Affairs Section and the Gender Adviser Unit, compared with 2008/09, to executive direction and management and the peace consolidation component. g Reflects the realignment of the HIV/AIDS Adviser Unit, compared with 2008/09, to the peace consolidation component. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section IV of the present report. A. Overall 1. The mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1509 (2003). The most recent extension of the mandate was authorized by the Council in its resolution 1836 (2008), by which it extended the mandate until 30 September 2009. 2. The Mission is mandated to enable the Security Council to achieve the overall objective of advancing the peace process in Liberia. 3. Within this overall objective, the Mission, during the budget period, will contribute to a number of expected accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, shown in the frameworks below. The frameworks are grouped by components (security sector, peace consolidation, rule of law and support), which are derived from the mandate of the Mission. 4. The expected accomplishments would lead to the fulfilment of the Security Council's objective within the lifetime of the Mission, and the indicators of achievement show a measurement of progress made towards such accomplishments during the budget period. The human resources of the Mission, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of executive direction and management, which can be attributed to the Mission as a whole. Variances in the number of personnel, compared with the 2008/09 budget, including reclassifications, have been explained under the respective components. 5. In the 2009/10 period, in line with the drawdown plan, the Mission's military component will be reorganized into two sectors, A and B, from four sectors covering the 15 counties. The first (Sector A), with headquarters in Monrovia, will encompass the greater Monrovia area and the counties of Gbarpolu and Grand Cape Mount (along Liberia's border with Sierra Leone), Bomi, Montserrado, Margibi, Grand Bassa, River Cess, Sinoe, Grand Kru and Maryland (which borders Côte d'Ivoire). The second (Sector B), with headquarters in Gbarnga, will encompass the counties of Lofa (along Liberia's border with Sierra Leone and Guinea), Bong (bordering Guinea), Nimba (bordering Guinea and Côte d'Ivoire), and Grand Gedeh and River Gee (which border Côte d'Ivoire). B. Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives 6. The Secretary-General made the following recommendations to the Security Council in his seventeenth progress report on UNMIL (S/2008/553): (a) Reduce the military component of the Mission by 1,460 troops between October 2008 and March 2009. Planning figures envisaged for the next phase include the drawdown of a further 2,100 troops by December 2010, subject to review following a technical assessment mission; (b) Increase the number of formed police units from five to seven effective September 2008, and put the reduction of the police advisory component on hold from September 2008 to September 2009. Planning figures envisaged for the next phase include a reduction of 132 police advisers between October 2009 and December 2010, subject to review following a technical assessment mission. 7. UNMIL will continue to adjust its civilian component, as appropriate, to adapt to evolving priorities. 8. With the commencement of the drawdown phase, the UNMIL military revised its concept of operations for the year 2008 and beyond. The revised concept of operations is called "Force Overwatch". As reflected under component 1, security sector, UNMIL military has changed its concept of operations from the securing of fixed-point locations, such as towns, routes and strategic infrastructure, using guards, bunkered positions and checkpoints, to a more discrete presence with a more mobile and flexible posture, with increased patrolling, snap vehicle checkpoints and a rapid-response capability. 9. UNMIL has been working closely with the Government to develop a long-term strategic plan for the institutional development of the Liberian National Police. As part of this effort, UNMIL continues to train the national police to gain functional capacity and operational presence in the counties and districts. Furthermore, the United Nations police, in collaboration with other partners, will train, make operational and deploy the Emergency Response Unit of the Liberian National Police. The Mission will also assist in developing the standard operating procedures of the national police, advise on realigning its establishment, provide in-service and specialized training and facilitate the provision of equipment and the rehabilitation of the police infrastructure in all counties. 10. The Mission's efforts will also reflect support to the Government, within the context of the overall poverty reduction strategy, in promoting national reconciliation, a constitutional review and the consolidation and strengthening of State authority throughout the country. Efforts will also focus on addressing land and property disputes, providing advice on the efficient management of natural resources, including timber, rubber and diamonds, ensuring the implementation of sound public financial management and facilitating labour-intensive emergency employment initiatives, especially in the area of road rehabilitation projects, in partnership with the United Nations country team, with resources from donor partners. 11. UNMIL will also intensify its efforts aimed at building the capacity of local government through the county support team process, focusing on capacity-building, civic education and administrative advice to local government officials. It will continue to facilitate the coordination of humanitarian support to vulnerable groups and the rehabilitation and reintegration of remaining ex-combatants and war-affected populations into communities, as well as the implementation of the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Programme and similar initiatives to capture and utilize national revenues for the public good. 12. The support for the strengthening of rule of law is a key priority for UNMIL. The Mission will also focus on improving critical rule of law institutions, including by providing training in key areas of the justice sector. Furthermore, the Mission will continue to support the Government in the development of its prison system, including the provision of significant assistance for the training of correctional staff and infrastructure development. 13. Resource requirements, including human resources, for the support component are projected to meet the support requirements of the substantive components. In 2009/10, the support component will focus on implementation of phase 2 of the downsizing plan and on the provision of support to substantive sections in programmes to consolidate Government authority. The concept of operations will require logistical support in connection with the further repatriation or downsizing of military contingents. It is anticipated that the strength of the police forces will remain unchanged from the levels authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 1836 (2008). UNMIL will continue to relocate some units from Government buildings, allowing for their return to national and local authorities. While the concept of operations and the consolidation of the military sector headquarters will reduce the number of detachments requiring support, the number of primary locations serviced by the support component is not projected to change. UNMIL will also continue to support the operations of the 250-troop guard force deployed in Freetown to provide security to the Special Court for Sierra Leone through outsourced services and from UNMIL directly. At the same time, the increased deployment of the Liberian National Police co-located with the United Nations police and the enhanced United Nations civilian substantive staff presence in the counties will increase the level of support provided. It is also assumed that the support infrastructure in Liberia, including roads, utilities and communications networks, will continue to see modest improvements in this budget period, particularly in the counties. The improved conditions of main and secondary supply routes repaired by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and UNMIL with World Bank funding will allow some reduction in UNMIL helicopter assets. Nonetheless, the evolving concept of operations will present continued significant logistical challenges. 14. In preparation for eventual withdrawal and Mission liquidation, UNMIL will implement an environmental clean-up programme during the budget period. In order to prepare national staff for the eventual closing of the Mission, UNMIL will continue the national staff capacity-building project, with 200 staff being assessed and certified in 20 areas of vocational skills and 90 administrative staff being certified in professional administration. UNMIL will also establish linkages with Government and industry employers to develop targeted training programmes to help prepare national staff for employment transition. 15. As UNMIL has transitioned into the drawdown phase and prepares to enter the withdrawal phase, the Division of Mission Support will seek process improvements to better align with evolving mission activities through business process analysis and organizational alignment with customer service lines. Specifically, UNMIL proposes to realign currently authorized resources to establish human resources management, materials management and information management capacities by consolidating disparate functions into sectional centres of excellence. The proposed realignments are detailed in paragraphs 17 to 21 below, with changes in human resources described under the respective components. 16. During the budget period, the Mission will continue to implement the following initiatives: (a) The provision of wide-body aircraft for the rotation of troops and the regional movement of cargo for the missions within West Africa, which will achieve greater cost efficiency; (b) The linking, through a fibre-optic network, of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (UNLB) so as to improve communications and reduce the cost of reliance on satellite communications; (c) The introduction of satellite monitoring of its aviation fleet. 17. As indicated in paragraph 15 above, UNMIL proposes to realign currently authorized resources to establish human resources, materials and information management capacities by consolidating disparate functions into sectional centres of excellence. The proposed realignments are designed to streamline operations and increase collaboration and efficiencies while maintaining the functions and responsibilities of the realigned elements and to effectively achieve the Mission's objectives, as well as to formalize the evolving structure that has occurred over the Mission life cycle. 18. The proposed realignment within executive direction and management relates to operational and support functions to provide synergy and enhance operational effectiveness and efficiency. Direct reporting lines to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General from the Conduct and Discipline Team and the Legal Affairs Section will be retained, as will the responsibility of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for security functions as both the Head of Mission and the Designated Official responsible for the security of all United Nations personnel in Liberia. Given the overarching nature of the functions of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre, it is proposed that it be realigned from the security sector component to operate within the immediate Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Likewise, the Communications and Public Information Office would be realigned from the peace consolidation component to executive direction and management. The Political Planning and Policy Section would be realigned under the peace consolidation component and would report to the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Recovery and Governance). 19. The peace consolidation component will focus on support to Government-led recovery and the establishment of functional, decentralized governance throughout Liberia; natural resources management and sound environmental practice; peacebuilding and national reconciliation; and promoting integrated collaborative work of the United Nations in Liberia. To this extent, it is proposed that the Recovery, Rehabilitation and Reintegration Section be downsized as it completes its support to and finalization of national processes, and as responsibilities for functions are assumed by the Government of Liberia and United Nations agencies. The Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office will be phased out, with its responsibilities being assumed increasingly by the United Nations country team. Residual functions will be integrated with the work of the Civil Affairs Section. The Gender Adviser Unit will be realigned from the rule of law to the peace consolidation component to facilitate increased cooperation and coordination with the United Nations country team in support of the Government of Liberia. This would facilitate the integration of the functions of those offices. With the Government of Liberia increasingly assuming the functions and roles related to the environment and the management of natural resources, those functions will be realigned to the support component, with only advisory functions being retained to provide continued advice and liaison with the United Nations country team and the Government of Liberia. 20. The support component will continue to place emphasis on providing efficient and effective services to the components of the Mission as a whole. Proposed realignments in the support component will achieve synergy to enable and support the fulfilment of the Mission's mandate, facilitate drawdown and prepare for eventual liquidation. 21. The Regional Offices, formerly under Integrated Support Services, would report to the Office of the Director of Mission Support through the Regional Administrative Officers. The Board of Inquiry Unit will report to the Director of Mission Support instead of to the Chief of Administrative Services. A performance management team will be established and report to the Office of the Director of Mission Support. It is proposed that the General Services Section of Administrative Services be disbanded, with the roles, responsibilities and related posts redistributed among the proposed Human Resources Management Section, the proposed Property Management Section and the proposed Information Management Unit, as well as the Integrated Support Services. Proposed realignments within Integrated Support Services involve the streamlining of functions in the Engineering and Supply Sections as well as the Joint Logistics Operations Centre. 22. The resource requirements for the 2009/10 period reflect a decrease of 1.7 per cent ($10.3 million) compared with the estimates for the 2008/09 period, which is attributable primarily to the phased drawdown of military contingent personnel from 10,232 to 8,693 and of military observers from 215 to 133. The overall decrease is offset by: (a) increased requirements in respect of United Nations police, formed police units and corrections personnel owing to the increase to 1,375 in the overall authorized police component of the Mission as endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1836 (2008); and (b) additional resources for salaries, including post adjustment, and common staff costs for international staff, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250 on human resources management, offset in part by the elimination of requirements for mission subsistence allowance. 23. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 63/250, the proposed 2009/10 budget provides for the conversion to the Field Service category of 49 international General Service posts (including 1 at the Principal level) and 18 Security Service posts approved for the 2008/09 period. The conversions are indicated under the respective offices of each framework component. C. Regional mission cooperation 24. Within the context of the mandate of UNMIL, regional cooperation will continue with a view to ensuring a consistent approach with other United Nations entities in the region on common security concerns. Such coordination includes joint patrols with mission counterparts and military observers from UNOCI and the Government border authorities of Guinea and Sierra Leone. Through the consultative processes that have been established in the recently reactivated Mano River Union (Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone; the International Contact Group and the respective United Nations country teams for Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone) regular meetings are held to jointly address regional issues relating to youth, small arms, human trafficking, HIV/AIDS, polio and other diseases, food security, the harmonization of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, border management and control, refugees and internally displaced persons, and the general strengthening of the Mano River Union partnerships. D. Partnerships, country team coordination and integrated missions 25. Within the integrated mission framework and based on the principle of "one United Nations" under a single leadership, UNMIL and the country team have worked closely under the guidance of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Recovery and Governance, who is also the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator. Collaboration is effectively carried out through a variety of mechanisms, including bimonthly country team meetings chaired by the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Recovery and Governance (in his function as Resident Coordinator), at which administrative, operational and substantive programmatic issues are coordinated. Specific joint programmes are developed at the technical level with the country team senior programme officers in the context of an inter-agency programme team in which UNMIL participates. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General chairs a fortnightly strategic planning group meeting, bringing together UNMIL section heads and country team agency heads. 26. Coordination and collaboration will continue through the Liberia Reconstruction and Development Committee, which provides a framework that brings the United Nations, the Government and other partners together to implement the poverty reduction strategy. The formulation of joint initiatives, projects and programme frameworks has provided practical avenues for coordinated United Nations efforts in support of the development goals of the Government of Liberia. The country team provides input for the periodic progress reports of the Secretary-General on Liberia, and key framework documents, such as the common country assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework were prepared with the active participation of UNMIL sections and in the context of strong United Nations support for the national poverty reduction strategy process. The strategy was developed on the basis of consultations on county development agendas, in which UNMIL field staff are actively engaged, in particular through participation and facilitation of the county support teams. 27. All of those mechanisms are contributing to information-sharing and the enhancement of the ability of the United Nations to deliver as one -- avoiding duplication of effort and resource wastage. The implementation of the Mission's mandate will continue to rely on close collaboration with the United Nations country team as UNMIL continues to advocate for Government capacity-building and the handover of responsibility. E. Results-based-budgeting frameworks Executive direction and management 28. Overall mission direction and management are to be provided by the immediate Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Table 1 Human resources: executive direction and management International staff USG- ASG D-2- D-1 P-5- P-4 P-3- P-2 Field Servicea General Servicea Security Service Subtotal National staffb Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Legal Affairs Sectionc Communications and Public Information Officec a Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250, reflects the conversion of approved General Service posts to the Field Service category, without change in functions. c Reflects the realignment, compared with the 2008/09 period, of the Legal Affairs Section from the rule of law component and the Communications and Public Information Office from the peace consolidation component, as reflected in annex I to the present report. National staff: no net change (redeployment of 1 national General Service post offset by the abolishment of a National Officer post) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 1 position (abolishment) International staff: increase of 1 post (establishment of a P-5 post, reclassification to the P-4 level of a P-3 post and conversion to the Field Service category of 4 General Service (1 Principal level and 3 Other level) posts) National staff: increase of 1 post (redeployment of 1 national General Service post from the disbanded General Services Section) 29. The Joint Mission Analysis Centre, unlike the Security Section that deals with threats of a tangible and immediate nature, is composed of civilian personnel from various parts of the Mission structure, the United Nations police, and military and security personnel. The Centre, a multidisciplinary unit, is responsible for the collection, coordination, analysis and dissemination of information from civilian and military sources, and strategic analysis of medium- and long-term issues affecting the Mission. It provides analytical capacity to conduct threat and risk analysis and security assessment in the Mission area, with particular emphasis on high-level risk assessments. The Centre also produces reports and policy documents as well as recommendations for the Mission's senior management to improve the ability of the Mission to adapt to and manage current and emerging problems, threats or obstacles in the implementation of its mandate. To date, the Centre has functioned within the security sector component headed by a military staff officer. In order to maintain continuity, and given that the military staff officer personnel assigned to this function rotate on average every six months, it is proposed to formally establish the Joint Mission Analysis Centre within the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, reporting to the Head of the Mission and headed by a Chief at the P-5 level. 30. The Chief of the Centre would be responsible for its day-to-day operations and the provision of integrated analyses to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the senior management team to enable comprehensive and in-depth understanding of issues and trends and their implications as well as assessments of cross-cutting issues and potential threats that may affect the Mission, and will oversee the preparation of and approve analysis and reports on relevant political developments in the Mission area and the region. Personnel assigned to the Joint Mission Analysis Centre on an ad hoc basis from various parts of the Mission structure and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to cover analytical functions relevant to their work would support the Chief of the Centre. 31. Upon a review of the functions of the immediate Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and in view of the streamlining of functions related to achieving synergy and efficiency of functional processes in the Mission, the reclassification to the P-4 level of the post of Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff (P-3) is proposed. The incumbent of the post of Special Assistant will assume the additional responsibilities of working on the Mission's results-based budget, drafting reports of the Secretary-General, formulating policy, and performing substantive political work in support of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The incumbent would also maintain liaison with external actors on behalf of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General including the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union (AU) and the International Contact Group on Liberia. He or she would also liaise with the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Recovery and Governance) to coordinate with the field offices. 32. Given the continuous requirement to deliver urgent mail from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the Office of the President and offices of Government Ministers throughout the day on a daily basis, it is proposed that a national General Service post of Driver be redeployed from the disbanded General Services Section to the immediate Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Legal Affairs Section International staff: conversion to the Field Service category of 1 General Service (Other level) post National staff: decrease of 1 post (abolishment of a National Officer post) 33. In line with the streamlining and integration of functions based on a review of the staffing requirements of the Section and taking into account the synergy between the Legal Affairs Section and the Legal and Judicial System Support Division, the functions of a Legal Officer (National Officer) are no longer deemed required. Accordingly, it is proposed that the staffing establishment of the Section be reduced through the abolishment of a National Officer post. Communications and Public Information Office International staff: increase of 1 post (1 P-2; conversion to the Field Service category of 1 General Service (Other level) post) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 1 position 34. The Communications and Public Information Office will continue to support all other sections in the Mission in promoting and publicizing their priorities and activities and to work with Government and other national partners in promoting their own progress and programmes. Moreover, as UNMIL enters the second stage of its drawdown, the public at large in Liberia will need to be further reassured, particularly concerning the level of their safety and security. Accordingly, and pursuant to a review and streamlining of the work processes of the Office, it is proposed that its staffing establishment be adjusted. With the merger of UNMIL Focus and the UNMIL Bulletin, it is proposed that one United Nations Volunteer position of Information Officer in the Publications Unit of the Office be abolished. At the same time, the Media Relations Unit would be strengthened through the establishment of a P-2 post of Associate Public Information Officer in consideration of the growing interest of international media in developments in Liberia and the need to continue to build relationships with a large and vibrant national media, with the Government and with international and civil society partners. In particular, the incumbent of the post would contribute to institutional public communication efforts through research and analysis of assigned topics and the timely preparation and distribution of information products to target audiences; organize media events, including conferences; ensure the consistent application of appropriate policies, guidelines and procedures; and liaise and interact with concerned parties. Component 1: security sector 35. The Mission's framework component on the security sector continues to encompass both security stabilization and security sector reform. The component incorporates the activities of the Mission's military and police elements, functioning with international partners and the Government, including the Liberian National Police, the Armed Forces of Liberia and other security agencies. 36. The main priority for the 2009/10 period for the Mission continues to be the focus on maintenance of a stable and secure environment. It comprises support for the development and implementation of a coordinated Liberian national security architecture, including implementation of the national security strategy in line with the poverty reduction strategy, the training and institutional capacity-building of the Liberian National Police and ensuring their full-fledged operational status, as well as the provision of support for restructuring the Armed Forces of Liberia. The Mission will seek to consolidate peace and achieve a phased drawdown, with a gradual shift in responsibility for security to national institutions. 37. The operational focus of the UNMIL military (overwatch strategy) will continue, that is, a shift from an emphasis on the domination of towns, routes and strategic infrastructure using guards, bunkered positions and static checkpoints, to a more fluid and flexible posture, using increased patrolling and vehicle checkpoints, leading to a more subtle presence by the force -- in essence, a move from visible domination to a form of credible deterrence exerted from a distance, ensuring security coverage for all the major strategic locations of the Mission. 38. In line with the strategic objective of ensuring that the Armed Forces of Liberia and the Liberian National Police become fully operational, the training and deployment of the Armed Forces of Liberia and the Liberian National Police and the development by the Government of a national security strategy and architecture will continue. During the 2009/10 period, the Mission will focus on: (a) Exercises of the Armed Forces of Liberia at the squadron, platoon and company levels; the operationalization of the first battalion of the Armed Forces of Liberia, the commencement of training of the Liberian Coast Guard and the establishment of the Veteran Affairs Bureau, all of which are expected to be accomplished by September 2009; (b) The training, deployment and mentoring of a fully operational Emergency Response Unit and the development and implementation of police operating procedures for the Liberian National Police. The Mission will continue to assist the Liberian National Police and facilitate the provision of equipment and the rehabilitation of the infrastructure of the police service in all the counties; (c) The implementation of the national security sector strategy through an implementation matrix that is aligned with the national poverty reduction strategy across the entire country. This includes the development of security coordination mechanisms in the counties and in border areas as well as the development of a coordinated and accountable security architecture. The implementation of the national security strategy runs concurrently with the poverty reduction strategy three-year cycle; (d) The further drawdown of the military component of the Mission by 2,100 troops by December 2010, subject to the review of a technical assessment mission; (e) The phased reduction of 132 United Nations police advisers by December 2010, subject to the review of a technical assessment mission. 39. The Mission's public information activities will also continue to keep the population informed of progress made in improving the security situation and provide extensive visibility on the reform of the security sector. In this connection, the Mission will sensitize the public on the Government's crime prevention efforts, with the support of the United Nations police, and encourage dialogue and cooperation between citizens and the Liberian National Police to assist in tackling crime and maintaining law and order. 40. As part of its overall mandate to mainstream gender into all its activities and to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, the Mission will also continue to support the Government in the development and implementation of gender accountability systems and mechanisms within the security sector. 41. The Mission will continue to proactively engage in and foster a culture of best practices in all areas relating to the security sector and security sector reform. Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement 1.1 Stable security environment in Liberia 1.1.1 No serious violations of the ceasefire agreement (2006/07: 0; 2007/08: 0; 2008/09: 0; 2009/10: 0) Outputs :: 512,460 patrol person days (12 troops per patrol x 117 patrols per day x 365 days) foot and mobile patrols of all types, including border monitoring, cordon and search, public order, support to the Government of Liberia, VIP and other security in the two sectors :: 262,800 static troop person days (12 troops per observation post x 60 static locations x 365 days), including checkpoints on roads, observation posts and all static guarding tasks for entrance/exit points to major ports and harbours, entrance/exit points to airfields and helicopter landing zones, approaches to major Government buildings, economic checkpoints for sanctions monitoring, border-crossing points, strategic bridges and junctions and other routes :: 17,160 United Nations military observer person days (6 days x 5 personnel (4 on patrol, 1 operations officer) x 52 weeks x 11 team sites) to gather information and liaise with agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) :: 5,600 air patrol hours (Mi 8 and Mi 24): this includes all air operations deployment and related activities, border patrols, other patrols, United Nations police support and United Nations military observer patrols, but excludes all logistical, medical evacuation, engineering, VIP and communication flights :: 91,250 troop protection person days (250 troops x 365 days) to secure the Special Court for Sierra Leone :: 256,152 force engineering person days (821 military engineers x 6 days per week x 52 weeks), including support to the Government of Liberia. The support includes but is not limited to roads, bridges and local infrastructure, culverts, airfields and helicopter-landing sites :: Planning and implementation of a public information campaign in support of a stable security environment and to publicize and promote the adjustments to UNMIL forces, including through 6 daily news bulletins on UNMIL Radio, 5 weekly Coffee Break programmes, 3 weekly radio public service announcements, 52 weekly press conferences, 80 press releases, quarterly media tours to military night-time patrols and other military public outreach activities (up to 6 selected Liberian or international journalists are taken on night patrols by the Liberian National Police and the UNMIL force), a photographic display, coverage and dissemination of video news items and features for broadcast on 5 Liberian television stations, 14 groups of traditional performers and dissemination of 200,000 flyers and 10,000 T-shirts in all 15 counties 1.2 Establishment of a new and restructured Liberian Armed Forces 1.2.1 Completion of the recruitment and training as well as sustaining of the full strength of Armed Forces of Liberia. The personnel of the Armed Forces of Liberia would complete courses in specific areas, such as leadership, senior command and staff, combat engineering, military police, jungle warfare and basic officers training (2006/07: 102; 2007/08: 650; 2008/09: 850; 2009/10: 2,000) 1.2.2 Declaration by the Government of Liberia of the organization of the second battalion of the Armed Forces of Liberia for operational training and mentoring by January 2010 1.2.3 Commencement of training of Coast Guard personnel by the Government of Liberia :: Provision of advice through monthly meetings of the Liberia Reconstruction and Development Committee, the security pillar of the Government of Liberia, on the continuing recruitment, training and deployment of the Liberian military, in cooperation with ECOWAS, AU, the European Commission, UNDP and concerned Member States 1.3 Enhanced public law and order and operational capacity of the Liberian National Police 1.3.1 Police Emergency Response Unit personnel of the Liberian National Police trained, equipped, deployed and operational (2006/07: N/A; 2007/08: 200; 2008/09: 500; 2009/10: 500) 1.3.2 Increase in representation of females to achieve and sustain a level of 20 per cent of the authorized strength of the Liberian National Police (2006/07: 6 per cent; 2007/08: 15 per cent; 2008/09: 20 per cent; 2009/10: 20 per cent) 1.3.3 Improvement of the quality of competence of the Liberian National Police officers through validation/fitness certification by the United Nations police (integrity and skill-based) with the Inspector General of Police and the Ministry of Justice (2007/08: 0; 2008/09: 0; 2009/10: 100 per cent) 1.3.4 Increased number of serving Liberian National Police officers participating in in-service and advanced training programmes (2006/07: 240; 2007/08: 640; 2008/09: 800; 2009/10: 1,100) 1.3.5 Media strategy designed by the Liberian National Police to include regular press briefings at its headquarters 1.3.6 Adoption and implementation by security sector agencies (Liberian National Police and Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization) of the recommendations contained in the national action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security :: Provision of advice through meetings, co-location activities and operational support through joint patrols and back-up support from the Formed Police Unit in joint field operations and exercises to 500 police personnel of Liberian National Police Emergency Response Unit to increase intervention capacity to address serious law and order incidents :: Provision of training to the Liberian National Police, including basic training to 300 recruits to address vacancies in the Liberian National Police; transitional law enforcement training for 200 recruits to support the national security architecture; and specialized and managerial training for 96 Liberian National Police officers of senior and middle management, including external training with emphasis on recruitment of females :: Provision of advice through daily contacts, in-service training and mentoring of 600 Liberian National Police officers in implementing standard police operating procedures and practices in all areas of police operations, administration, management, internal investigations and civilian complaints and training :: Provision of operational support by the Formed Police Unit, through joint patrols, operational advice and mentoring to the Liberian National Police in addressing serious crime and civil unrest, as well as operations involving cordon and search, high visibility and those led by criminal intelligence :: Provision of advice through daily contacts and weekly and monthly meetings with the Liberian National Police leadership and the Government of Liberia to implement strategic frameworks to meet law enforcement challenges, to ensure the primacy of the Liberian National Police throughout the country, to ensure public safety and to facilitate donor funding and the budgetary allocations necessary for the sustained operational development of the Liberian National Police :: Provision of advice through daily contacts, mentoring, co-location activities and meetings with the Liberian National Police leadership and commanders to strengthen supervision, command and control; enhance community-police relations; and ensure consistent implementation of standard police operations, procedures and practices :: Implementation of officer competency validation/fitness certification programme in collaboration with the Liberian National Police as per jointly agreed certification procedures :: Provision of advice through daily contacts and weekly and monthly meetings with the Liberian National Police to enhance security coverage in high-threat areas and to meet new security challenges through reallocation of Liberian National Police personnel and logistics, including infrastructure enhancement :: Provision of technical advice through daily contacts and monthly meetings on cross-border issues with Liberian law enforcement agencies in border counties :: Provision of advice through bimonthly meetings with the Liberian National Police to support its capacity to deal with the concerns of the media and the public on crime and public safety and security :: Planning and implementation of weekly UNMIL Radio crime watch programmes and regular radio reports in collaboration with community radio stations :: Planning and implementation of one public outreach campaign to sensitize the public on the importance of abiding by the rule of law and to highlight improvements in the Liberian National Police operational capacity and equipment through the dissemination of 100,000 flyers, 2,000 posters, 5,000 T-shirts and 12 billboard displays :: Provision of 3 one-day training workshops for senior managers of the Liberian National Police, the Liberian National Police Gender Unit, the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, legislative gender and security committees, and the Women's Legislative Caucus on gender and security sector reform as well as the national action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security External factors Donors will provide adequate funding for the restructuring of the Armed Forces of Liberia and the Liberian National Police Table 2 Human resources: component 1, security sector I. Military observers II. Military contingents III. United Nations police IV. Formed police units V. Government-provided personnel VI. Civilian staff USG- ASG National staff b Office of the Force Commander Office of the United Nations Police Commissioner Subtotal, civilian staff Total (I-VI) a Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250, reflects the conversion of approved General Service posts to the Field Service category without change in functions. National staff: decrease of 2 posts (abolishment of 2 national General Service posts) International staff: conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts 42. Taking into account the changes in the time frame of the drawdown process and the overall strength of the United Nations police component, a review of the functions of the Office of the United Nations Police Commissioner has resulted in the streamlining of processes, responsibilities and planned tasks. Consequently, it is proposed to adjust the staffing establishment of the Office downwards by the abolishment of two national General Service posts, as the administrative support functions provided by them are deemed no longer needed. Component 2: peace consolidation 43. Under the peace consolidation framework, the Mission will continue its emphasis on supporting the Government's poverty reduction strategy, the promotion of national reconciliation, the consolidation and strengthening of State authority throughout the country and the facilitation of ethnic and political reconciliation. The Mission will draw on the support of United Nations agencies, including the $15 million funding envelope from the Peacebuilding Fund in the areas of national reconciliation and conflict management, critical interventions to promote peace and resolve conflicts, and strengthening the State capacity for peace consolidation. The furtherance of economic revitalization will continue to be supported through the facilitation and promotion by the Mission of the efficient management of natural resources, including timber, rubber and diamonds. Through the United Nations county support team mechanism, the Mission will continue to assist in building and strengthening the capacity of local government. 44. The Mission, together with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, will continue to support the capacity of the government and civil society to address the humanitarian needs of vulnerable groups and will support the reintegration of rehabilitated ex-combatants and war-affected populations into communities. The Mission will continue to support Government efforts in coordinating labourintensive employment initiatives in partnership with external donors, especially in the area of road rehabilitation and agriculture. Assistance will continue in the area of the implementation of the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Programme and other initiatives to capture and utilize national revenues for the public good. 45. As part of its overall mandate to mainstream gender into all its activities and to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, the Mission will also continue to support the Government in the development and implementation of gender accountability systems and mechanisms and the inclusion of the voices of women in the peace consolidation process. 46. The peace consolidation component will comprise the Mission's planned activities in the areas of political planning and policy as well as civil affairs, which incorporate humanitarian activities, the environment and natural resources, and recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration, HIV/AIDS and the Office of the Gender Adviser. All Mission elements will work in close partnership, in the context of an integrated mission, with the funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations in collaborating with the World Bank, the European Union, ECOWAS and the international community in providing support to the Government of Liberia. 47. The activities implemented under this component will be promoted through various public information outreach mechanisms and events targeting local authorities in order to encourage their involvement in national development and rehabilitation efforts. At the same time, they will serve to highlight progress in the rehabilitation and reintegration of war-affected youth and communities. 48. The Mission will continue to proactively engage in and foster a culture of best practices in all areas relating to peace consolidation. 2.1 Consolidation of national authority throughout the country 2.1.1 Increase in the total number of civil servants returned to their duty stations in the counties (2006/07: 1,320; 2007/08: 2,775; 2008/09: 3,000; 2009/10: 3,300) 2.1.2 Payment by the Government of salaries and entitlements to all personnel on the Government payroll in the counties (2006/07: 17,500; 2007/08: 30,000; 2008/09: 45,000; 2009/10: 48,000) 2.1.3 Increase in the percentage of Government ministries/agencies participating in monthly poverty reduction strategy/county development agenda coordination meetings at the county level for the national consolidation of State authority (2008/09: 60 per cent; 2009/10: 80 per cent) 2.1.4 Establishment by the Government of a constitutional review task force 2.1.5 The Governance Reform Commission holds a national conference on constitutional reform 2.1.6 The national Legislature publishes daily records of its proceedings to provide clarity on governance with respect to adopted legislation 2.1.7 The national Legislature will enact legislation that enhances the transparency of the economy, boosts Government revenue and increases the gross domestic product 2.1.8 Implementation by the Government of a national gender policy and the national action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) 2.1.9 Enactment by the Government of legislation on the management of the environment and natural resources :: Provision of advice and support to 15 key ministries and Government agencies (the Ministries of Defence; Finance; Agriculture; Labour; Lands; Mines and Energy; Internal Affairs; Public Works; Education; Health and Social Welfare; and Youth and Sports, as well as the Forestry Development Authority; Governance Reform Commission; National Ports Authority; Bureau of the Budget; Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-information Services; and Liberia Reconstruction and Development Committee) at the national and decentralized levels, through the deployment of staff in support of the planning processes and meetings, including on decentralization of functions, staff deployment and training, organizational restructuring, programme and project development, and business processes :: Provision of support to the county administrations in capacity-building and training for local Government officials through the county support team mechanism based on the two-year local government capacity development plan of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in the implementation and monitoring of county development agendas and overall coordination of the national poverty reduction strategy and identification of further development support requirements for consolidation of authority at decentralized levels :: Provision of advice through meetings, briefings, thematic papers, comments on policies and programmes, and development of project proposals to the Government, at the central and county levels, on the further development and implementation of management mechanisms for the proper utilization of natural resources, including compliance with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme for diamonds and with the National Forestry Reform Law for chain of custody and awards and management of contracts to ensure the sustainable utilization of forestry resources :: Engage civil society through dialogue, consultations, participatory processes, civil society forums and structures, organizational development and capacity-building, through a joint UNMIL, UNDP and United Nations country team approach in the promotion of peace and national reconciliation and coordinate their participation in the implementation of the poverty reduction strategy/county development agendas in collaboration with the United Nations country team :: Facilitation of a dialogue process, through monthly meetings with community leaders, in 5 pilot counties through community-based peace committees to address localized conflicts and strengthen sustainable structures for peacebuilding and reconciliation :: Organization of 15 consultative forums (30 participants each) for local officials, NGOs and community representatives on national reconciliation, peacebuilding and conflict resolution :: Facilitation of a dialogue, through monthly meetings with representatives of the executive and legislative branches of the Government, the Governance Reform Commission and civil society, on review of the constitution leading to the establishment of a constitutional review commission, including through the airing of a 1-hour twice-weekly programme over UNMIL Radio :: Provision of advice through meetings at least two times per month with political parties and the legislature on initiating legislation to strengthen the viability of political parties and improve their role as a mechanism for harmonizing different political interests, thereby fostering good governance and reconciliation :: Organization of consultative processes in 15 counties for increased interaction between institutions of central and local governance with grass-roots constituencies to enhance their participation in national social, economic and political processes :: Provision of advice through weekly meetings with the legislature for the finalization of the five-year strategic plan for strengthening the capacity of the legislature :: Planning and implementation of a public information campaign to encourage local authorities and the public to be actively involved in national development and rehabilitation activities, including through press briefings, community radio reports, 4 video outreach features and 2 video public service announcements to be broadcast on 5 local television stations and in video clubs in all 15 sectors, weekly reports on UNMIL Radio programmes Dateline Liberia and Coffee Break as well as through radio public service announcements :: Conduct of 2 five-day training workshops for 60 NGOs on planning and policymaking that is gender sensitive as well as monitoring through monthly meetings of the implementation, from a gender perspective, of the poverty reduction strategy and county development agendas :: Conduct of 2 training workshops for 50 members of the national gender forum and the gender advisers in the line Ministries and a one-day forum (30 participants) for commissioners in the Governance Reform Commission, National Elections Commission and the National Human Rights Commission on the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of and reporting on the national gender policy and the national action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) :: Provision of advice through two meetings per month with the Liberia Environmental Protection Agency and the Forestry Development Authority on the preservation and protection of the environment and natural resources as well as on the monitoring and inspection of illegal activities in protected areas that comprise Liberia's Protected Area Network :: Provision of advice to the Government through monthly meetings within the joint Government of Liberia-United Nations Rubber Plantations Task Force on the implementation of reforms in the rubber market 2.2 Improved humanitarian conditions in Liberia 2.2.1 Increased access to basic health care (2007/08: 55 per cent; 2008/09: 62 per cent; 2009/10: 70 per cent, the target set by the Liberia poverty reduction strategy for December 2010) 2.2.2 Increased access to safe drinking water (2007/08: 38 per cent; 2008/09: 44 per cent; 2009/10: 47 per cent -- the target set by the Liberia poverty reduction strategy is 50 per cent by 2011) 2.2.3 Increase in the total number of trained staff on the National Disaster Relief Commission and the Liberian Refugee Repatriation and Resettlement Commission deployed to manage and respond to humanitarian emergencies (2007/08: 91; 2008/09: 20; 2009/2010: 25) :: Convening and chairing inter-agency humanitarian meetings twice a year to enhance coordination among actors, for example between the members of the Liberia Inter-Agency Standing Committee (comprising UNMIL, United Nations specialized agencies, donors and the Management Steering Group of International Non-governmental Organizations) to discuss the various issues related to early warning preparedness mechanisms as they relate to humanitarian conditions in Liberia, including sectoral responses to health, water and sanitation, food security and nutrition, among others :: Preparation and updating on an as needed basis of national humanitarian contingency plans in collaboration with local authorities, United Nations agencies and NGOs :: Convening and chairing of monthly Humanitarian Action Committee meetings on issues across all humanitarian sectors to ensure that common United Nations plans and strategies adequately incorporate humanitarian perspectives :: Planning and implementation of 2 training programmes on humanitarian issues, including coordination, and contingency planning for 15 participants per training programme from the Government, NGOs and United Nations agencies :: Planning and implementation of a public information campaign in support of the improvement of humanitarian conditions in Liberia, including through publication of 4 issues of UNMIL Focus magazine, regular press briefings and press releases, 3 daily UNMIL Radio reports and 13 daily news bulletins, as well as 6 separate weekly current affairs and talk programmes 2.3 Progress in the rehabilitation and reintegration of war-affected populations in host communities 2.3.1 Increase in the number of war-affected community members participating in labour-intensive employment projects (2007/08: 21,000; 2008/09: 30,000; 2009/10: 35,000 2.3.2 Increase in the number of war-affected young people participating in community-based recovery programmes (2007/08: 0; 2008/09: 500; 2009/10: 1,100) :: Monitoring, through quarterly assessments, field visits, bimonthly meetings and information exchanges with local authorities, of remaining ex-combatant groups posing a threat to the consolidation of the peace process, and through biweekly meetings with Government authorities in monitoring and designing policies and mobilizing resources to address such residual reintegration challenges :: Provision of advice through biweekly meetings and monthly joint monitoring visits to Government authorities in completing activities related to the final phase of the disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration programme, and production of a joint evaluation report, with UNDP, of the programme :: Provision of advice to the Government through monthly meetings with the National Employment Unit, the Ministry of Labour and the private sector, and biweekly meetings with the Ministry of Public Works, on the creation of short-term employment through labour-intensive infrastructure rehabilitation as part of the national employment strategy, the Liberian Youth Employment and Empowerment Programme, and the two-year labour-intensive road maintenance programme :: Conduct of a joint monitoring visit with the military (Joint Mission Analysis Centre), UNDP and UNOCI to address cross-border reintegration issues :: Implementation of a nationwide publicity campaign, including 6 daily news bulletins, 3 weekly issues of Dateline Liberia and 5 weekly Coffee Break programmes, press briefings, press releases and publication in quarterly issues of UNMIL Focus and on the website, of stories related to successful reintegration and rehabilitation projects undertaken by UNMIL and the United Nations country team Donors will provide resources to support initiatives for the consolidation of national authority, humanitarian and recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration projects Table 3 Human resources: component 2, peace consolidation Civilian staff P-1 National staffa Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Recovery and Governance) and Humanitarian Coordinator Political Planning and Policy Section Recovery, Rehabilitation and Reintegration Section Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office Approved temporary positionsb 2008/09 Proposed temporary positions 2009/10 Subtotal, Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office Civil Affairs Section Gender Adviser Unitc HIV/AIDS Adviser Unitc c Reflects the realignment, compared with the 2008/09 period, of the Gender Adviser Unit from the rule of law component and the HIV/AIDS Adviser Unit from the support component. International staff: net decrease of 3 posts (abolishment of 1 D-2, 2 P-4 and 1 P-3 posts offset by the establishment of 1 P-2 post; conversion to the Field Service category of 9 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: decrease of 9 posts (6 National Officer and 3 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 7 positions (abolishment) International staff: decrease of 1 post (redeployment of 1 P-3 post to the Engineering Section; conversion to the Field Service category of 3 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: decrease of 3 posts (redeployment of 2 National Officer and 1 national General Service posts to the Engineering Section) 49. The Government of Liberia has been assuming increasing responsibility for the environment and management of natural resources. Consequentially, the advisory role of the Environment and Natural Resources Unit has declined. At the same time, the progress in the drawdown of UNMIL in Liberia has placed the emphasis and focus on the social and environmental responsibility of the Mission with the need to deal with waste and the rehabilitation of sites, such as troop barracks and sanitation facilities. Accordingly, and with a view to guiding the environmental impact assessments to be conducted by the Integrated Support Services (Engineering Section) of the support framework component and the necessary cleanup as UNMIL downsizes and prepares for eventual liquidation, an adjustment to the staffing establishment of the immediate office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General is proposed. With the exception of the Environmental Adviser (P4), who would continue to provide advice to and liaise with the United Nations country team and the Government of Liberia, it is proposed to redeploy the staffing of the Environment and Natural Resources Unit (1 P-3, 2 National Officer and 1 national General Service posts) to the Engineering Section, Integrated Support Services, of the Division of Mission Support. Consequently, the Environment and Natural Resources Unit would be disbanded. International staff: net increase of 2 posts (establishment of 1 P-5, 1 P-3 and 1 P-2 posts, offset by the abolishment of 1 P-4 post; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts) 50. A review of the functions of the Political Planning and Policy Section has determined the need for an increased focus on support to Government-led recovery and establishment of functional, decentralized governance throughout Liberia. Recognizing that the functions of the Section are closely interlinked with the planned activities of the Civil Affairs Section and, in the context of rationalizing functions and processes in the peace consolidation framework component, it is proposed to adjust the staffing establishment of the Section. The proposal involves the establishment of three Political Affairs Officer posts at the P-5, P-3 and P2 levels and the abolishment of a P-4 post. 51. The incumbent of the Senior Political Affairs Officer post (P-5), in addition to supervisory functions, would provide advice and support to the Legislature including members of both the House of Representatives and the Senate. The incumbent of the Political Affairs Officer post (P-3) would cover four counties in sector 2 with respect to gathering information and strengthening political institutions in the counties and would support governance reforms at the grass-roots level. At the same time, it is proposed that a Political Affairs Officer post at the P-4 level be abolished given the realignment of functions within the Section. The incumbent of the Associate Political Affairs Officer post (P-2) would be responsible for contributing to the analysis of the political and governance reform of the Government of Liberia, including to the facilitation of political and ethnic reconciliation. He or she would provide support to the Governance Reform Commission, the National Elections Commission and the working group on reconciliation at the office of the Minister for Information. International staff: decrease of 2 posts (abolishment of 1 D-2 and 1 P-4 posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: decrease of 6 posts (3 National Officer and 3 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 3 positions (abolishment) 52. The current phase of the reintegration effort in Liberia, which will end in April 2009, will have completed the training of most of the 101,000 registered excombatants, and the National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Rehabilitation would be closed. The employment programme, an integral component of the reintegration and recovery effort in Liberia, is now entering a transition phase to a two-year programme supported by the Government of Liberia, UNDP and the United Nations Office for Project Services. On the basis of a review of the status of the residual ex-combatants' chains of command in the country, a system is being set up with the Government for future monitoring. Furthermore, the Government would also have assumed more responsibility owing to progressive support from United Nations agencies. Agriculture, food security, land allocation and employment efforts would be led directly by Government ministries with support from the Section and UNDP. As the Government of Liberia and United Nations agencies assume responsibilities for recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration, the activities of the Section will decline significantly. 53. During the drawdown phase of the Mission, the Recovery, Rehabilitation and Reintegration Section would ensure the completion of support to national processes and finalize policies. Pursuant to a review of the functional requirements of the Section taking into account progress made thus far, a downward adjustment to the staffing establishment is proposed. The adjustment would involve the abolishment of 11 posts and positions (1 D-2, 1 P-4, 3 National Officer and 3 national General Service posts, and 3 United Nations Volunteer positions). The proposed reductions stem from a decrease in the number of field offices and a refocus of project sustainability involving the transfer of responsibility for some activities to national NGOs, the private sector and United Nations agencies, including UNDP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. International staff: decrease of 3 posts (abolishment of 1 P-4 and 1 P-3 posts and redeployment to the Civil Affairs Section of 1 P-5 post) National staff: decrease of 4 posts (abolishment of 1 National Officer post and redeployment to the Civil Affairs Section of 1 National Officer and 2 national General Service posts) 54. With the assumption by the United Nations country team of humanitarian coordination support functions and related activities, the functions of the Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office would be realigned to focus on coordination with partners, including the United Nations, NGOs and donors. The aim would be to facilitate the necessary resource mobilization, contingency planning and emergency coordination, especially at the county and district levels. The Mission would also be involved in supporting the development of national capacity-building for contingency planning and emergency coordination as well as providing continued support and training to local authorities in disaster management. In view of the streamlining and integration of processes within the Mission, it is proposed that the Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office be phased out, with the residual functions being integrated within the Civil Affairs Section. This is particularly important in view of the interlocking nature of the planned activities/functions of the latter. Therefore, it is proposed that the staffing establishment of the Office be adjusted to reflect the abolishment of one P-4 and one P-3 posts, one National Officer post funded from general temporary assistance as well as one United Nations Volunteer position, and the redeployment to the Civil Affairs Section of one P-5, one National Officer and 2 national General Service posts. Because of the proposed realignment with the Civil Affairs Section, the Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office would be abolished. International staff: increase of 1 post (redeployment of 1 P-5 post; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts National staff: increase of 3 posts (redeployment of 1 National Officer and 2 national General Service posts) 55. Certain mandated activities in support of key line ministries, Government agencies and commissions at the headquarters level have been completed. Also, the involvement of UNDP in Government and institutional reform and the continued deployment of Government officials across Liberia have been increased. It is therefore proposed to adjust the staffing establishment of the Section through the abolishment of three United Nations Volunteer positions. At the same time, and given the streamlining and integration of residual humanitarian and related coordination functions into the work of the Section, it is further proposed to adjust the staffing establishment through the redeployment into the Section of one P-5, one National Officer and two national General Service posts from the disbanded Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office. HIV/AIDS Adviser Unit International staff: reclassification of the P-5 post to the P-4 level National staff: increase of 1 post (establishment of 1 national General Service post) 56. The introduction of systems, the establishment of voluntary counselling and confidential testing facilities, field support and all related training of staff as well as the induction briefings have been completed. A fully functioning HIV/AIDS support team is now in place. The focus of the Unit has shifted to one of delivery, with emphasis on advocacy with the United Nations country team. Pursuant to a review of the staffing establishment and functions of the Unit, it has been determined that the level of the Chief of the Unit (P-5) is not consonant with the functions to be performed and should be reclassified downward to the P-4 level. Accordingly, an adjustment to the staffing establishment is proposed through the downward reclassification to the P-4 level of the P-5 post. 57. The establishment of a Training Assistant post (national General Service) is proposed. The incumbent would be responsible for the HIV/AIDS sensitization programme. This includes peer education for all Mission personnel. In addition, the incumbent would also assist in the operation and maintenance of the voluntary counselling and confidential testing facilities. Component 3: rule of law 58. Support for the strengthening of rule of law is a key priority for the Mission. UNMIL will focus on improving critical rule of law institutions, including by providing training in key areas of the justice sector. Furthermore, it will continue to support the Government in the development of its prison system, including the provision of significant assistance for the training of correctional staff and infrastructure development in collaboration with the World Food Programme (WFP), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the International Committee of the Red Cross and donor countries. Strengthening the capacities of rule of law institutions and mechanisms and improving delivery and access to justice will also continue to be priorities during the 2009/10 period. 59. As part of its overall mandate to mainstream gender into all its activities and to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, the Mission will also continue to support the Government in the development and implementation of gender accountability systems and mechanisms, including the establishment of a legal framework guaranteeing the protection and promotion of human rights for women and girls. 60. In addition to the above, the Mission will give special importance to reporting on and monitoring the state of human rights compliance and supporting the truth and reconciliation process, including its outreach campaigns and efforts to include the voices of women in those processes. 61. The component incorporates the activities of the Corrections and Prison Advisory Service, the Legal and Judicial System Support Division, and the Human Rights and Protection Section. 62. The Mission will continue to proactively engage in and foster a culture of best practices in all areas relating to the rule of law. 3.1 Progress towards the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and national reconciliation in Liberia 3.1.1 Implementation of the recommendations made by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to the Government in its final report, monitored and promoted by the Independent National Commission on Human Rights and civil society organizations 3.1.2 Finalization and implementation of a National Human Rights Action Plan by the Government in collaboration with civil society 3.1.3 A total of 35 human rights instructors of the Liberian National Police and 25 human rights instructors of the Armed Forces of Liberia to conduct training sessions on human rights, 20 for personnel of the Liberian National Police and 10 for personnel of the Armed Forces of Liberia on relevant and applicable human rights standards 3.1.4 Civil society organizations monitor and issue reports to the general public with recommendations on the human rights situation in Liberia 3.1.5 A total of 20 women's NGOs working on the protection and promotion of the rights of women and girls' rights report to the Division for the Advancement of Women of the United Nations Secretariat implementation of international conventions and treaties on human rights, in particular the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women :: Provision of advice and technical assistance, through coaching, 4 capacity development training sessions and regular monthly meetings with Commissioners and staff of the Commission, on the implementation of the mandate of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights :: Provision of advice, monitoring and reporting, through monthly meetings with the Government, the Independent National Commission on Human Rights and civil society organizations, on the implementation of the recommendations made by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in its final report :: Provision of advice and technical assistance, through monthly meetings with relevant Ministries of the Government and civil society groups, on finalizing and implementing the National Human Rights Action Plan :: Organization of 30 training sessions (2 in each county) and quarterly meetings with civil society groups on human rights issues, including the mandate of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights :: Building and enhancing the capacity of a monitoring and protection network with civil society groups in order to establish more sustainable human rights promotion and protection activities nationwide :: Organization and airing of monthly public awareness radio shows in all 15 counties on the mandate and functions of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights :: Provision of technical advice through the monitoring of 30 human rights training sessions to 30 personnel of the Liberian National Police and the Liberian Armed Forces (20 police and 10 military officers) by human rights instructors :: Provision of advice and technical assistance through monthly meetings with the Ministry of Justice and the Office of the Chief Justice on enhancement of adherence to the implementation of rule of law and the application of international human rights law, as well as addressing issues such as harmful traditional practices :: Publication of 2 public reports with recommendations on the human rights situation in Liberia and 3 thematic reports with recommendations and follow-up on their implementation with the Government of Liberia :: Organization of quarterly training programmes for county and district officials in each county on the implementation of the poverty reduction strategy through a human rights-based approach, to which a National Human Rights Action Plan is to be linked :: Organization of quarterly training programmes for members of parliament on the integration of ratified international human rights instruments into domestic legislation and its implementation :: Organization of 2 two-day workshops and follow-up monthly meetings on juvenile justice issues, including rebuilding the juvenile justice system in Liberia, with the Ministry of Justice, the Office of the Chief Justice and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and on addressing concerns relating to orphanages and in-country adoptions with representatives of the Task Force on Orphanages and the Union of Liberian Orphanages :: Organization and conduct of press briefings, including dissemination of press releases, in connection with the release of the annual UNMIL human rights report and the report of the Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in Liberia :: Organization of 4 two-day workshops for former combatants, local authorities and community leaders, and young men and women to promote human rights and women's rights issues as part of the combined effort to stop gender-based and other forms of violence :: Implementation of a public information campaign on fundamental human rights, the proceedings of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and sexual and gender-based violence, including rape, through 2 weekly 45-minute UNMIL Radio programmes, 9 daily news bulletins, 3 of which are in local languages, 3 weekly programmes of Dateline Liberia, 5 weekly Coffee Break programmes, public service radio announcements and public service video announcements and 14 groups of traditional communicators on sexual exploitation and abuse, rape and HIV/AIDS, and the distribution of 200,000 flyers, 40,000 posters and 10,000 T-shirts :: Provision of advice through monthly meetings with the Government and civil society organizations on planning and implementation of one public outreach campaign in support of the collective United Nations response to rape initiative, and production of public service radio and video announcements :: Organization and conduct of a three-day training programme for 20 women's NGOs on reporting on implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and other international convention and treaties 3.2 Strengthening of the legal, judicial and correctional systems in Liberia 3.2.1 The Law Reform Commission reviews major statutes that are inconsistent with the Constitution and international norms and makes related recommendations (2009/10: 5) 3.2.2 Increase in the number of counties with assigned public defence counsel (2007/08: 7; 2008/09: 11; 2009/2010: 15) 3.2.3 Increase in the number of cases determined by the circuit courts (2007/08: 135; 2008/09: 200; 2009/10: 300) 3.2.4 Implementation by the Ministry of Justice of the approved penal reform/strategic plan 3.2.5 Implementation by the Government of Liberia of an action plan for the reform of laws that are gender insensitive :: Provision of advice, both in writing and through monthly meetings, with the Law Reform Commission and the Legislature on legislative review, legal research, legislative drafting and law reform, including the review of the Hinterland Regulations :: Provision of technical assistance, by co-location and written advice and through monthly meetings, with the Legislature on the preparation of legislation, legal research and legislative drafting :: Provision of technical assistance, through co-location and written advice and through weekly meetings with the Ministry of Justice, on prosecutions and case reviews, including rape cases, as well as recordkeeping and case management, codification, litigation, legal advisory services, contracts and agreements, and immigration :: Provision of technical assistance to the Judiciary, through co-location and written advice and through meetings on a weekly basis, on court administration, case management, recordkeeping, ethics and discipline, advocacy, training and judicial reform, including reform of procedures to expedite the trial process :: Provision of technical assistance and advice on access to justice by the general public through weekly radio programmes and occasional meetings with the Ministry of Justice and civil society :: Provision of advice, both in writing and through bimonthly meetings of the Governance and Rule of Law Pillar (and monthly meetings with the Government institutions and Ministries that fall under the Pillar), monthly meetings with the Governance Reform Commission, weekly meetings of the Ministry of Justice and the Judiciary, monthly meetings with the Louis Arthur Grimes School of Law and the Liberia National Bar Association, on the coordination and development of justice sector reforms, including the development of paralegal programmes in collaboration with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Paralegal Advisory Services and Penal Reform International :: Provision of legal and technical assistance for the design and implementation of training programmes for judicial officers to the Judicial Training Institute and the Ministry of Justice in training and conducting bimonthly workshops to build the capacity of judges, magistrates, sheriffs, bailiffs, court clerks, public defenders, prosecutors and instructors at the Liberian National Police Training Academy :: Ongoing collaboration with the United States Institute of Peace and the Carter Center in research on informal justice mechanisms, including traditional justice practices and alternative dispute resolution :: Collaboration with the United States Institute of Peace and the Carter Center to conduct 3 consultative workshops on informal justice mechanisms, including traditional justice and alternative dispute resolution :: Monitoring of legal and judicial institutions, through weekly visits to rule of law institutions, conducting analyses of the justice system, identifying legal and judicial issues for redress and preparing regular reports to be shared with the Government, on a daily, weekly and monthly basis :: Organization and implementation of an induction training programme for 210 new corrections officer recruits, including training in first aid, fire safety, gender and HIV :: Organization and implementation of basic and advanced train-the-trainers courses for 12 corrections officers on training skills and corrections subjects. The basic train-the-trainers course is on training skills, including: systematic approach to training, active learning techniques, lesson planning and presentation skills. The advanced train-the-trainers programme includes group dynamics in training, problem solving, training methods and observation skills :: Organization and implementation of a management training course for 30 corrections staff :: Provision of assistance to the Government through co-location of 23 mentors at 16 prisons to develop the operation of facilities, to mentor managers and to provide on-the-job training to trainee officers :: Monitoring of 16 prisons through monthly visits in order to ensure separation of inmates, to review staff performance and workbooks, to check on logbooks and food supplies and to confirm that the implementation of refurbishment projects are on schedule :: Provision of advice through weekly meetings with the Government, NGOs, donors and human rights specialists on correctional system reform :: Provision of support through the deployment of 3 mentors with expertise in agriculture to enhance the existing agricultural component of the 16 prisons :: Provision of 5 one-day workshops to the four Legislative committees, the Women's Legislative Caucus, the Governance Reform Commission, the Independent National Human Rights Commission and NGOs on the action plan for the reform of gender-insensitive laws by the Government of Liberia :: 30 quick-impact projects in the areas of rehabilitation of police stations, correctional facilities, magistrate courts, immigration offices and border posts to strengthen the rule of law infrastructure :: 10 quick-impact projects in the areas of rehabilitation of town halls, community resource centres for women and youth groups and fire services buildings to support the extension of State authority Donors will provide funds to support initiatives in strengthening the rule of law sector Table 4 Human resources: component 3, rule of law Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Operations and Rule of Law) Corrections and Prison Advisory Service Legal and Judicial System Support Division Human Rights and Protection Section National staff: increase of 3 posts (establishment of 1 National Officer and 2 national General Service posts) Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Operations and Rule of Law) International staff: net increase of 1 post (establishment of 2 P-4 posts offset by the abolishment of 1 P-3 post; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts) 63. In the current phase of drawdown, the rule of law sector has been declared a priority, as the sector has yet to show sufficient progress. It is the area of greatest concern for ensuring peace and stability in Liberia. A number of issues need to be addressed to strengthen the sector. They include the weak operational capacity of the rule of law institutions, the lack of adequate funding, the shortage of qualified judicial officials, the lack of infrastructure, including courts and prisons, the archaic rules of procedure, the inadequate numbers of qualified judicial and legal officers, poor management of cases and the absence of a coherent strategic plan agreed to by all stakeholders. 64. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission will soon complete its report, and the Independent National Human Rights Commission is to be set up thereafter to implement the recommendations made. The Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Operations and Rule of Law) will play a critical role in providing support and technical advice to fulfil the mandate of the Independent Human Rights Commission. The rule of law component in the Mission will play a mentoring and facilitative role in assisting the Liberian rule of law sector to eradicate human rights violations caused by harmful traditional practices. 65. With a view to strengthening the coordination, compilation, review and monitoring functions and given the need to respond and function in a speedy and effective manner in order to meet the above priorities, it is proposed to strengthen the staffing establishment of the Office. More specifically, the establishment of two posts of Special Assistant and Human Rights Adviser to the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Rule of Law) (2 P-4) and one national General Service post would augment the staffing of the office. 66. The incumbent of the Special Assistant post would support the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Rule of Law) in the provision of policy and strategic-level advice to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Mission's mandate and would lead high-level negotiations with officials of the Government and leaders of political parties and civil society. The responsibilities of the post require knowledge, experience, analytical ability and the capacity to take initiative and function coherently and responsibly, even during the absence of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General. 67. The Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Operations and Rule of Law) has assumed a proactive role on issues of juvenile justice and sexual and gender-based violence, which requires the compilation and analysis of information from the human rights officers in the counties. In this respect, the incumbent of the proposed post of Human Rights Adviser would be responsible for the consolidation and coordination of the information and would prepare background information and concept notes on human rights issues for the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The incumbent would also prepare responses and comprehensive analytical reports on human rights issues for consideration by the rule of law pillar and would liaise with concerned government agencies, NGOs and civil society organizations on human rights issues. 68. With a view to contributing to national capacity for the sustainability of rule of law, while at the same time strengthening the Office, the establishment of a national General Service post is proposed. The incumbent would provide administrative and substantive support to the Office. National staff: increase of 2 posts (1 National Officer and 1 national General Service) 69. The Corrections and Prison Advisory Service would continue to ensure continuity of national competency-based training programmes in the areas of prison and prisoner management. This is in line with the Mission's objective of contributing to national capacity-building for the sustainability of the training section within the Ministry of Justice and the capacity-building of local corrections staff. Accordingly, and with a view to strengthening the sector and augmenting the increased requirements for administrative support, it is proposed to establish one National Officer and one national General Service post in the Service. The incumbent of the National Officer post would be co-located with the Ministry of Justice and focus primarily on capacity-building of local corrections personnel, including through training. The incumbent of the national General Service staff post would provide administrative support to the entire Office. International staff: decrease of 1 post (abolishment of 1 P-4 post) 70. With the work in the area of the juvenile justice sector being assumed by UNICEF, the abolishment of the post of Child Protection Adviser (P-4) is proposed. Component 4: support 71. The Mission's support component will continue to provide administrative, logistical and security services in support of the offices and their mandated activities under the security sector, peace consolidation and rule of law components. In view of the progress made by the Mission as a whole, the emphasis in the 2009/10 period would be to support the military downsizing with associated repatriation, and eventual preparation for liquidation. The focus, in particular, would be on the implementation of phase 2 of the consolidation, drawdown and withdrawal plan and on providing support to the substantive sections in programmes to consolidate Government authority. 72. During the period, the support component would undertake the relocation of Mission personnel from Government buildings to the extent that this is operationally feasible, allowing for the return of some Government buildings to the national and local authorities. The consolidation of the military sector headquarters, with the subsequent relocation of troops within the Mission and the provision of support to the guard contingent at the Special Court for Sierra Leone through both direct support and outsourced services, will continue. The overall level of support provided is therefore not expected to change. In fact, the increased deployment of the Liberian National Police, to be co-located with United Nations police personnel, and the enhanced presence of United Nations civilian substantive staff in the counties is expected to require an increased level of support during the 2009/10 period. 73. In the area of infrastructure support in Liberia, more specifically the roads, utilities and communications networks in the counties, improvements are expected to continue in the 2009/10 period. Given the improved conditions of the main and secondary routes in the country under the joint maintenance of UNMIL and UNDP with World Bank funding, a reduction in the Mission's fleet of rotary-wing aircraft is envisaged. In preparation for the eventual withdrawal and liquidation of the Mission, UNMIL is also planning an environmental cleanup programme. 74. In addition to the above, the Mission would strive to ensure a reduction in the number of major vehicle accidents and an increase in vehicle availability rate, including material-handling equipment. In the area of national staff capacity-building, bearing in mind the preparations for eventual withdrawal, 200 national staff would be assessed and certified in 20 areas of vocational skills. Certification of 90 staff in professional administration would also occur. Linkages would be established with Government and industry employers in order to develop targeted training programmes that would help prepare national staff for employment transition. 75. In terms of efficiency measures, the Mission intends to continue to achieve economies of scale in respect of requirements for travel on emplacement, rotation and repatriation of military and police personnel and the movement of cargo within the Mission area. In this regard, support would also be provided to other missions in the West African region using UNMIL air assets. The following cost efficiencies would be achieved: $5.6 million in the missions' air operations; $1 million in diesel fuel, liquefied petroleum gas and kerosene; and $1 million in respect of communications spare parts and supplies through obsolescence management, enhanced preventive maintenance and standardization of the information and communications technology infrastructure. 4.1 Increased efficiency and effectiveness of logistical support to the Mission 4.1.1 Reduction in the number of major vehicle accidents (accidents with a repair cost of over $500) (2007/08: 66; 2008/09: 65; 2009/10: 55) 4.1.2 Increase in the vehicle availability rate (2007/08: 90 per cent; 2008/09: 92 per cent; 2009/10: 93 per cent) 4.1.3 Increased availability rate of material-handling equipment (2007/08: N/A; 2008/09: 75 per cent; 2009/10: 76 per cent) 4.1.4 Reduction in the average number of days taken to write off assets (2007/08: 115; 2008/09: 80; 2009/10: 78) 4.1.5 Increase in the percentage of calls to the Communications and Information Technology Section Service Desk that are resolved within 1 hour from receipt of the call (2007/08: 63 per cent; 2008/09: 85 per cent; 2009/10: 90 per cent) Service improvements :: Planning, implementation and monitoring of environmentally friendly construction and waste disposal functions and taking corrective action, where and when necessary, in line with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Environmental Policy and Guidelines :: Implementation of a booking system to minimize down time for routine vehicle maintenance and reduction of workshop backlogs without compromising roadworthiness of vehicles :: Enhancement of the safe driving training and testing programme for all types of light and heavy vehicles (including material-handling equipment) to improve skills across the Mission, thereby enhancing the safety and security of staff and assets :: Conduct of Mission-wide assessments of contingent-owned equipment capabilities and performance, within the framework of the UNMIL contingent-owned equipment and memorandums of understanding Management Review Board, in terms of personnel, major equipment and self-sustainment requirements in order to optimize utilization of contingent-owned equipment resources during the drawdown and to ensure compliance by the contingents with memorandums of understanding and, where appropriate, recommend changes to memorandums of understanding with troop- and police-contributing countries to United Nations Headquarters :: Implementation of a container tracking system and expediting procedures to minimize turnaround time between the Monrovia Port and the UNMIL logistics base Military, police and civilian personnel :: Emplacement, rotation and repatriation of an average of 126 military observers, 9,442 military contingent personnel, 845 formed police personnel and 447 United Nations police officers :: Verification, monitoring and inspection of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment for the military and formed police personnel :: Supply of rations for the total number of military contingent and formed police personnel on the ground (estimated average number, based on authorized strength and delayed deployment factors -- except for the formed police unit): 9,339 military contingents and 845 formed police personnel :: Storage and supply of a 14-day reserve of combat rations and bottled water for an average strength of 126 military observers, 9,442 military contingent personnel (including 103 staff officers), 845 formed police, 447 United Nations police officers and 689 civilian personnel (464 international staff and 225 United Nations Volunteers) :: Provision of security in support of the Special Court for Sierra Leone with an average strength of 245 military guard force personnel :: Administration of 1,665 civilian staff, comprising an average of 464 international staff and 976 national staff, including 42 National Officers, and 225 United Nations Volunteers :: Implementation of a national staff capacity-building project with 200 staff assessed and certified in 10 areas of vocational skills and 90 administrative staff certified in professional administration :: Planning and implementation of occupational health and safety training for 20 personnel Facilities and infrastructure :: Maintenance and repair of 86 military/formed police unit sites, 6 United Nations police premises and 18 civilian staff premises, for a total of 110 UNMIL locations :: Completion of construction of 2 formed police unit sites, based on drawdown plans :: Provision of sanitation services, including sewage and garbage collection and disposal, at all 110 UNMIL locations in Liberia :: Accelerate the delivery of goods to the end-user and improve security for the items through the implementation of enhanced procedures related to receiving and inspections :: Operation and maintenance of 35 United Nations-owned water purification plants serving 38 UNMIL locations not connected to the public water reticulation and not supported by contingent-owned water purification plants :: Drilling of 2 boreholes to provide water to troops :: Operation, repair and maintenance of 550 United Nations-owned generators, in stock or in use, at all UNMIL locations in Liberia not connected to the public electrical reticulation and not supported by contingent-owned generators :: Supply of about 14.63 million litres of petrol, oil and lubricants for an average of 430 United Nations-owned and 349 contingent-owned generators :: Maintenance and renovation of about 660 km of roads (main and secondary supply roads) :: Maintenance of 7 airfields, 8 terminal facilities and 35 helicopter landing sites :: Preparation of an environmental impact assessment report on impacts caused by the Mission and related remedial actions, in consultation with the Government of Liberia :: Provision of essential supplies and services to 447 United Nations police officers, 126 military observers, 103 staff officers, 1,695 civilian staff (an average of 30 corrections officers, 464 international staff, 976 national staff, including 42 National Officers, and 225 United Nations Volunteers) :: Provision of essential services (catering, garbage collection, maintenance, customs clearances and information technology support, among others), utilities and supplies in support of an average strength of 245 Mongolian Guard Force personnel at the Special Court for Sierra Leone Ground transportation :: Operation and maintenance of a fleet of 1,317 United Nations-owned vehicles, including armoured vehicles, engineering vehicles, trailers and material-handling equipment, at 10 workshops in 8 locations (Monrovia, Buchanan, Zwedru, Harper, Tubmanburg, Voinjama, Gbarnga and Greenville) :: Supply of 10.9 million litres of petrol, oil and lubricants for ground transportation for an average of 1,143 United Nations-owned and 1,779 contingent-owned vehicles (excluding vehicles that do not require fuel, such as trailers and attachments) :: Operation of daily shuttle services for 1,000 passengers per day, five days a week, and as required during weekends, for United Nations civilian and police personnel, military observers and staff officers from their accommodation to Mission facilities/premises Air transportation :: Operation of 3 fixed-wing and 19 rotary-wing aircraft, including 14 military aircraft :: 10,348 flying hours (2,312 for 3 fixed-wing and 8,036 for 19 rotary-wing aircraft), including domestic and regional shuttle flights for passengers and cargo, troop rotations, ad hoc flights, casualty and medical evaluation flights, search and rescue flights, border patrols, and other military flights :: Supply of 11.7 million litres of aviation fuel for air operations Naval transportation :: Operation of 1 coastal freighter :: Supply of 0.8 million litres of diesel for naval transportation Communications :: Operation and maintenance of a satellite network consisting of 1 Earth station hub to provide voice, fax, video and data communications :: Operation and maintenance of 19 VSAT systems and 33 telephone exchanges :: Operation and maintenance of a terrestrial microwave network consisting of 35 microwave links and 75 narrowband digital radio systems to provide voice, fax, video and data communications to 80 UNMIL locations :: Operation and maintenance of 63 VHF/UHF repeaters, 4,893 radios, 101 satellite phones and 910 mobile phones to provide mobile voice services Information technology :: Operations and maintenance of the information technology infrastructure comprising approximately 76 routers, 100 servers, 2,164 desktop computers, 522 laptop computers, 497 printers and 115 digital senders at 80 UNMIL locations :: Operation of a service desk to support 4,000 UNMIL users, integrating the functions of call centre and switchboard, monitoring of information technology infrastructures and services, resolving first-line information technology problems remotely and within average talk time, collecting and reporting statistics on availability and performance of information technology services Medical :: Operation and maintenance of 8 United Nations level-I clinics, 3 contingent-owned level-II hospitals, 1 contingent-owned level-III hospital and 25 contingent-owned emergency and first aid stations for all Mission personnel, staff of other United Nations agencies and the local civilian population in emergency cases :: Maintenance of Mission-wide land and air evacuation arrangements for all United Nations personnel, including to level-IV hospitals in Ghana and South Africa :: Operation and maintenance of voluntary confidential HIV counselling and testing facilities for all Mission personnel Security :: Provision of security services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to 34 United Nations installations :: Provision of 24 hour close protection to senior Mission staff and visiting high-level officials :: Semi-annual updated security plan and associated security risk assessments :: Implementation of the Mission security plan, including the integrated security management system :: Update of country-specific minimum operational security standards/minimum operational residential security standards survey biannually :: Conduct of fire and safety inspections, assessments and drills at United Nations facilities biannually :: Initiation and management of security investigations on incidents/accidents affecting the security of UNMIL personnel and property as they are reported Status-of-forces agreement will be complied with. Vendors/contractors/suppliers will be able to deliver goods and services as contracted Human resources: component 4, support Security Servicea Conduct and Discipline Team Proposed temporary positionsb 2009/10 Subtotal, Conduct and Discipline Team Division of Mission Support Office of the Director of Mission Support Administrative Services Integrated Support Services Subtotal, Division of Mission Support Security Section Total, civilian staff a Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250, reflects the conversion of approved General Service and Security Service posts to the Field Service category without change in functions. International staff: net decrease of 2 posts (abolishment of 2 P-4, 5 P-2 and 3 General Service (Other level) posts, offset by the establishment of 5 P-3 and 3 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 25 General Service (Other level) and 18 Security Service posts) National staff: net decrease of 3 posts (abolishment of 5 national General Service posts offset by the establishment of 2 National Officer posts) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 6 positions (abolishment) International staff: decrease of 3 posts (reclassification of 3 P-2 posts to the P-3 level, abolishment of 3 Field Service category posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 1 General Service (Other level) and 18 Security Service posts) National staff: increase of 7 posts (establishment of 7 national General Service posts) 76. Given that the Mission is in a drawdown phase leading to eventual liquidation, a review of the composition and functions of the Security Section was conducted with a view to ensuring the adequacy of the safety and security of all United Nations personnel and eligible dependants and the various assets, premises and property of the United Nations. The outcome of the review indicated that the posts of three Supervisors (P-2) of the Security Information Coordination Unit, the Personal Protection Unit and the Guard Force Unit should be reclassified to the P-3 level given the nature of the work, the high visibility in the Mission area and increased responsibilities. Accordingly, it is proposed that the three supervisory posts (P-2) be reclassified to the P-3 level to correct the imbalance of increased functions versus grade. 77. The incumbent of the Supervisor post (P-3) of the Security Information Coordination Unit, in addition to the day-to-day supervision of the work of the Unit, is expected to interact with senior officials, both internal and external, to participate in analytical processes and to produce country security risk assessments. The incumbent would also develop and maintain a continuous liaison and exchange of security-related information with members of the country security management team, United Nations agencies country representatives and their security focal points, senior managers of the Mission, senior military and United Nations police officers. Also, the incumbent would maintain liaison on a regular basis with senior security officials from Liberian law enforcement agencies and the Ministry of National Security. 78. The incumbent of the Supervisor post (P-3) of the Personal Protection Unit, in addition to responsibility for command and control of personal protection personnel assigned to principals in the conduct of personal protective security operations, would maintain liaison with relevant civilian police, military personnel, law enforcement officials and others as necessary, while coordinating with other Mission security and support services. He or she would prepare regular operational reports with analyses and recommendations and conduct periodic reviews of emergency and medical evacuation plans for senior management personnel. 79. The incumbent of the Supervisor post (P-3) of the Guard Force Unit, in addition to his/her current responsibilities, would oversee the management of commercial guard service contracts, scheduling of guards, supervision of the operations of both the commercial guards and nationally recruited United Nations security staff. The incumbent would also undertake response management for incidents, prepare and update periodic threat and risk assessments for all locations and would serve as the focal point for implementing and monitoring critical security projects in the area of responsibility, including the security surveillance system. 80. The current strength of the national security staff of the Guard Force Unit also needs to be strengthened through the establishment of an additional seven guard posts (national General Service) for the provision of security services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The Unit is currently overstretched in terms of deployment of personnel to cover all the premises at Mission headquarters. Office of the Director Mission Support International staff: net increase of 7 posts (establishment of 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2 and 3 Field Service posts and the redeployment of 1 P-4, 1 P-3 posts, offset in part by the abolishment of 1 P-4 post; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: decrease of 3 posts (national General Service) United Nations Volunteers: net decrease of 3 positions (abolishment of 4 positions, offset by the redeployment of 1 position) Immediate Office of the Director of Mission Support International staff: increase of 5 posts (establishment of 1 P-4 and 1 P-2 posts, redeployment of 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 1 position (redeployment) 81. As indicated in paragraph 25 of the present report, the proposed realignments in the support component will achieve synergy and support the achievement of the Mission's mandate, facilitate the drawdown and prepare for eventual liquidation. 82. From an operational perspective, the Board of Inquiry Unit of the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services has been reporting directly to the Director of Mission Support in view of the sensitivities surrounding the cases. In this context, it is proposed to redeploy the staffing complement (1 P-4 and 1 P-3 posts and 1 United Nations Volunteer position) of the Board of Inquiry Unit and one Administrative Assistant post (Field Service) from the Aviation Safety Unit to the immediate Office of the Director of Mission Support from the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services. 83. There have been a number of incidents involving serious injury or death to personnel and serious property loss in the Mission. Owing to a lack of staffing capacity, the backlog of pending cases has been steadily increasing from 13 to the current caseload of 32. To address this backlog and to meet the capacity requirements of the Unit, the establishment of an additional post of Board of Inquiry Officer (P-2) is proposed. 84. It is also proposed to establish, within the Office of the Director of Mission Support, a Performance Management Officer post at the P-4 level. The incumbent of the post would be responsible for collecting, analysing and evaluating critical data and business processes as well as implementing continuous process improvements. It is expected that the implementation of process improvements would lead to the streamlining of operations and effectively achieve the Mission's objectives while fostering better customer services and improved accountability for the management of the Mission's resources. Regional offices International staff: net increase of 2 posts (establishment of 1 P-3 and 2 Field Service posts offset by the abolishment of 1 P-4 post) National staff: decrease of 3 posts (abolishment of 3 national General Service posts) 85. Because of the continuous efforts of the Mission to streamline reporting lines, improve business processes and foster increased accountability, the reporting line of the Regional Offices has been realigned from the functional section chiefs in Monrovia to the Regional Administrative Officers reporting directly to the Director of Mission Support. This internal adjustment is intended to hold all Regional Administrative Officers responsible and accountable for and improve the delivery of administrative and logistical support in the regions. 86. At the same time, as the Mission is in a drawdown phase leading to eventual liquidation, a review of the composition and functions of the Regional Offices was conducted with a view to ensuring the adequacy of support to the Security Sector, which is to be resized from four sectors to two, and other offices in all the counties. The outcome of the review was the necessity to adjust the staffing establishment of the Regional Offices to better accommodate the support needs of the field offices. The adjustments are detailed in the paragraphs below. 87. It is proposed to replace the P-4 post of Regional Administrative Officer through the proposed establishment of a post of Regional Coordinator at the P-3 level. The incumbent would play an essential role in coordinating all regional support activities, inclusive of support for extending Government authority to the counties; additional responsibilities to support the Guard Force in Freetown in view of the closure of the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) and the drawdown phase. The Regional Coordinator would ensure that the logistical and administrative support provided to the UNMIL military, police, and substantive components and other UNMIL partners by the Regional Administrative Officers is feasible and expeditiously provided and mitigates and minimizes bottlenecks in the provision of services to the regions. 88. In addition, it is proposed to augment the staffing establishment of the field offices in Sinoe and Grand Bassa counties through the establishment of two Regional Administrative Officer posts (Field Service category). The incumbents of the posts would ensure enhanced support to, in addition to the military and formed police personnel deployed in the two regions, the substantive offices providing economic and governance support in the regions. This is of particular importance given the security activities in the rubber plantations and the ensuing natural resource issues of economic relevance. 89. At the same time, it is also proposed to streamline the Regional Offices and their related functions, in view of the gradual drawdown of troops leading to eventual liquidation and the assumption by the Government of responsibilities in the regions. Accordingly, the composition of the field offices would be adjusted downwards through the abolishment of six positions and posts (3 United Nations Volunteer positions and three national General Service posts). Budget Section International staff: increase of 1 post (establishment of 1 Field Service post) 90. Since the 2003/04 period, the Budget Section has comprised six posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 Field Service, 2 United Nations Volunteers and 1 national General Service). Since then, there has been a manifold increase in the workload of the Section, with the additional workload being absorbed within the existing authorized resources of the Section. The drawdown of the Mission has resulted in increased activities of the substantive sections in the sectors. This has added to the need for the Budget Section to effectively track and monitor the implementation of planned outputs and related expenditures while carrying out the tasks of budgetary control and maintaining the appropriate budgetary discipline throughout the Mission. The Section is also entrusted with the verification of the collected data in relation to the portfolio of evidence and the implementation of results-based-budgeting frameworks of the Mission. In view of the increased workload and functions, it is proposed to augment the staffing establishment of the Section by the establishment of a post of Budget Officer (Field Service category) to assist the Section in carrying out its increased responsibilities. Aviation Safety Unit International staff: decrease of 1 post (redeployment of 1 Field Service post) United Nations Volunteers: decrease by 1 position (redeployment) 91. On the basis of a review of the functions and responsibilities of the Unit, and in line with the streamlining of functions and processes in the Mission's aviation sector (in particular the Aviation Section), an adjustment of the staffing establishment of the Unit is deemed necessary. Accordingly, it is proposed to redeploy a post of Administrative Assistant (Field Service) to the immediate Office of the Director of Mission Support to augment the Board of Inquiry Unit. It is also proposed to abolish a United Nations Volunteer position to delineate and minimize the overlap of flight following and related functions between the Aviation Safety Unit and the Aviation Section. International staff: net increase of 1 post (establishment of 1 P-3 and 12 Field Service posts, abolishment of 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2, 6 Field Service and 1 General Service (Other level) posts, and redeployment of 1 P-4 and 1 P-3 posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 11 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: net decrease of 11 posts (establishment of 3 national General Service posts, abolishment of 1 national General Service and redeployment of 13 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: net decrease of 7 positions (abolishment of 1 and redeployment of 6 positions) Office of the Chief of Administrative Services International staff: decrease of 2 posts (redeployment to the Office of the Director of Mission Support of 1 P-4 and 1 P-3 posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 1 position (redeployment) 92. Pursuant to the proposed redeployment of the Board of Inquiry Unit from the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services to the Office of the Director of Mission Support, as indicated in paragraph 82, the staffing establishment of the immediate office would be reduced by one P-4 and one P-3 posts and one United Nations Volunteer position. Human Resources Management Section International staff: increase of 22 posts (redeployment of 1 P-5, 3 P-4, 3 P-3 and 9 Field Service posts from the Integrated Mission Training Centre, ex-Personnel Section, General Services Section, and Staff Counselling Unit and the establishment of 1 P-3 and 5 Field Service posts) National staff: increase of 27 posts (redeployment of 3 National Officer and 24 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 13 positions (redeployment) 93. Following the review of the configuration of Administrative Services, adjustments are proposed to the organizational structure of the Service. The realignment takes into account best practices and efficient, client-oriented service. The role of the Human Resources Management Section has expanded to include all aspects of the Mission's human resources activities, the action plan as well as the implementation of a harmonized personnel structure. Consequently, the current Personnel Section, the Integrated Mission Training Centre, the Staff Counselling Unit and the Travel Unit of the General Services Section, as well as a new Check-in-Check-out Unit, would be integrated into a new Human Resources Management Section. The relevant staffing establishment of the respective offices would be redeployed in toto to the Section. Also proposed is the strengthening of the new Section with additional staffing of one P-3 and five Field Service posts as detailed in the paragraphs below. 94. The Personnel Section, renamed as the Human Resources Management Section, would be restructured to reflect the desired integrated service requirements. It would provide the enhanced functions demanded by the Mission at this point in its life cycle and would be structured into three main pillars. Pillar I would service the rule of law and security sector components. Pillar II would be responsible for the support component. Pillar III would assume all responsibilities for executive direction and management and the peace consolidation component as well as military and police personnel. As indicated, each pillar would focus on specific offices and manage the relevant staff in a "one-stop shop" with named officers for each staff member and comprising, dispersed among the pillars, experts in various functions with experience and skills to advise Human Resources Officers on various aspects of their work. The pillars would cater to specific categories/groups and be responsible for vacancy management, gender balance, workflows and turnover rates, appropriate representation of troop- and police-contributing country, monitoring compliance with General Assembly resolutions on human resources management and the management and maintenance of e-systems, such as Nucleus. In addition to the 26 posts and positions of the former Personnel Section (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 P-3, 4 Field Service, 1 National Officer and 12 national General Service posts as well as 5 United Nations Volunteer positions) the establishment of one post of Human Resources Assistant (Field Service) is proposed in order to provide balanced support to the three pillars. 95. The Integrated Mission Training Centre within the Human Resources Management Section has formulated the training strategy of the Mission to focus on capacity-building and the career development of national staff, given that the Mission is in its drawdown phase. As part of the integration, the entire staffing of 18 posts and positions (1 P-4, 2 Field Service, 2 National Officer and 6 national General Service posts as well as 7 United Nations Volunteer positions) would be merged into the Human Resources Management Section. 96. In line with the career development policy of providing a framework of opportunity and the requisite supporting programmes and systems with managers fostering support for staff development and staff members fully committed to continuous professional development, it is proposed to strengthen the Integrated Mission Training Centre through the establishment of a post of Human Resources Officer (P-3). The incumbent would be responsible for the operation of the new Career Development Unit within the Centre, including training on a number of topics, such as interviewing skills, preparing résumés/curricula vitae, letter writing, and individual staff development/support interviews. The Human Resources Officer would also be responsible for the development of an employment coordinating service to provide national staff with up-to-date information on employment opportunities external to the Mission and the United Nations. 97. The Travel Unit of the former General Services Section would be incorporated into the Human Resources Management Section to provide the full range of customer services to all UNMIL staff members. The staffing establishment of the Travel Unit would comprise four international posts (1 P-3 and 3 Field Service), five national General Service posts and one United Nations Volunteer position through redeployment from the disbanded General Services Section. In addition, two Travel Assistant posts (Field Service) are proposed for establishment. Under the overall direction of the Chief of Travel, the incumbents of the posts would be responsible for the administration of all official Mission travel, outgoing shipments of personal effects and the management of Unit records. 98. The Check-in-Check-out Unit would be established in the Human Resources Management Section to provide full personnel administration services to staff members. The Unit would be responsible for the development and implementation of an entry procedure to provide new staff with a comprehensive information package on arrival, a one-stop service for identification procedures and an induction and security attendance booking system linked to the Integrated Mission Training Centre. This would enable easier tracking of the attendance of new staff at mandatory training and information sessions. The staffing establishment of the Unit would be strengthened through the proposed establishment of two posts of Checkin-Check-out Officers (Field Service). The incumbents would be responsible for the development and maintenance of check-in-check-out electronic systems for the arrival and departure of UNMIL staff, liaison with the Human Resources Management Section and the Integrated Mission Training Centre to track registration for and attendance at induction and security briefings and mandatory elearning programmes (basic and advanced security in the field, integrity awareness and prevention of harassment, sexual harassment and abuse of authority in the workplace). Finance Section International staff: increase of 4 posts (establishment of 4 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 6 General Service (Other level) posts) 99. To strengthen the staffing establishment of the Finance Section in view of the increasing workload in the Cashier's Unit and the Accounts Receivable Unit, it is proposed to establish four Finance Assistant posts (Field Service). The incumbent of two Finance Assistant posts would support the Cashier's Unit in generating and effecting cash payments and bank transfers for the large number of vendors and Mission personnel. The incumbent of the third Finance Assistant post would be responsible for accounts receivable in respect of medical insurance (Van Breda) for UNMIL as well as from United Nations agencies and other organizations. The incumbent would be responsible for ensuring that receivables are monitored and their age kept below one year and for issuing all outgoing debit advices. The incumbent of the fourth Finance Assistant post would be responsible for preparing the monthly financial statements and would also carry out the responsibilities of systems administrator for the finance software in the Mission. Procurement Section International staff: no net change (abolishment of 1 P-4 post offset by the establishment of 1 Field Service post; conversion to the Field Service category of a General Service (Other level) post) 100. In view of the drawdown and the change in procurement activities, adjustments to the staffing establishment of the Section are proposed. These involve the abolishment of two posts of Procurement Officer (1 P-4 and 1 United Nations Volunteer position) reflecting the downsizing of the management structure of the Section and the establishment of a post of Local Vendor Roster Database Officer (Field Service) to enhance internal controls and create a more robust vendor management system. The Database Officer would be responsible for monitoring vendor performance and would expedite and follow-up on deliveries. General Services Section International staff: decrease of 34 posts (abolishment of 1 P-3, 1 P-2, 6 Field Service and 1 General Service (Other level) posts and the redeployment of 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3, 1 P-2 and 17 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 2 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: decrease of 50 posts (abolishment of 1 and redeployment of 49 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 17 positions (redeployment) 101. To better align organizational structure and functions with business processes as well as to conform to current best practices and client needs, it is proposed to disband the General Services Section. The roles and responsibilities related to the 91 posts in the Section (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3, 1 P-2, 17 Field Service, 49 national General Service posts and 17 United Nations Volunteer positions) would be redistributed among several offices. They include the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Human Resources Management Section, the Property Management Section, the Information Management Unit and the Engineering and Supply Sections of the Integrated Support Services. Of the total of 91 posts and positions, one national General Service post of Driver would be redeployed to the office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. A total of 10 posts and positions (1 P-3, 3 Field Service, 5 national General Service posts and 1 United Nations Volunteer position) would be redeployed to the Human Resources Management Section in respect of the Travel Unit. A total of 51 posts and positions (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2, 13 Field Service and 24 national General Service posts as well as 9 United Nations Volunteer positions) would be redeployed to the newly established Property Management Section. A total of 10 posts and positions (1 P-3, 1 Field Service and 6 national General Service posts as well as 2 United Nations Volunteer positions) would be redeployed to the newly proposed Information Management Unit. A total of 16 posts and positions (1 P-3 and 13 national General Service posts as well as 2 United Nations Volunteer positions) are to be redeployed to Engineering Section. The three remaining United Nations Volunteer positions would be redeployed to the Supply Section. At the same time, a number of staffing requirements totalling 10 posts (1 P-3, 1 P-2, 6 Field Service, 1 General Service (Other level) and 1 national General Service post) and related functions are deemed no longer required. Those posts and positions are proposed for abolishment. International staff: increase of 18 posts (redeployment of 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2, and 13 Field Service posts) National staff: increase of 28 national General Service posts (establishment of 4 and redeployment of 24) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 9 positions (redeployment) 102. With the Mission entering in its drawdown and withdrawal phase and with increasing requirements for accountability and the efficient management of United Nations-owned equipment, the establishment of a dedicated Property Management Section within Administrative Services is proposed. The Section will carry out operational, strategic and oversight functions within the domain of property management. The staffing of the Section would be met through the establishment of four Clerk posts (national General Service) and the redeployment from the disbanded General Services Section of a total of 51 posts and positions (1 P-5, 2 P4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2, 13 Field Service and 24 national General Service posts as well as 9 United Nations Volunteer positions). The proposed redeployment of 51 posts and positions would comprise the staffing establishment of the Receiving and Inspection, the Property Control and Inventory, the Claims and the Property Disposal Units of the disbanded General Services Section. 103. On the operational side, the Section will manage all the receipt, inspection, acceptance and instatement of United Nations-owned equipment in the Mission's inventory and the collection and disposal of written-off United Nations-owned equipment. In terms of oversight functions, the Property Control and Inventory Unit of the Section will provide verification and internal control services covering the whole life cycle of United Nations-owned equipment while monitoring and assuring compliance with the relevant rules, regulations and procedures. The Section would endeavour to promote best practices in supply chain and property management and be responsible for the financial reporting on Mission's inventory. In terms of broader strategic functions, the Section would provide a business intelligence layer, delivering analytical services to facilitate management's focus on the overall administration of the Mission's United Nations-owned equipment programme. The Property Management Section will provide advice on issues related to the utilization of stock, materials resource planning, consumption rates, stock ratios, cost benefit analysis on United Nations-owned equipment versus outsourcing and the establishment of replacement programmes, among others. Medical Services Section International staff: increase of 2 posts (establishment of 2 Field Service posts) National staff: decrease of 1 post (abolishment of 1 national General Service post) 104. The Medical Services Section operates eight level-I civilian medical units throughout the Mission area. In addition, one forward medical team is deployed throughout the Mission area. The Section comprises 32 staff, including medical, paramedical, technical and support staff. It is proposed to reinforce the staffing of the Section through the establishment of two international posts of Nurse and Administrative Assistant, offset in part through the abolishment of one national General Service post. 105. The incumbent of the Nurse post (Field Service) would undertake the promotion of preventive medicine among Mission personnel and the dissemination through medical advisories of information on preventive measures for the prevailing diseases in Liberia, especially tropical diseases, including malaria, typhoid, cholera, Lassa fever and yellow fever. In addition, the incumbent would supervise the day-to-day activities of the clinic and all other Nurses, offer consultations and assist the Doctors appropriately; prepare the duty roster and approve the leave plans of the Nurses; maintain patients' medical records; schedule routine medical examinations for staff when needed and provide immunizations against life-threatening diseases and prophylaxis for malaria. In addition, the incumbent would supervise the dispensation of the medications prescribed by the Doctors, order resupplies of medications, consumables and medical supplies for the clinics. 106. The incumbent of the Administrative Assistant post (Field Service) would supervise work of Ambulance Drivers and Clerks, coordinate casualty and medical evacuation cases and arrange for the transfer of patients and liaise with level-III and level-IV hospitals for the smooth transfer and admission of UNMIL patients. The incumbent would also maintain a log of daily and monthly data on medical evacuations/repatriations; manage requisitions for the purchase of medications, supplies, medical equipment and consumables; prepare and administer the budget of the Medical Services Section; and process, review and submit to the Finance Section for payment all medical bills for level-III and level-IV hospitals. Information Management Unit International staff: increase of 2 posts (redeployment of 1 P-3 and 1 Field Service posts) National staff: increase of 6 posts (redeployment of 6 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 2 positions (redeployment) 107. The responsibilities and related staffing of 10 posts (1 P-3, 1 Field Service and 6 national General Service posts as well as 2 United Nations Volunteer positions) of the Registry and Archive Unit, the Mail/Diplomatic Pouch Unit and the Reproduction Unit of the disbanded General Services Section would be consolidated under the proposed new Information Management Unit. The consolidation would aim to strengthen the records management programme and the mail and pouch and reproduction services during the drawdown and liquidation phases of the Mission. The efficient management of records and the timely and accurate delivery of mail and documents is necessary to support the core functions of the Mission in complying with its legal and regulatory obligations and contribute to its accountable and effective management. In particular, the preparation for the liquidation of the Mission will require an increased effort in capturing, sorting, organizing and maintaining records. The preparation for the Mission liquidation will also require an increased effort and dedication of time to records appraisal and selection as well as their preparation for transfer to United Nations Headquarters in order to preserve the financial, legal and historical recall of the Mission. International staff: net decrease of 7 posts (abolishment of 2 P-4, 3 P-3, 2 P-2, 6 Field Service and 2 General Service (Other level) posts, offset by the establishment of 1 P4, 2 P-3 and 3 Field Service posts, and the redeployment of 2 P-3 posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 11 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: net increase of 4 posts (2 National Officer and 2 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 4 positions (redeployment) Office of the Chief, Integrated Support Services International staff: decrease of 1 post (redeployment to the Movement Control Section of 1 Field Service post) 108. A number of management controls initiated in the 2007/08 period by the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services are expected to remain in effect during the 2009/10 period. Given the drawdown phase of the Mission and as a prelude to preparation for downsizing, the management controls that are in place allow for the rationalization of the staffing of the Office of the Chief and the Integrated Support Services as a whole. Accordingly, the redeployment of a post of Administrative Assistant to the Movement Control Section to support the operations of that Section and the abolishment of one United Nations Volunteer position are proposed. Joint Logistics Operations Centre International staff: decrease of 11 posts (abolishment of 1 P-4 and redeployment of 3 P-3 and 7 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 1 General Service (Other level) post) National staff: decrease of 13 posts (redeployment of 13 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 5 positions (redeployment) 109. In anticipation of the drawdown, a review was conducted of the structure and tasking of the Joint Logistics Operation Centre to provide management and coordination of the Mission's logistical support capabilities, including but not limited to the implementation of the drawdown programme. The military force is reorganizing into two sectors from the current four, and the substantive offices are expected to continue their support in the counties. The provision of a holistic and optimal response to operational requirements is expected to increase the effective planning and coordination role of the Centre in the provision of logistics support services to the Mission force in the sectors and to the field offices in the counties. At the same time, in keeping with the streamlining of support services, it is also foreseen that the improved business processes would result in the various support components of the Mission providing the expected level of administrative and logistical support without impeding the efficacy of the Centre. This includes the subsuming of certain cross-functional support areas, such as the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and the Lease Management Units of the Engineering Section, while at the same time the devolving of functions, such as supply, fuel, engineering and procurement, which are best performed by the respective sections. Accordingly, it is proposed to reduce the staffing establishment of the Centre through the redeployment to the Supply Section of 28 posts and positions (3 P-3, 7 Field Service, 13 national General Service posts and 5 United Nations Volunteer positions) and the abolishment of a P-4 post. Because of this proposed adjustment, the revised staffing of the Centre would comprise 28 posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 3 P-3, 7 Field Service and 15 national General Service posts). Movement Control Section International staff: net decrease of 1 post (abolishment of 1 P-4 and 2 P-3 posts, offset by the establishment of 1 Field Service and the redeployment of 1 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 3 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: increase of 6 posts (establishment of 6 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 1 position (establishment) 110. While activities related to troop rotations will reduce slightly, the support provided by the Movement Control Section to domestic and out-of-Mission air and sea passenger/cargo movement schedules will increase. The operations in support of the Guard Force providing security to the Special Court for Sierra Leone are also expected to increase tasking for the Section, given that UNIOSIL has closed. The Section oversees on-the-ground operations at three permanent air terminals (Roberts International Airport, Spriggs Payne Airport and Kotoka Airport, Accra) and the management of a coastal freighter, as well as the management of movement control operations for the Mission across four sectors. The Section also manages dangerous goods and cargo, cargo preparation, ship handling and stevedoring, monitors international flights, manages booking office operations and exercises passenger and crowd control at airfields in four sectors. In this regard, pursuant to a review of the responsibilities and staffing in line with the streamlining of operations, including those of the Joint Logistics Operations Centre, adjustments to the level of the authorized staffing complement of the Section are proposed. Because of the streamlining of operations and functions both at Monrovia and the field, the functions of the posts of Deputy Chief, Outstation Supervisor and Chief of the Seaport Office (1 P-4 and 2 P-3) are deemed no longer required. Accordingly, the three posts are proposed for abolishment. 111. The establishment of two posts of Movement Control Assistant and Administrative Assistant (Field Service) are proposed at Spriggs Payne Airport in Monrovia, accommodated in part through the redeployment of an Administrative Assistant post (Field Service) from the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services. The incumbent of the Movement Control Assistant post would oversee passenger ground services and loading of cargo involving 15 daily domestic scheduled flights and 7-day-a-week special and transit flights. The incumbent of the Administrative Assistant post would be responsible for all administrative-related tasks for passenger ground services and cargo-loading services for 15 daily domestic scheduled flights and 7-day-a-week special and transit flights. The incumbent would also provide operational back-up support to the Movement Control Assistant. 112. To strengthen the Section in the field, it is proposed to establish six posts of Movement Control Assistant (national General Service). The incumbents of those posts would be based at Roberts International Airport, Monrovia Port, and Spriggs Payne Airport, Monrovia, Kotoka Airport, Accra, the UNMIL Forward Logistics Base for the sectors at Gbarnga, and the Movement Control Office at Greenville. They would carry out the functions of clerks and handymen. 113. The Passenger Management Unit of the Section would be strengthened through the proposed establishment of a Movement Control Assistant post (United Nations Volunteer). The incumbent would support all passenger booking services for flights originating in Monrovia, Accra and Freetown, as well as in the sectors, and coordinate tasks during rotations and repatriation of military contingent and formed police personnel. Engineering Section International staff: no net change (establishment of 1 P-4 and 2 P-3 posts, redeployment of 2 P-3 posts, abolishment of 4 and redeployment of 1 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 3 General Service (Other level) posts) National staff: net decrease of 10 posts (abolishment of 6 and redeployment of 6 national General Service posts offset in part by the redeployment of 2 National Officer posts) 114. The commencement of drawdown activities has added to the demands for the rationalization of contingent locations, including enlarging sites and substituting contingents throughout the Mission area. Renovation and dismantling activities would continue at levels of high intensity throughout the period in view of the drawdown of military personnel. The structure and functions of the support elements in the Mission have been reviewed in order to centralize the engineering effort, to reduce the duplication of tasks and to achieve efficacy in asset management. As a result, changes to the structure of the Section are proposed. The changes take into account workload and cross-functional issues and the consolidation of asset and materials management functions as described below. 115. The refocus of the activities of the Environment and Natural Resources Unit from substantive policy under the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Recovery and Governance) to the provision of support in the implementation of the drawdown would enhance the quality of handover of sites and is expected to contribute positively to the credibility of the Mission. Accordingly, it is proposed to redeploy the four posts of the Unit (1 P-3, 2 National Officer and 1 national General Service staff) to the Engineering Section. The staff would support the environmental impact assessments to be conducted by the Section to prepare to deal with waste materials, the rehabilitation of sites, such as troop barracks, and sanitation facilities, as well as the necessary cleanup as UNMIL downsizes and prepares for eventual liquidation. The engineering and military staff would also be trained in environmental cleanup issues. 116. In the areas of construction and water sanitation engineering, it is proposed to augment the staffing of the Engineering Section through the establishment of three posts (1 P-4 and 2 P-3) comprising two Construction Engineers (P-4 and P-3) and a Water Sanitation Engineer (P-3). The incumbent of the Chief Construction Engineer post (P-4) would be responsible for coordinating and overseeing all engineering projects throughout the Mission area, including the construction of roads, bridges and military installations, large building refurbishment, airport facilities and planning and design projects, as well as water purification and treatment plants and sanitation engineering. The incumbent of the Construction Engineer post (P-3) would assist the Chief in the construction of all military camps, major refurbishment of buildings for all Mission personnel, including formed police units, military, United Nations police personnel and airport buildings within the greater Monrovia region. The incumbent of the Water Sanitation Engineer post (P-3) would be responsible for sourcing and supplying water to all military camps throughout Liberia and for ensuring that wastewater facilities are in place in those locations. The incumbent will also ensure that wastewater disposal facilities are hygienic and environmentally sound. 117. The Facilities Management Unit of the former General Services Section and the Buildings Management Unit of the Engineering Section have been operating independently. In order to avoid duplication of effort and to identify possibilities for outsourcing in the 2010/11 period, it is proposed to merge and consolidate the staffing and functions of the Facilities Management Unit of the disbanded General Services Section in its entirety with the existing Buildings Management Unit of the Engineering Section. The result of this merger and consolidation would be the proposed redeployment from the former General Services Section of 16 posts and positions (1 P-3 and 13 national General Service posts as well as 2 United Nations Volunteer positions). 118. Following a review of the functions and responsibilities of the Materials Management Unit of the Section, it was noted that they were more closely aligned with those of the Supply Section, where similar activities are carried out. The advantages of this amalgamation of the Materials Management Unit with the Supply Section would entail the combining of functions, such as the receipt, warehousing and issuance of expendables, assets and generator spare parts, minor warehouse maintenance and administration of expendable items. In addition, support could be provided for tasks and building projects, including water purification, insect extermination, road and bridge repairs along main and secondary supply routes, ablution facilities and landscaping, among others. Accordingly, it is proposed to redeploy 28 posts and positions (1 Field Service and 20 national General Service posts as well as 7 United Nations Volunteer positions) of the Materials Management Unit from the Engineering to the Supply Section to augment the staffing establishment of the latter. 119. The activities and the workload of the Geographic Information Systems Unit of the Section have reduced, warranting a critical review of the need for the level of staffing and functions in view of the cross-functional nature of the work of the Unit. As a result, it is proposed that the functions be subsumed by the Joint Logistics Operations Centre and that the staffing complement of the Unit be reduced by two posts (Field Service). The same is the case with the Lease Management Unit of the Engineering Section. Its functions have become more cross-functional to the drawdown support as opposed to being related strictly to the deployment and consolidation of engineering projects. It is therefore proposed that the staffing complement of the Lease Management Unit be reduced by one Field Service post. 120. In addition to the above, the review of the structure of the Engineering Section identified potential areas where functions were deemed no longer required. As such, the staffing complement of the Section would be further reduced by the proposed abolishment of 7 posts (1 Field Service and 6 national General Service). 121. The staffing of the Section would be reduced by 38 posts and positions (5 Field Service and 26 national General Service posts as well as 7 United Nations Volunteer positions). The overall reduction is offset in part by the establishment of three posts (1 P-4 and 2 P-3) and the redeployment to the Section of 20 posts and positions (2 P-3, 2 National Officer and 14 national General Service posts as well as 2 United Nations Volunteer positions) for a total of 23 posts and positions. There would be a net reduction of 15 posts and positions. Aviation Section International staff: decrease of 1 post (abolishment of 1 General Service (Other level) post; conversion to the Field Service category of 3 General Service (Other level) posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 6 positions (establishment) 122. The Aviation Section is responsible for the planning and coordination of the utilization of the Mission's air assets comprising 3 fixed-wing and 19 rotary-wing aircraft, including 14 military helicopters. The Section implements a coordinated air support system throughout the Mission area and develops and implements aviation standard operating procedures. It is responsible for the operational control of air charter contracts, airfield services and airfield rehabilitation projects, the management of air terminal operations, liaison with national and international aviation authorities, the provision of flight clearances and flight following. The Section undertakes surveys and assessment of airfields and helicopter landing zones at remote sites as well as threat assessments. Aeronautical and meteorological information is provided to aircrews. 123. During the 2009/10 period, aviation activity levels, on the one hand, would be dependant on the drawdown, while on the other hand, would remain consistent. The operations in Sierra Leone in support of the Special Court for Sierra Leone will increase tasking. This notwithstanding, the activities at the Spriggs Payne Airport and the air operations centre in Monrovia as well as the forward logistics base for the sectors at Gbarnga are expected to increase in several areas, including technical compliance and quality assurance, meteorological information, and following, planning and scheduling of flights. Consequently, adjustments to the staffing establishment of the Section are proposed. They involve the establishment of six United Nations Volunteer positions to be based at the Spriggs Payne Airport, the air operations centre in Monrovia and the forward logistics base for the sectors at Gbarnga to carry out the functions of aviation assistants in the areas of increased activity and to support round-the-clock operations. At the same time, it is proposed to abolish an Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) owing to the rationalization of administrative support tasks in the Section. Communications and Information Technology Section International staff: net decrease of 1 post (abolishment of 1 P-3 and 2 P-2 posts offset in part by the establishment of 2 Field Service posts) National staff: decrease of 2 posts (abolishment of a national General Service) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 5 positions (abolishment) 124. The Communications and Information Technology Section is responsible for the planning, installation and maintenance of all communications and information technology infrastructure and systems in the Mission area. It ensures the provision of service to a large number of staff and manages a large inventory of high-cost equipment. Under budgetary and financial matters, the Section tracks and accounts for commercial costs of both official and private communications. A review of the structure and functions of the Section has been conducted with a view to improving business processes and streamlining operations. It is expected that work on the optimization of the wide area network and the site standardization projects would continue during the 2009/10 period, as will the project of linking, through a fibre-optic network, UNOCI and UNLB. As an outcome of the review, rationalization of the structure is proposed through a downward adjustment to the staffing of the Section for the 2009/10 period. The staffing complement would be reduced through the abolishment of 10 posts and positions (1 P-3, 2 P-2 and 2 national General Service posts as well as 5 United Nations Volunteer positions). At the same time, in view of the need for additional staff in the Communications Centre and the Telephone Billing Unit of the Section, it is proposed to establish two posts of Communications Officer (Field Service). The incumbent of the post to be allocated to the Communications Centre would be responsible for all secure communications of the Mission and have supervisory functions over the staff of the Centre. The incumbent of the second post would be deployed in the Telephone Billing Unit and would be responsible for the efficient management of payments to vendors and recovery of costs for personal calls of civilian staff made through the Mission's telephone system. Transport Section International staff: decrease of 1 post (abolishment of 1 General Service (Other level) post) National staff: decrease of 35 posts (abolishment of 5 national General Service posts and redeployment of 30 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: decrease of 2 positions (abolishment) 125. In view of the rationalization of the structure of the Transport Section and the centralization of fuel-related services, all fuel-related responsibilities and the related 30 posts (national General Service) would be realigned through redeployment to the Supply Section. Three posts of Transport Assistant (1 General Service (Other level) and 2 United Nations Volunteer positions) and 5 posts of Vehicle Mechanic (national General Service) will be abolished owing to the outsourcing of repair and maintenance services, which the Mission has had in place since its inception to complement the support services provided in-house. The staffing of the Transport Section would be reduced in total by 38 posts and positions (1 General Service (Other level) and 35 national General Service posts as well as 2 United Nations Volunteer positions). Supply Section International staff: increase of 11 posts (redeployment of 3 P-3 and 8 Field Service posts; conversion to the Field Service category of 1 General Service (Other level) post) National staff: increase of 63 posts (redeployment of 63 national General Service posts) United Nations Volunteers: increase of 15 positions (redeployment) 126. The Supply Section manages and executes a number of functions related to: the supply of fuel and rations; warehousing; the provision of all general supplies and engineering materials; equipment; disposal functions; and budget and requisitioning activities for itself and other sections/units. The functions and responsibilities of the Supply Section have been rationalized to provide improved centralized services. The rationalization includes the realignment, through the redeployment, of 30 posts (national General Service) of the Fuel Unit from the Transport Section and 28 posts and positions (1 Field Service and 20 national General Service posts as well as 7 United Nations Volunteer positions) from the Materials Management Unit and Engineering Sections, respectively. In addition, 28 posts and positions (3 P-3, 7 Field Service and 13 national General Service posts as well as 5 United Nations Volunteer positions) from the Joint Logistics Operations Centre and 3 United Nations Volunteer positions from the disbanded General Services Section would be redeployed to the Supply Section. Contingent-owned Equipment and Verification Unit International staff: decrease of 2 posts (abolishment of 2 Field Service posts) National staff: decrease of 5 posts (national General Service) (abolishment) 127. Considering the drawdown of military contingent personnel during the period and following a review of the structure and functions of the Unit, it is proposed to reduce its staffing establishment by one verification team. Therefore, 7 posts (2 Field Service and 5 national General Service) are proposed for abolishment. (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010) Expenditure (2007/08) Apportionment (2008/09) Cost estimates (2009/10) Formed police units National staff General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted)a a From the Government of Germany. B. Non-budgeted contributions 128. The estimated value of non-budgeted contributions for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 is as follows: (Thousands of United States dollars) Estimated value Status-of-forces agreementa Voluntary contributions in kind (non-budgeted) a Inclusive of the estimated rental value of Government-provided facilities and of exemption from aviation and naval transportation fees and taxes. 129. The estimated value of $1,987,200 in non-budgeted contributions reflects a decrease of $2.5 million over the value estimated in the 2008/09 period. The reduction is attributable to the drawdown and restructuring of military personnel and lower estimated rental value of Government-provided facilities. C. Efficiency gains 130. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 take into account the efficiency initiatives estimated at $6,493,500, as follows: Initiative Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment Some of the contingent-owned major equipment deployed will be identified as surplus, and the mandate of the Mission could be met with a reduced level of major equipment. During the drawdown phase of the Mission, it is expected that the military and police components will be reconfigured, redeployed and repatriated. In this context, the UNMIL Contingent-Owned Equipment/Memorandum of Understanding Management Review Board will continue to reassess contingent-owned equipment capabilities against adjusted concepts of operation and revised operational and support requirements. (a) Reduction by $2,629,700 in air operations costs associated with fewer flying hours and lower costs for rental of air assets; (b) Reduction by $1,055,300 in the cost of aviation fuel associated with the use by the Mission of more fuel efficient aircraft (B-757-200 and B-200) as well as through revisions to flight schedules based on travel patterns, both within the Mission and to/from Accra; (c) Reduction by $15,500 in insurance costs through the consolidation of shuttle flights, where practical, in order to maximize passenger and cargo loads. Petrol, oil and lubricants (a) Reduction by $431,700 resulting from the lowering by 3 per cent of the application of the standard ratio for the consumption of fuel, oil and lubricants by vehicles and generators. The lower rate stems from the management initiative regarding the policy governing the issuance of fuel, oil and lubricants for vehicles and generators and the enhanced monitoring of fuel utilization by contingent-owned generators, thus reducing average loads to optimal levels; (b) Reduction by $152,400 in the consumption of liquefied propane gas and kerosene for contingent personnel. The reduction is based on revised entitlements and internal policy on the issuance of cooking gas and kerosene; (c) Reduction by $208,900, representing an efficiency gain of 2 per cent in diesel fuel consumption through sensitization of staff members to the implementation of energy-saving practices, such as switching off office equipment and air-conditioning units when leaving the office, and car pooling, among others. Communications and information technology and spare parts Implementation of enhanced preventive maintenance through: (a) Better isolation of the information and communications technology equipment room, use of recycling, setting in air-conditioning and increase of ambient room temperature; (b) Reduction of hardware by 20 per cent by using hardware virtualization techniques and by replacing obsolete equipment with fewer and more economical items; (c) Replacement of standalone UPS (1kVA) with shared high-capacity UPS (5kVA) to reduce numbers by 30 per cent; (d) Reduction of inventory by 20 per cent, keeping minimum spare parts and expendables and adhering to the near "just-in-time" principle; (e) Reduction in acquisition of spare parts for communications and information technology equipment from 7.5 per cent to 4.5 per cent and 5.5 per cent, respectively, of total inventory value. This will be achieved by proper obsolescence management, enhanced preventive maintenance and standardization of information and communications technology infrastructure; (f) Installation of solar panels and wind generators at some repeater sites in order to eliminate use of diesel generators. D. Vacancy factors 131. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 take into account the following vacancy factors: (Percentage) Actual Budgeted Projected National Officers National General Service staff Temporary positionsa a Funded under general temporary assistance. 132. Increased vacancy rates have been applied to the international and National Officer categories of staff in which actual vacancies of posts/positions are experienced. The application of vacancy rates to the estimates for the 2009/10 period takes into account past experience with a view to reflecting the continued effort of the Mission to ensure a more realistic cost estimate. E. Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and selfsustainment 133. Requirements for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 are based on standard reimbursement rates for major equipment (wet lease) and self-sustainment in the total amount of $92,519,600 as follows: Estimated amount Major equipment Self-sustainment Mission factors Effective date Last review A. Applicable to Mission area Extreme environmental condition factor 1 April 2006 20 April 2006 Intensified operational condition factor Hostile action/forced abandonment factor B. Applicable to home country Incremental transportation factor F. Training 134. The estimated resource requirements for training for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 are as follows: Training consultants Official travel, training Training fees, supplies and services 135. The number of participants planned for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, compared with previous periods, is as follows: (Number of participants) Planned Proposed Internala Externalb a Includes participants in online courses; excludes members from national institutions and civic society. b Includes UNLB and outside the Mission area. 136. Resources would be used for the external and internal training of some 2,024 participants, comprising 700 international, 1,222 national and 102 military and police personnel. Of the total number of participants, some 98 per cent would be trained within the Mission area, including through the use of online courses, with the remaining 2 per cent attending external training courses, including at UNLB. Some 60 per cent of participants in both internal and external training programmes are in the national staff category. As part of the outreach and mandated activities, some 618 members of national institutions and civic society organizations would partake in internal training in the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse as well as peacebuilding and conflict-sensitive planning. Some 42 training programmes are geared towards upgrading the substantive and technical skills of 702 staff, as well as focusing on leadership, management and organizational development for senior level managers. In the area of national staff capacity-building/training, some 45 courses are planned for 1,222 staff, including some 40 in leadership, management and organizational development. 137. The areas of training would include conduct and discipline, prison support and corrections, security, human rights, peacebuilding and conflict-sensitive planning, crisis intervention, rule of law, communications, procurement and property management, movement control and transport, including handling of hazardous materials, facilities management, warehouse and inventory management, information and communications technology, and aviation. G. Quick-impact projects 138. The estimated resource requirements for quick-impact projects for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, compared with previous periods, are as follows: Period Amount (Thousands of United States dollars) Number of projects 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 (actual) 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 (approved) 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 (proposed) 139. Over the years, quick-impact projects have played an important role in facilitating the execution of the UNMIL mandate, with tangible benefits to the population at large as well as facilitating the Liberian peace process. Dividends of peace in the form of basic social services (e.g., schools, health clinics and water facilities), community structures (e.g., markets, administrative buildings and town halls) and rule of law infrastructure (e.g., police stations, correctional facilities, courthouses and border immigration posts), as well as concrete support to restore State authority have provided benefits to a population with high expectations. Notwithstanding all those efforts, the situation in Liberia remains fragile. The Mission intends to continue to implement quick-impact projects to fill in gaps that still exist in strategic areas, in line with the overall mandate of the Mission and in support of the Government and the broader efforts of the international community. 140. Recent requirements for quick-impact projects have been assessed through regular consultations with national and local authorities as well as with other partners, including United Nations agencies and local and international NGOs. Against this background, it is evident that UNMIL needs to continue to address urgent challenges in the areas of rule of law and institution-building in order to enable the State to perform its core functions, such as administering justice, maintaining public order and reaffirming and strengthening State authority on the national territory, as well as to provide an enabling environment for social cohesion. 141. The rule of law infrastructure in the country remains poor with police stations, courthouses, corrections facilities and border posts, particularly along the Sierra Leone, Guinea and Côte d'Ivoire borders, still requiring urgent attention. This is particularly so considering the uncertainties in the wider region of West Africa, intense cross-border activities and the perceived high crime rate in the country. 142. The Mission has been working particularly closely with other United Nations agencies and Government counterparts in upgrading the rule of law infrastructure to facilitate justice, enhance security and promote respect for the legal system. In order to contribute to the improvement of the fragile security situation in Liberia, the Mission intends to allocate over the 2009/10 fiscal year the greater part of quick-impact project resources in continuing to support projects designed to rehabilitate police stations, corrections facilities, border posts and magistrate courts. The resources will contribute to the improvement of the infrastructure while the Mission is furthering the building of capacity of rule of law institutions in order to strengthen efforts made by the Government to establish and enhance law enforcement throughout the country, thereby creating an enabling security environment for reconstruction and economic recovery. 143. The authority of the State will be restored by providing support and furthering the capacity-building of local governance systems. Local-level consultations have led to the formulation of county development agendas and, subsequently, to the poverty reduction strategy. Meanwhile, a range of interventions has been identified for quick-impact project support that will enable local authorities to discharge their functions more efficiently. These include the construction/rehabilitation of community structures, such as town halls, district administrative buildings, community resource centres for women and youth groups and fire stations, among others. 144. In addition, in the event of emergency, UNMIL would render support to the Government in averting the impact on the Liberian population of a possible food crisis deriving from the negative international economic context, and which would strongly influence the fragile security situation. * Resource variance amounts are expressed in thousands of United States dollars. Analysis is provided for variances of at least plus or minus 5 per cent, or $100,000. III. Analysis of variances* :: Mandate: drawdown of military observers 145. The variance of $1,078,900 is attributable to the planned phased reduction to 133 military observers, with effect from 1 July 2009, from the current authorized strength of 215 personnel. The provisions in respect of the planned average strength of 133 military observers during the 2009/10 period reflects the application of a 5 per cent delayed deployment factor to the costing of requirements in respect of provisions for mission subsistence allowance, travel on emplacement, rotation and repatriation, clothing allowance, death and disability provisions, and rations. 146. The reduction in the number of military observers stems from phase 2 of the drawdown of the military component, as indicated by the Secretary-General in paragraph 59 of his seventeenth progress report on UNMIL (S/2008/553), involving the repatriation by 1 July 2009 of 82 military observers against the authorized 215 personnel. :: Mandate: drawdown of military contingent personnel 147. The variance of $21,380,100 is attributable primarily to the lower overall requirements as a result of the phased drawdown during the 2009/10 period from 10,232 to 8,693 in the number of military contingent personnel, inclusive of 105 staff officers. The overall lower requirements were offset in part by increased requirements for travel on emplacement, rotation and repatriation as well as for freight and the deployment of contingent-owned equipment. 148. The increased requirements for travel on emplacement, rotation and repatriation stem from higher travel costs for military contingent personnel and staff officers under both commercial travel and letter-of-assist arrangements. The higher requirements for freight and the deployment of contingent-owned equipment stem from the planned movement of major equipment associated with the planned repatriation during the period of some 1,539 military contingent personnel. 149. The costing of requirements, with the exception of travel on emplacement, rotation and repatriation and contingent-owned equipment (major equipment), takes into account the application of a 2 per cent delayed deployment factor. The provisions in respect of contingent-owned equipment reflect a 1.5 per cent unserviceability and non-deployment factors, respectively, to provide for normal wear and tear of major equipment. 150. The decrease by 1,539 in the number of military contingent personnel reflects in part the phase 3 of the drawdown of the military component of the Mission, as indicated by the Secretary-General in paragraph 62 of his report (S/2008/553). While there would be a decrease in the number of military contingent personnel, there would be no significant change in the Mission's deployment locations, as smaller units would be redeployed to locations left by the repatriated troops. :: Mandate: increase in the number of police personnel 151. The variance of $1,676,600 reflects additional requirements attributable to the higher overall requirements for United Nations police personnel. The increased requirements result from provisions in respect of an average of 470 United Nations police advisers. The amount takes into account internal adjustments in the composition of the police component within its overall authorized ceiling of 1,375 personnel (845 formed police unit personnel, 32 corrections officers and 498 police advisers) as endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1836 (2008). In contrast, the 2008/09 budget provided for reduced requirements owing to the planned and phased reduction to 398 United Nations police personnel by January 2009 from the budgeted strength of 635 police personnel. At that time, the Security Council, in its resolution 1777 (2007), had endorsed the recommendation of the Secretary-General that a gradual reduction of 498 police advisers take place in seven stages between April 2008 and December 2010. 152. The provisions reflect the application of a 5 per cent delayed deployment factor to the computation of estimates for an overall average of 470 United Nations police advisers based on the phased and planned drawdown of United Nations police advisers from 498 to 412 between November 2009 and 30 June 2010. :: Mandate: increase in the number of formed police personnel 153. The additional requirements of $5,281,600 under this heading are attributable to the full deployment of formed police personnel during the period. The increased requirements reflect an increase from 240 to 845 in the strength of formed police personnel, as authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 1836 (2008). :: Management: cost parameters 154. The additional requirements of $3,846,400 under this heading are attributable primarily to additional resources for salaries, including post adjustment and common staff costs for international staff, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250 on human resources management, offset in part by the elimination of requirements for mission subsistence allowance and decreased requirements for staff assessment and hazardous duty station allowance. In addition, and pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250, the proposed 2009/10 budget reflects the conversion to the Field Service category of 49 General Service posts (including 1 at the Principal level) and 18 Security Service posts approved for the 2008/09 period. 155. The overall requirements reflect the application of a 15 per cent delayed deployment factor to the computation of provisions in respect of 544 international personnel (a net decrease of 2 Professional posts). It also reflects an increase in hazardous duty station allowance, with effect from 1 January 2009, from $1,300 to $1,365 per month per person. :: Management: reduced inputs and same outputs 156. The decrease by $326,400 in requirements under this heading is attributable to the decrease in the authorized number of national staff from 1,047 (inclusive of 56 National Officers) to 1,037 (inclusive of 53 National Officers) for a decrease of 10 posts (including 3 National Officers). 157. The estimates in respect of national staff posts are based on computations at the NOB, step 1, and G-4, step VI, levels of the salary scales in effect since 1 November 2008, and 1 February 2007, respectively. The higher grade of G-4, step VI, in contrast to the G-4, step III, used in the 2008/09 period for the computation for national General Service salaries is attributed to the fact that more than 30 per cent of the staff would be at levels higher than G-4, step III, during the period. The provisions reflect the application of vacancy rates of 20 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively, to the estimates for National Officer and national General Service staff. :: Management: change in cost parameters 158. The additional requirements under this heading stem from increases, with effect from 1 March 2008 in living allowances for 237 United Nations Volunteers, coupled with requirements for home visit expenses for some 200 Volunteers. The provisions reflect the application of a 5 per cent delayed deployment factor to the computation of the cost estimates. 159. The overall requirements were offset in part by the decrease of 14 United Nations Volunteer positions. 160. The additional requirements of $113,000 under this heading represent increased costs for salaries, including post adjustment, and common staff costs for international staff, offset in part by the elimination of requirements for mission subsistence allowance and lower requirements for national staff. The increased requirement for international salaries is pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250 on human resources management. The lower requirements for national staff are because of the decrease of one National Officer position in the Humanitarian Coordinator's Support Office. The requirements under this heading reflect provisions in respect of two international (1 P-4 and 1 Field Service) and one national General Service posts. 161. The requirements of $1,651,800 under this heading reflect the provision for mission subsistence allowance and travel on emplacement, rotation and repatriation in respect of 32 corrections officers. They take into account the internal adjustments in the composition of the police component within the ceiling of the overall strength of 1,375 personnel (845 formed police unit personnel, 32 corrections officers and 498 police advisers) as endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1836 (2008). The estimates take into account a 5 per cent delayed deployment factor. 162. The corrections officers were previously budgeted along with United Nations police advisers. :: Management: increased inputs and outputs 163. The additional requirements of $236,400 under this heading reflect increased costs in respect of training consultants offset in part by lower requirements for nontraining consultants. 164. The increased requirements for consultants (training) are attributable to an increase in the number of staff undergoing within-Mission training, coupled with the higher cost of air travel and an increase in daily subsistence allowance rates. The increased requirements are for the Communications and Information Technology, Engineering, Movement Control, Security and Transport Sections and for upgrading substantive skills (Integrated Management Training Centre) in contrast with the 2008/09 period. The increased requirements in those areas will provide for national staff capacity-building, including certification in information technology disciplines, as well as in the areas of engineering and movement of dangerous goods, security (firefighting and investigations, among others) and maintenance and operation of material-handling equipment. 165. As part of the outreach activities of the Mission, the proposed provisions also include a training consultancy to raise awareness of sexual exploitation and abuse and the zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations targeting local communities, community-based organizations and youth, women's and religious organizations that are in close proximity to United Nations installations in the sectors. 166. The overall requirements for consultancies in respect of training provide for the training and upgrading of the skills of some 2,642 personnel comprising 700 international staff, 1,222 national staff, 102 military and police personnel, and 618 members of national institutions and civil society. 167. The lower requirements for non-training consultants, in contrast with the 2008/09 period, are attributable to a decrease in the number of consultants, particularly in relation to the provision of assistance to the offices of State prosecutors and defence, the Judicial Inquiry Commission and the Law Reform Commission, all of which will be discontinued in the 2009/10 period. :: Management: increased input, same output and cost parameters 168. The additional requirements of $476,700 are attributable primarily to increased provisions for within-Mission travel resulting from the payment of daily subsistence allowance to civilian personnel for trips within the Mission area involving overnight stay at locations other than the original duty station. The proposed provisions relate to requirements for travel in connection with the implementation of the planned outputs by the respective offices under the four components. Of the total requirements, some 58 per cent relate to official within-Mission travel, some 32 per cent relate to official travel outside the Mission area, and the remaining 10 per cent relates to travel for training purposes. :: Management: reduced inputs, same outputs and change in cost parameters 169. The decrease of $1,004,600 under this heading is attributable primarily to the lower requirements for self-sustainment, acquisition of prefabricated facilities, firefighting equipment, bridges for infrastructure, maintenance and construction services. The overall lower requirements are offset in part by increased requirements for petrol, oil and lubricants, acquisition of generators, and alteration and renovation, as well as security services. 170. The decrease in the estimates for self-sustainment and acquisition of prefabricated facilities are attributable to the drawdown by some 1,539 in the number of military contingent personnel, offset in part by an increase by 2.5 per cent in the rates of reimbursement for self-sustainment and the inclusion of requirements for Internet access, basic firefighting equipment and fire alarms and detectors. In addition, non-provision for the acquisition of bridges and infrastructure, the availability of inventory from acquisitions carried out in previous years of firefighting equipment and the requirement to replace 380 fire extinguishers, as well as reduced requirements for maintenance services and construction services, also contributed to the offset. 171. The higher requirements for petrol, oil and lubricants stem from the increase of between 28 and 35 per cent in the price per litre of diesel, petrol and kerosene, as compared with the price rates used in the estimates for the 2008/09 period. The price of diesel has risen to $1.00 per litre in the 2009/10 period in contrast to $0.74 per litre in the 2008/09 period. The requirements reflect provisions for some 14.6 million litres of diesel and petrol for the operation of an average 430 United Nations-owned and 349 contingent-owned generators. However, in contrast with the 2008/09 period, the consumption of fuel is marginally lower. The provisions also incorporate efficiency gains in the amount of $793,000 as a result of: (a) a 3 per cent reduction ($431,700) from the standard 10 per cent ratio used for estimating the requirement in the consumption of oil and lubricants for vehicles and diesel fuel for generators; (b) the enhanced monitoring, through internal policy change on issuance to contingent personnel of liquefied propane gas and kerosene, representing an efficiency gain (reduction) of $152,400; and (c) a 2 per cent reduction ($208,900) representing an efficiency gain in diesel fuel consumption through sensitization of staff members to implementation of energy-saving practices, such as switching off office equipment and air conditioning units when leaving the office and car pooling, among others. 172. The provisions under this heading also reflect increased requirements attributable to the need to replace 56 generators due to obsolescence and write-off. Increased requirements in respect of alteration and renovation services reflect provisions for 54,000 bags of cement at $10 per bag needed for construction purposes and for the repair and upgrade of main and secondary supply routes not funded by the World Bank. In respect of security services, the higher provisions primarily reflect an increase in the cost of reimbursement for residential security measures for an average of 126 military observers, 504 United Nations police officers and 103 staff officers. :: Management: increased inputs, same outputs and change in cost parameters 173. The variance of $2,898,600 under this heading is attributable primarily to the increase of between 28 and 35 per cent in the unit price per litre of diesel and petrol as compared with the unit prices used in the estimates for the 2008/09 period. The requirements for some 10.9 million litres of diesel and petrol provide for the operation of an average of 1,143 United Nations-owned and 1,779 contingent-owned vehicles. 174. The overall provisions under this heading reflect requirements for the acquisition of trucks and material-handling equipment and two fuel trucks; the replacement of 98 vehicles; the replacement of only 45 items of workshop equipment owing to availability of stock; contractual maintenance using specialized equipment for 1,317 vehicles; local and global third-party insurance premiums; and increased requirements for spare parts. :: Management: reduced inputs and outputs and change in cost parameters 175. The decrease by $294,400 in overall requirements under this heading is attributable to lower costs for rental and operation of rotary- and fixed-wing aircraft as well as services. The overall lower requirements are offset primarily by the increase by 42 per cent in the cost per litre ($1.18) of aviation fuel as compared with the unit price rate of $0.83 per litre in the 2008/09 period. 176. The reduced requirements for rental and operation of rotary-wing aircraft is attributable to the reduction of the fleet by two medium-transport helicopters (MI8MTV) and a consequential reduction in flying hours. The Mission's fleet of rotary-wing aircraft would comprise 19 helicopters, comprising 4 medium- and 1 heavy-utility helicopters under commercial arrangements and 14 military helicopters under letter-of-assist arrangements. The requirements for the rental and operation of three fixed-wing aircraft reflect the change of the regional and liaison airliner from a Beechcraft 1900D to a B-200 model. The rental and operation of the Mission's fleet of aircraft also takes into account efficiency gains in the amount of $2,629,700 in air operation costs associated with reductions in both the number of flying hours and the rental costs of air assets. 177. The decreased requirements for services reflects provisions for en route air navigation charges within West Africa and the non-requirement for air traffic management costs. 178. While the increased requirements for aviation fuel stems from the increased unit cost per litre, the provisions required in support of the Mission's fleet of aircraft take into account the decreased consumption of fuel from 14.2 million to 11.7 million litres and efficiency gains of $1,055,300 in the cost of aviation fuel associated with the use of more fuel-efficient B-757-200 and B-200 aircraft, coupled with a reduction in the rotary-wing fleet by two helicopters and flight schedule revisions based on travel patterns throughout the mission area, including Accra. 179. The additional requirements of $213,300 under this heading are attributable to the increase in cost to $1.00 per litre of diesel as compared with $0.74 per litre in the 2008/09 period. The requirements provide for 820,000 litres of diesel, the same quantity as in 2008/09, for operation of the Mission's vessel during the 2009/10 period. :: Mandate: decrease in the number of military personnel 180. The reduction in requirements by $1,363,600 under this heading is owing primarily to lower requirements for self-sustainment attributable to the drawdown by 1,539 in the number of military contingent personnel, offset in part by increased requirements in view of the increase by 240 in and the full deployment of the authorized strength of formed police personnel. 181. The variance of $236,600 under this heading reflects lower overall requirements for information technology licences, fees and rental of software, spare parts and supplies, and the replacement of 1,469 items of information technology equipment, offset by higher requirements for information technology services. 182. The replacement programme, which reflects the ongoing standardization of network infrastructure is in its second phase. It involves the progressive replacement of obsolete equipment while supporting some 4,000 users at 80 locations throughout Liberia. The proposed replacement of information technology assets takes into account the drawdown plan, with only essential equipment being replaced. 183. The lower requirements for licences, fees and rental of software reflect provisions for enterprise licences for some 2,686 desktops and laptops at an annual unit rate of $295 per computer, managed centrally from Headquarters. The requirements for spare parts and supplies are based on 5.5 per cent of the inventory value ($8.5 million) of the information technology assets in contrast with the standard 7.5 per cent. 184. The overall decreased requirements for both communications and information technology takes into account an efficiency gain of $1 million as a result of enhanced maintenance of equipment through the implementation of virtualization techniques, resulting in the reduction by 20 per cent of the acquisition of equipment, the lowering of inventory by 20 per cent, reduction from 7.5 per cent to 4.5 per cent and 5.5 per cent, respectively, in the level of spare parts inventory, and the installation of solar panels and wind generators at certain repeater sites. 185. The decrease in provisions by $303,500 is attributable to the drawdown by 1,539 in the number of military contingent personnel, offset in part by increased requirements in view of the increase by 240 and the full deployment of the authorized strength of formed police personnel. 186. The estimated provisions under this heading provide for medical services comprising aero-medical evacuation for Mission personnel, specialist consultation services, X-ray and laboratory tests, hospitalization in non-Mission hospitals for military and police personnel, medical supplies and self-sustainment requirements for military contingent and formed police personnel. 187. The decrease in provisions by $1,553,600 is attributable to the drawdown by 1,539 in the number of military contingent personnel, offset in part by increased requirements in view of the increase by 240 and the full deployment of the authorized strength of formed police personnel. 188. The reduction of $277,700 under this heading is attributable primarily to lower requirements for the acquisition of other equipment, printing and reproduction, other freight and related costs, and uniforms, flags and decals. The reduced overall requirements are offset in part by increased requirements for other services and operational maps. 189. The lower requirements for other equipment take into account provisions for the replacement of 14,328 items and include a provision of $151,000 for the replacement of 15 items of equipment and miscellaneous supplies required for staff welfare activities. Reduced requirements for printing and reproduction stem from new contractual arrangements to provide services at lower cost. The decreased requirements for other freight and related costs are the result of lower charges for activities related to customs clearance at Monrovia sea and airports. 190. The increased requirements for other services stem from the need to provide catering services to the guard contingent at the Special Court for Sierra Leone as they are not self-sustained in this respect. Higher requirements for operational maps are owing to the need to acquire new satellite imagery. IV. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 191. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNMIL are: (a) Appropriation of the amount of $593,436,000 for the maintenance of the Mission for the 12-month period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010; (b) Assessment of the amount in subparagraph (a) above at a monthly rate of $49,453,000, should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the Mission. V. Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the decisions and requests made by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/276 and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the Assembly, and of the United Nations Board of Auditors A. General Assembly (Resolution 61/276) Decisions and requests to the Secretary-General Action taken to implement decisions and requests Section II: budgeting and budget presentation When submitting future budget proposals and performance reports, include information on the most significant management decisions relating to the Mission's budget and its implementation, including those related to operational costs (para. 2). Resource planning assumptions, including significant management decisions, have been included in the proposed 2009/10 budget. Intensify efforts to improve the quality and timely issuance of peacekeeping documents (para. 3). The 2007/08 performance report and the proposed 2009/10 cost estimates have been submitted in a timely manner. Budget submissions should reflect management improvements and efficiency gains to be achieved and present future strategies in that regard (para. 4). Management improvements and anticipated efficiency gains are identified and incorporated in the proposed 2009/10 cost estimates. Take further steps towards improving budget assumptions and forecasts and report thereon to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session (para. 5). Budget assumptions and forecasts have been based on the drawdown plan as enumerated in the seventeenth report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council and approved by the Council in its resolution 1836 (2008) in line with the Mission's consolidation, drawdown and withdrawal benchmarks. Wherever possible, mission-specific parameters, rather than standard costs, have been used. Improve control over obligations due to the significant increase in the cancellation of prior-period obligations (para. 6). A mechanism has been put in place requiring all cost centre managers to provide justification for retention of all obligations for the next financial period. This is in addition to the quarterly review of all outstanding obligations carried out by the Finance Section and Self Accounting Units. It permits the Mission to identify and forecast accurately expenditure patterns and avoid overstatement of obligations. Section III: results-based-budgeting Integrate operational, logistical and financial aspects fully in the planning phase of peacekeeping operations by linking results-based-budgeting to the mandate implementation plans of peacekeeping operations (para. 2). The results-based-budgeting frameworks have been formulated to support achieving the Mission's mandate and drawdown plan. All planned activities are linked with the Mission's mandate. Cost estimates have been prepared based on the results-based-budgeting frameworks. Human resource requirements are derived from the activities to be carried out as indicated in the results-based-budgeting frameworks. Section VII: staffing, recruitment and vacancy rates Make greater use of national staff, as appropriate, commensurate with the requirements of the mission and its mandate (para. 3). National staff members are increasingly assuming duties performed by international staff in the mission support areas. The Mission endeavours to fill national staff and National Officer posts within the 30 day mark. For international posts, the recruitment process to bring staff on board is carried out within 90 days. Authority for technical clearance for selected occupational groups has been delegated to the Mission for all categories of personnel up to and including the D-1 level, thus expediting the recruitment process. Review the staffing structure of missions on an ongoing basis, bearing in mind, in particular, the mission's mandate and concept of operations, and to reflect this in budget proposals, including full justification of any additional posts proposed (para. 5). The human resources requirements of the Mission have been reviewed in line with its mandate, the concept of operations and the drawdown plan. The rationalization and streamlining of the structure of the Mission is reflected in the proposed 2009/10 budget. Section IX: training Provide professional development opportunities for national staff and fully include them in all relevant training programmes (para. 2). Professional development opportunities for national staff are available through the Integrated Mission Training Centre. The Centre provides national staff certification and accreditation and professional administrators Diplomas. It also provides computer courses, including on Microsoft Office applications. Section XIII: air operations Improve the formulation of resource requirements for air operations in budget submissions to make them more reflective of actual operations, bearing in mind the overbudgeting of air transportation requirements in some peacekeeping operations (para. 3). The formulation of resource requirements for air operations in budget submissions is based on the concept of operations and takes into account actual and past performance, the tasks to be carried out, the type of aircraft required, planned flight schedules and estimated flight hours. When reviewing their transportation requirements, missions must take into account means that are efficient, cost-effective and responsive to their operational needs and that ensure the safety of their personnel and take fully into account the unique mandate, complexities, specificities and operational conditions of each mission (para. 4). The concept of operations of the Mission takes into account the efficient utilization and cost effectiveness of the assets to be employed. As part of the evaluation exercise, the selection of aircraft is looked at along with operational modalities, inclusive of available and new facilities and other resources that may be required. The safety of passengers and personnel is paramount and is factored in at all phases of the planning function. Section XVIII: quick-impact projects Quick-impact projects should be implemented with minimal or no overhead charges in order to ensure that the maximum amount is spent for the direct benefit of the local population (para. 5). Funding earmarked for quick-impact projects is spent entirely on the projects themselves. No overhead charges are levied or allowed. There are no dedicated personnel per se in the Mission assigned to manage quick-impact projects. Funding for quick-impact projects for the third year of a mission and beyond may be requested if there is a requirement for confidence-building activities, in which case a needs assessment should be conducted (para. 6). A need assessment was conducted for the 2009/10 period. Gaps were identified in strategic sectors in Liberia in the areas of rule of law and the extension of State authority. The south-eastern part of the country is isolated and remains a geographical priority. Coordination with humanitarian and development partners should be carried out in order to avoid duplication and overlap of activities between missions and humanitarian and development partners in the field (para. 7). The prioritization, selection and vetting of proposals is carried out at local levels through the county support team mechanism, which comprises all stakeholders and is chaired by local authorities. The activities are screened at the central level through Project Review Committee meetings with the participation of line ministries. These measures ensure that there is no duplication or overlap with activities of other partners. Mission budgets allocated for quick-impact projects should not be used to finance humanitarian and development activities already being carried out by United Nations agencies or other international organizations (para. 8). Consultations with all actors at the field level result in the prioritization and selection of projects ensuring that projects considered are those for which no donor funding is available. Regular sharing of information with United Nations agencies and other international organizations at both the field and central levels enables the Mission to select projects for which there is no duplication of effort. Section XX: regional coordination Develop and implement regional coordination plans aligned to the objectives of missions, keeping in mind the specific mandate of each mission (para. 2). UNMIL holds inter-mission meetings with UNOCI and the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) to share best practices and foster further collaboration. UNMIL troops are deployed in Sierra Leone and patrol the borders between the two countries. UNMIL carries out troop rotations for UNOCI. Collaboration is also facilitated by the United Nations Office for West Africa among United Nations peace missions operating in the subregion (UNIPSIL, UNMIL, UNOCI and United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau). Through a consultative process in the Mano River Union, the respective United Nations country teams of Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea and Côte d'Ivoire meet every six months to work on joint responses to regional issues. These include youth, small arms and human trafficking, HIV/AIDS, polio and other epidemics, food security, harmonization of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, border management and control, refugees and internally displaced persons. Section XXI: partnerships, country team coordination and integrated missions Provide, in the context of the budget submissions of complex integrated peacekeeping missions, a clear description of the role and responsibility of missions vis-à-vis integrated mission partners as well as the strategies of the missions for enhancing coordination and collaboration with United Nations country teams in order to achieve better results under relevant components (para. 2). Coordination and collaboration between the Mission and the United Nations country team take place within the integrated mission framework and an avowed principle of one United Nations under a single leadership. The United Nations country team has worked closely with UNMIL since its inception under the guidance of a combined Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator and Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (for Recovery and Governance). Coordination and collaboration are achieved through bimonthly United Nations country team meetings chaired by the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General/ Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator for consultation on substantive programme, operational and administrative issues. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General also chairs a bimonthly Strategic Planning Group, which brings together UNMIL section heads and United Nations country team agency heads. The United Nations country team provides inputs into the Secretary-General's periodic progress reports on Liberia and is regularly consulted during the process of updating the Mission's mandate implementation plan. Key framework documents, such as the Common Country Assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, were prepared with the active participation of UNMIL sections and closely joined-up United Nations support to the national poverty reduction strategy process. (Resolution 62/263) In view of the importance of ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with the United Nations agencies and programmes, reiterates its request that the Secretary-General report to the General Assembly on the progress made in the development of a collaboration framework and the efforts towards developing an integrated workplan in the context of his budget submission at the sixty-third session of the Assembly (para. 10). Following a UNMIL/United Nations country team senior management retreat on integration (25 and 26 September 2009), the Mission and the United Nations country team are in the process of formulating their pillar workplans. Review the staffing structure of the Mission and its related costs and report thereon in the next budget proposal (para. 11). The staffing structure has been reviewed and necessary action taken in the context of the drawdown plan. B. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/62/781/Add.10) Request/recommendation Action taken to implement request/recommendation The Advisory Committee was informed that, as at 31 December 2007, $31,750,000 was owed for troop-cost reimbursements and $27,666,000 for contingent-owned equipment. In respect of death and disability compensation, $3,371,900 had been paid for 89 claims since the inception of the Mission; 17 claims were pending and unliquidated obligations amounted to $1,951,400. The Committee expects that these claims will be settled expeditiously (para. 10). Reimbursement for all UNMIL contingent-owned equipment claims was settled in full as at 30 June 2008. In respect of death and disability compensation, 99 claims estimated at $3,621,945.37 have been received since the inception of the Mission. Of that total, only 16 claims, which were received recently and are estimated at $173,500, are outstanding. The Advisory Committee notes that efficiency gains from better management contributed to underexpenditure for fuel. Upon enquiry, the Committee was informed that overbudgeting was also a major factor in underexpenditure for fuel. In this regard, the Committee was informed that the Mission had benefited from the visit of a budget team from Headquarters, under the Abacus initiative, during its preparation of the budget for 2008/09 (para. 31). Efficiency gains have been identified and incorporated into the 2009/10 cost estimates. The savings in fuel were attributed primarily to the repatriation of the military units once the drawdown plan was confirmed. The Advisory Committee notes the comments raised by the Board of Auditors with respect to UNMIL and requests that the recommendations of the Board be implemented in a timely manner. The Committee notes, in particular, the comment by the Board on longer lead time for contract approval and measures implemented to reduce lead time, including the use of the expediting and tracking sheet by the Mission to monitor its procurement lead time (A/62/764, sect. V.C). Upon enquiry, the Committee was informed that the use of the tracking sheet enables an overview of the procurement cycle and activities, and, as a management tool, it highlights the work overload of particular staff, thus enabling the redistribution of work (para. 38). The recommendation of the Advisory Committee has been implemented in respect of the posting of the requisition and purchase order expediting tracking information sheet on a weekly basis. The information is posted on the UNMIL bulletin board. C. Board of Auditors (A/62/5 (Vol. II) chap. II) Recommendation Implementation Results-based-budgeting During the Board's follow-up of previous audit recommendations, the Administration indicated that, in conjunction with the missions, significant progress had been made in developing clear and measurable indicators of achievement in the missions' results-based framework for 2006/07 and that further improvements would be achieved during the preparation of the budget for 2007/08. Paragraph 16 of the results-based-budgeting guidelines stipulates that all elements of the logical frameworks are formulated as specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and time-bound. However, the Board noted that this requirement had either not been adhered to or there was need for further enhancement, as follows: UNMIL is committed to improving upon the results-based-budgeting process and has endeavoured to produce Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Timely (SMART) outputs in the 2009/10 results-based-budgeting frameworks. (c) At UNMIL, further improvements could be made to the indicators of achievement and the outputs, particularly as regards measurability and the setting of baselines, targets and time frames (para. 79). The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that the Administration ensure that all indicators of achievement and outputs for the results-based-budgeting framework are clear and measurable, and that they include baselines and targets for the current and the ensuing financial year in order to facilitate monitoring and reporting (para. 80). Portfolio of evidence The Board noted the following shortcomings in relation to the portfolio of evidence: The Chief Budget Officer conducts verification exercises every fiscal year. In addition, the Mission also monitors its outputs through the monthly key performance indicators report. (c) At UNMIL, five instances were noted in which the reported outputs exceeded the actual outputs. UNMIL commented that it would closely monitor its data to avoid future discrepancies, circulate the biennial and annual reports to all section chiefs for verification and subsequently submit the reports to the Senior Management Group for review (para. 83). The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that: (a) all performance results are properly substantiated by documented proof of output; and (b) information contained in the portfolio of evidence is certified as correct by the cost centre managers and validated on a test basis by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (para. 84). Expendable property Stock levels In its previous report, the Board had recommended the monitoring of stock levels of expendable equipment by establishing minimum and maximum stock quantities. This was particularly so in respect of UNMIL, where the Board expressed concerns regarding controls on its expendable stock valued at $56.43 million as at 30 June 2006 (para. 104). Guidelines on inventory management for all self-accounting units have been issued. The units currently use Galileo and the Business Objects reporting tool to monitor their stock levels and consumption trends. The Asset Managers have the responsibility of completing the annual physical inventories and reconciliations by 30 June every year. For fast moving items, physical counting is performed twice a year. During the current audit, the Board noted that UNMIL had not fully established the required stock levels. For example, stock levels were not set for the transport and communications and information technology warehouses. The Administration explained that UNMIL had since determined minimum and maximum stock levels for 95 per cent of its stock items and was in the process of determining the levels of the remaining 5 per cent. In addition, the Engineering Services Section conducted monthly reviews of reorder levels of approximately 10 per cent of all stock items (para. 105). The Administration agreed with the Board's reiterated recommendation that it implement an effective system of inventory management, especially with regard to stock levels, lead times for the replenishment of stocks, and reorder quantities (para. 108). Physical count and inventory records At UNMIL, no physical inventories had been undertaken in the communications and information technology and engineering warehouses for the period ended 30 June 2007. The Mission informed the Board that a physical verification exercise had since commenced and would be completed during the first quarter of 2008 (para. 114). The self-accounting units were instructed to fully record the transactions in Galileo by 1 January 2009. However, the reconciliation of the physical inventory with Galileo records for the backlog of previous transactions is ongoing and planned to be finalized by 30 June 2009. The Board recommends that the above missions: (a) conduct a physical inventory of all expendable property at all locations and reconcile the discrepancies between the physical counts and the quantities recorded in the Galileo system; (b) update the Galileo system promptly whenever there are inventory movements; and (c) ensure that the locations of inventories as recorded in Galileo agree with the actual physical locations (para. 116). Write-offs and disposal The Board recommends that MONUC and UNMIL identify the causes for the delays in the disposal of non-expendable property and take appropriate measures to expedite such disposal (para. 135). Between April 2006 and September 2007, because of delays in the recruitment process, significant backlog accrued. Other factors hampering the disposal of items are the limited market, the short-term ban on exportation of certain commodities by the Government, as well as also the shortage of certified local disposal contractors. Disposal of non-expendable property is expected to be on track eventually. The Department of Field Support commented that UNMIL had recently recruited an asset disposal assistant to augment the work of the Asset Disposal Unit, and that destruction exercises had since been completed for 222 monitors and 192 computer notebooks. The remaining obsolete items were to be disposed of appropriately (para. 136). From April to July 2008, some 2,473 assets valued at $5.2 million were disposed of. To date, the Communications and Information Technology Section, the Property Control and Inventory Unit and the Assets Disposal Unit had written off about 7,726 assets, for a total value of $13.4 million. This exercise started in 2007. Physical verification and recording The Board noted instances at various missions in which recording had not been done in accordance with paragraphs 5.30 and 5.31 of the Property Management Manual, which require the reconciliation of property records with the information derived from physical verification. These instances were as follows: (a) At UNMIL, of the 42,173 items of non-expendable assets, 7,781 (18.45 per cent) valued at $32.28 million had not been physically verified during 2006/07. Verification with Galileo had also revealed that the locations of several assets were not correctly reflected in the system. Furthermore, while the system showed that some assets were in stock, physical verification had disclosed that they were faulty and therefore could not be used (para. 138). The Board reiterates its previous recommendations that the Administration ensure that: (a) periodic physical verifications of non-expendable property at the various missions are carried out; (b) discrepancies are promptly investigated; and (c) corrective action is taken to avoid a recurrence (para. 139). The Department of Field Support commented that UNMIL had developed key performance indicators and goals to facilitate monitoring of the monthly inspections carried out by the Property Control and Inventory Unit (para. 140). The Property Control and Inventory Unit reports discrepancies to the self-accounting unit on a weekly basis, with reconciliation monitored on a monthly basis. Compared with the 2006/07 period, in the 2007/08 period, the Mission significantly reduced the non-verifiable items. In the current 2008/09 period the Mission is aiming at further reducing such figures by means of better inspection planning and increased enforcement of accountability requirements. Procurement lead time Goods and services not delivered on time may result in the delayed delivery of mission mandates and could pose threats to life and property. The following observations were made in relation to the lead times between the approval of requisitions and the issuance of the related purchase orders: (b) At UNMIL, 4 purchase orders had been issued between 91 and 194 days after the approval of the related requisitions (para. 183). The Board recommends that the Administration identify the causes for delays in the issuance of purchase orders and adopt measures to ensure that all purchase orders are issued within a reasonable time after the approval of the related requisitions (para. 184). All purchase orders issued are within the time line prescribed in the Procurement Manual. The Mission has been able to process the award within one to two months from the approval of the requisition. Storage of rations At UNMIL, ration packs had not been stored at the prescribed temperature; as a result, there was spoilage of at least 128,710 ration packs valued at $0.913 million as at 6 September 2007 (para. 236). The Board recommends that the Administration ensure that UNMIL takes appropriate measures to ensure that rations are stored at the prescribed temperature in order to minimize spoilage (para. 237). The Mission undertakes regular visits to storage facilities and advises contingent commanders of appropriate storage conditions. UNMIL has a policy of rotating composite ration packs. Units are obliged to consume daily issued stock; replacement of authorized consumption is provided six to eight times a year. At the end of October 2008, the Mission had a total of seven days' reserve of composite ration packs. Pending the receipt of seven days' stock from the vendor in accordance with the contract, additional quantities have been distributed to the units to reach the necessary level of stock at their locations. In addition, the Mission arranges to place the needed level of stock of composite ration packs at the units' locations before the start of the rainy season, when roads become impassable. This ensures that units have composite ration pack stock to consume when needed, thus avoiding a high rate of spoilage. The administrative instructions for the emergency composite ration pack reserve require units to maintain a seven-day supply of United Nations composite ration packs as a reserve for emergency purposes. However, at UNMIL, an audit visit to Buchanan on 28 August 2007 disclosed that no emergency ration packs were in stock at one of the contingents (para. 245). The Department of Peacekeeping Operations agreed with the Board's recommendation that UNMIL plan and monitor the distribution of composite ration packs to ensure that all contingents maintain the minimum reserves (para. 246). It should be noted that many military contingents lack proper temperature-controlled storage at their locations. This has led to the administrative arrangement to keep only a 2-day composite ration pack reserve in their custody in order to avoid problems, such as spoilage. In addition, to ensure that the contingents are obtaining maximum support in case of emergency, the food cell closely monitors the demand for all units and promptly arranges the transfer of composite ration packs from the contractor's warehouse to the relevant contingent's location before depletion of their stock. Air operations Aircraft passengers At UNMIL, for the period under review, the passenger average per flight was calculated at 45 per cent of seating capacity, a 2 per cent increase over the 2005/06 figure, while the average cargo carried on helicopters remained at 35 per cent of their capacity. The Board recommends that UNMIL seek ways of improving aircraft utilization (paras. 265 and 266). Management commented that owing to the nature of dead-leg flights, medical evacuation trips, and cargo and patrol operations, the true utilization performance of the air operations might not be accurately assessed and that the current nature and form of reporting and systems did not cater for an effective review of utilization. The Mission would nevertheless continue to conduct analyses to ensure the efficient utilization of aircraft (para. 267). The Mission has adopted the policy of optimal use of air assets and reconfigures them to respond to changing circumstances, including an increase in the utilization of air assets, inter alia, by continuing to review flight schedules to accommodate more passengers and cargo. Measures have been taken to improve aircraft utilization and to enhance efficiency gains and service improvements. These include revision of flight schedules from experience of travel patterns and the implementation of new shuttle flight schedules, both domestic and to/from Accra, and combining shuttle flights where practical at the last minutes of the planning/scheduling stage in order to maximize passenger and cargo loads. Helicopters have been deployed to Greenville and to Gbarnga to reduce flying hours and provide a more efficient response to casualty and medical evacuations. The average aircraft utilization has increased from 41 per cent on passengers to 59.48 per cent and decreased on cargo from 35 per cent to 17.39 per cent for the period 2007/08. The Mission identified this reduction and therefore reduced the fleet by one MI-26 aircraft as at 1 January 2008. Furthermore, the Mission has recommended a further reduction of two helicopters for the 2009/10 period. Information and communications technology Governance structure At UNMIL, information and communications technology governance structures were not in place although all missions had been advised since 2005 that such a structure should be established to provide a uniform approach to development, maintenance, system support and training. This issue had also been raised by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in April 2007 (para. 278). The Administration indicated that UNMIL had increased the scope of the Information and Communications Technology Review Committee to include the review of governance issues and that, at the next meeting of the Committee in January 2008, the Mission's projects relating to information and communications technology would be discussed. The Mission had also requested funding in the 2008/09 budget for a consultant to develop and implement a business continuity plan. In addition, the Mission had begun a crisis management actions project, the first phase of which would be to catalogue required responses to various potential emergencies. The second phase would be to identify the critical core business processes that must be continued during an emergency. Those two phases would be completed in January and June 2008, respectively (para. 279). The information and communications technology governance structure has been in place since September 2007. The Board recommends that UNMIL: (a) convene regular meetings of the Information and Communications Technology Review Committee and increase the scope of the Committee to include overall governance of information and communications technology; and (b) prepare a business continuity plan (para. 280). UNMIL holds regular Information and Communications Technology Review Committee meetings in accordance with the policy of the Department of Field Support, and the scope of the Committee was increased to include overall governance of information and communications technology. UNMIL has published and tested its plan for disaster recovery and business continuity. Human resources management Human resources plan At MONUC, UNMIL, the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and UNOCI, human resources plans, including succession planning, were not yet in place. The absence of a plan had been raised in the previous audit and the Administration had agreed to develop and implement comprehensive human resources plans (para. 284). The formal roll out of the human resources action plan implementation was sent by Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support and to all field missions on 28 July 2008. UNMIL is in the process of reviewing the targets and baselines for consideration and acceptance by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia and Head of UNMIL. The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that missions, in conjunction with headquarters, develop and implement comprehensive human resources plans, as well as succession plans, to enable them to attract and retain suitably qualified and trained personnel (para. 285). Pending the implementation of the Talent Management Tool, UNMIL will utilize the Nucleus system to determine upcoming vacancies and take proactive action in identifying candidates. The Department of Field Support indicated that the implementation of a human resources plan must be considered in the broader context of the introduction of human resources action plans at all field missions. The human resources action plan concept and its framework had been endorsed by both the Office of Human Resources Management and the expanded senior management team of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support. The Department of Field Support stated that a pilot project would be implemented at five missions (MINUSTAH, UNMIL, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan) and that it was in the process of developing information technology-based human resources management tools for data compilation, which would assist the pilot missions in meeting the objectives of the human resources action plan. Following a review of lessons learned during the pilot implementation of the plans at those five missions, the project would be rolled out to all missions, effective July 2008 for missions funded from special assessed contributions and January 2009 for missions funded from the regular budget (para. 286). The concept and framework of the human resources action plan highlight legislative mandates, roles and responsibilities at the Mission and Headquarters levels, with an emphasis on the authority of the Head of Mission in human resources management in general and in staff selection in particular. A crucial role of the action plan is to identify critical and challenging areas where the Department of Field Support could deliver stronger support to the field. Vacancy rates The vacancy rates at UNMIL as at 30 June 2007 for posts at the senior and middle management levels were 18 and 15 per cent, respectively. Some of the positions had been vacant for more than six months (para. 291). The tenure of the majority of staff in the Mission is approximately 2.5 years. During the period 2007/08, with the establishment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, several staff members were selected for the new mission owing to the expertise and experience they had acquired during their service in UNMIL. The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the filling of vacancies at all missions (para. 293). The Mission is attempting to fill all vacancies in a timely manner in line with the drawdown plan. Gender balance The Board followed up the implementation of its previous recommendation on the improvement of gender balance and noted that the situation had yet to be fully addressed at UNMIL (para. 298). At UNMIL, the gender balance of staff as at 30 June 2007 was not within the 50/50 ratio. In particular, the ratios of males to females in respect of international staff, national staff and United Nations Volunteers were 68:32, 80:20 and 67:33, respectively (para. 299). The Board recommends that the Administration continue to develop and implement strategies and targets in human resources plans with a view to achieving the 50/50 gender balance at all missions (para. 302). The Mission continues to identify and give first preference to equally qualified female candidates. However, the rate of acceptance is very low. Within the human resources action plan, the gender balance target established is for an increase of 3 per cent yearly. The efforts to attract and select suitable female candidates will continue. Procedure manual and handover notes At UNMIL, there was no procedure manual that documented the policies and procedures relating to the budget process. Such policies and procedures include the assignment of responsibilities among personnel and offices, monthly, quarterly and annual timelines for the submission of budget information, the process flow for submission, the approval procedures, the adjustment procedures, and the review and variance analysis procedures. There also was no evidence of management processes being in place to identify and correct variances between actual and budgeted figures on a monthly basis (para. 310). Budget guidelines and procedures have been prepared and posted on the Mission Intranet. In addition, the monthly expenditure and appropriation report compiled by the budget section and sent out on a monthly basis to the chiefs of all sections only provided information on changes to appropriations and the year-to-date expenditure. Therefore, under or overspending was not immediately identified since there were no comparisons on a month-to-month basis, or on current year-to-date expenditures compared with prior months or year-to-date expenditures (para. 311). A report on expenditures is done with analysis of graphs and reason for variances is given on a monthly basis and sent to programme managers. At UNMIL, the best practices toolbox for handover notes for personnel leaving their positions or for those on leave of absence for more than four weeks had not been implemented (para. 314). The Board recommends that UNMIL implement the best practices toolbox for handover notes for staff members leaving the Mission permanently in order to assist their successors during the transition periods (para. 315). The Department of Field Support informed the Board that UNMIL had since issued an information circular, reminding staff members, especially those leaving the Mission or moving from one section to another, that it was imperative that they prepare handover notes to assist their successors. The Department stated that the Mission management would monitor all handovers to ensure strict compliance with the provisions of the information circular (para. 316). In line with best practices and as part of the Mission's check-out process, handover notes are requested from departing personnel. UNMIL issued a circular to all personnel on this subject in November 2007. Project implementation At UNMIL, 26 per cent of quick-impact projects had not been completed on time. In particular, delays in the completion of 10 projects ranged from two to nine months. In addition, physical inspections indicated substandard and incomplete work on two projects (para. 335). The Department of Field Support commented that UNMIL had since implemented a monitoring and tracking system that systematically oversaw the entire process of reviewing, selecting and administering approved projects. The system facilitated the identification and addressing of problems well before the end of the three months set for disbursement of the first instalment of project funds. Also, in cooperation with the Reintegration, Rehabilitation and Recovery Section, the UNMIL Force Commander had directed military observers to visit periodically ongoing quick-impact projects and report on the status of their implementation (para. 336). The Board recommended that the Administration, in collaboration with the management at missions, develop strategies to ensure that: (a) quick-impact projects are completed within the agreed time frames; and (b) physical inspections are carried out periodically to ensure that the work undertaken is of an acceptable quality (para. 338). As a result of the integration of quick-impact projects into the recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration programme from 1 July 2007, monitoring has been undertaken by recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration field officers, and through the county support team mechanism. Substantial efforts have already been made and implemented in regard to project oversight since 1 July 2007, including: (a) Institutionalizing well-thought-out supervisory arrangements that augment monitoring at the field level by involving senior headquarters staff in regular visits to project sites (for purposes of keeping a close watch on project operations and verification of progress); (b) Establishment of a monitoring and tracking system that identifies problems faced in the implementation and records remedial actions taken; (c) Enhanced cooperation with the UNMIL Engineering and Procurement Sections to ensure that project proposals are thoroughly reviewed, involving field staff who are substantively responsible for submission of the proposal, as well as local authorities and county support teams, to ensure that proposals reflect actual needs; (d) Active involvement of all supervisors/monitors in leading coordination forums, where consultations with representatives of national and local authorities and community leaders may have an effect on the efficacy of approved project. A. Substantive offices of the United Nations Mission in Liberia Abbreviations: USG, Under-Secretary-General; ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; FS, Field Service; NO, National Officer; NS, national General Service; UNV, United Nations Volunteer. a New post. b Redeployed post. c Reclassified post. d Funded under general temporary assistance. e Post converted to Field Service category. a Post converted to Field Service category. Annex II Priorities Outcomes Lead, partners, mechanism National and local authorities increasingly have the capacity to provide security, manage conflict and prevent violence, respecting human rights throughout the country :: Accountable security sector established and functioning :: Enhancing security sector reform (2009-2010: $8.4 million) :: Training and capacity development of the Liberian National Police in the enforcement of law and order (2009: $350,000) :: UNMIL, UNDP, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Justice :: UNMIL, UNDP, Liberian National Police, Ministry of Justice :: Support to corrections reform (2009: $150,000) :: UNDP, UNMIL, Ministry of Justice :: National reconciliation and reintegration processes consolidated, with focus on youth empowerment and combating violence against women :: Arms for development (2009: $1.6 million) :: UNDP :: Livelihoods (microgrants for vulnerable, microloans for business people, agricultural inputs) for Liberian returnees, contribution to the Liberian health pool fund for primary health care, support to protection core group (protection monitoring, incentives to protection core group clerks and county attorneys) (2009: $2,911,684) :: UNHCR, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Justice, Liberian Refugee Repatriation and Resettlement Commission and Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization :: Government and civil society have capacity for conflict prevention, management and conflict- sensitive development at national and local levels :: Establishment of Government of Liberia Peacebuilding Office/ secretariat at the Ministry of Internal Affairs :: National Youth Volunteer for Peace :: Supporting the Ministry of Justice in improving prosecution services :: Enhancing the relationship between the police and civilians in communities :: Tumutu agricultural training programme :: Enhancing the capacity of the Ministry of Justice in Maryland and Grand Bassa counties :: Strengthening public defence (total 2009-2010, 18 months: $6 million) :: UNDP, UNMIL, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Youth and Sports, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Land Mine Action (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) :: Community empowerment: peace, human rights and civic participation (community-based peace education with local NGOs) and strengthening the rule of law (formal and informal/ traditional institutions) (2008-2010: $2,100,010) :: UNHCR, Ministry of Internal Affairs National economic policies and programmes are being implemented to support equitable, inclusive and sustainable socio-economic development :: National mechanisms and capacities for Millennium Development Goals-based development strategies, conflict-sensitive planning, analysis and monitoring strengthened :: Strengthen national capacities for Millennium Development Goals-based planning, statistical development and economic policies (2009: $2,721,105) :: UNDP, Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Liberian Institute for Statistics and Geo-Information Services, Liberian Reconstruction and Development Committee, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Mines, Land and Energy :: Increased access to productive employment and equal opportunities for sustainable livelihoods, especially for vulnerable groups and in consideration of conflict factors :: Vocational training business skills development and microcredit schemes (2009: $2,390,000) :: UNDP, Ministry of Youth and Sports, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Agriculture, Federation of Liberian Youth :: Community-based social and economic reintegration enable vulnerable children to embark on sustainable livelihoods ($969,000) :: UNICEF, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Gender and Development, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Youth and Sports, Ministry of Labour Democratic, accountable and transparent governance is being advanced in a participatory and inclusive manner and in accordance with human rights standards :: Governance systems reformed to promote and sustain democratic principles with strengthened decentralized capacity and participation of disadvantaged groups :: Support to formulation and implementation of decentralization policy and capacity-building of county/district administrations (2009: $4 million) :: UNDP, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Planning, Ministry of Finance, Governance Commission :: Support to interventions targeted at enhancing the governance framework, improved transparency and accountability and civic participation in the governance ($825,000) :: UNDP, Ministry of Planning, Governance Commission, Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission, National Elections Commission :: Joint programme on sexual and gender-based violence finalized and resources mobilized to begin implementation (2009: $1 million) :: United Nations Population Fund, United Nations Development Fund for Women, UNDP, UNHCR, World Health Organization, UNICEF, WFP and UNMIL through gender theme groups and gender-based violence task forces :: Rule of law strengthened, upholding international human rights standards :: Strengthened State authority at local level through the county support teams, including administrative building, capacity-building and information management (2009: $2 million) :: United Nations country team and UNMIL, UNDP lead for county support team project and UNMIL lead for the county support team mechanism :: Strengthening rule of law and administration of justice in Liberia ($2.9 million) :: UNDP, Ministry of Justice, Judiciary :: Support to the development of the police child protection services alongside the social welfare and probation services and judiciary (2009: $969,000) :: UNICEF, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Millennium Development Goals 