%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SUPPORT ACCOUNTS|RESULTS-BASED BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|STAFFING|ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE|ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM|INSTITUTIONAL MACHINERY|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|PROGRAMME PLANNING|

Sixty-third session Agenda item 132 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations, performance report on the budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 and proposed budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Contents Page Introduction Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations (A/63/702) Support account for peacekeeping operations Performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 Updated financial information in respect of the current period Proposed cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Format and presentation Evolution of the support account General Detailed recommendations Department of Peacekeeping Operations Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Office of Operations Office of Military Affairs Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions Policy, Evaluation and Training Division Department of Field Support Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support Field Budget and Finance Division Field Personnel Division Logistics Support Division Information and Communications Technology Division Department of Management Office of the Under-Secretary-General Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts Office of Human Resources Management Office of Central Support Services Office of Internal Oversight Services Office of the United Nations Ombudsman Ethics Office Office of Legal Affairs Department of Public Information Department of Safety and Security Office of Information and Communications Technology Conclusion Documentation Annexes Organization charts, Office of Operations, Department of Peacekeeping Operations Summary of improvements to administrative and management processes Current and projected expenditure of the support account for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 Organization chart, Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, Police Division Organization chart, Office of Information and Communications Technology I. Introduction 1. The recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions would entail a reduction in the proposed budget for the support account for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. The reasons for this are contained in paragraphs 46-199 below. The Advisory Committee also makes a number of observations and recommendations with regard to the administration and management of the resources of the support account for peacekeeping operations and areas for improvements. 2. The Advisory Committee's general report on administrative and budgetary aspects of peacekeeping operations (A/63/746) contains its views and recommendations on a number of cross-cutting issues. The Committee's comments and observations on the Secretary-General's report on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations (A/63/702 and Corr.1), which was submitted in response to the request of the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/279 and 62/250, are contained in section II of the present report. Section III contains the Committee's observations and recommendations on the financial performance report on the budget of the support account for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 and on the proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. 3. The documents used by the Advisory Committee in its consideration of the proposed budget for the support account are listed at the end of the present report. II. Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations (A/63/702) 4. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in paragraph 67 of its resolution 61/279, requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the second part of its resumed sixty-third session, a comprehensive report on the impact of the new structure of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support in the implementation of mission mandates, and on the efficiency and effectiveness of programme delivery. In paragraph 24 of its resolution 62/250, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to include detailed information on mechanisms in place and measures taken to address management challenges posed by the new organizational structure, and on the improvement that the new structure has brought in ensuring efficiency and effectiveness in support for peacekeeping operations and special political missions, as well as to coordinate with the Department of Political Affairs. 5. Regarding the request contained in paragraph 67 of resolution 61/279, the Advisory Committee notes that, according to the Secretary-General, the 18 months that have elapsed since the approval by the General Assembly of the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support are not sufficient to fully realize the implementation of in-depth organizational reform. In his report, the Secretary-General instead seeks to highlight areas in which significant strategic and operational benefits have already accrued. According to the representatives of the Secretary-General, it will take three to four years to fully realize and assess in a meaningful manner the impact of the restructuring. The Committee recognizes that three to four years may be a reasonable time frame to fully realize and meaningfully assess the impact of the restructuring. However, it is of the opinion that significant strategic and operational benefits accrued thus far are not evident in the report and need to be brought out more clearly in future reports. 6. In paragraphs 8 to 21 of his report (A/63/702), the Secretary-General sets out the context of the restructuring, including past reforms, such as that which followed the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/305-S/2000/809), the five-year (2005-2010) reform agenda referred to as "Peace operations 2010", culminating with a summary of the Secretary-General's proposals for reform set out in his reports (see A/61/749, A/61/858 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and Add.2, and A/62/752), as well as the decisions of the General Assembly in this regard, as contained in its resolutions 61/279 and 62/250. The Advisory Committee recognizes that the restructuring exercise has achieved some of the objectives outlined in paragraphs 16 and 17 of the report. It recommends that the Secretary-General develop clear benchmarks to realize the objectives set out in those paragraphs. The Committee also emphasizes that evaluation of the success of restructuring would continue to be measured against these broad objectives. 7. Section V of the Secretary-General's report addresses the progress and initial impact of the restructuring. The Secretary-General notes that most of the capacities approved under resolution 61/279 have been introduced and that the strengthening of the leadership, managerial and staffing capacities has also been achieved in large part: recruitment is under way for some key posts owing to movement of staff (for example, the Director-level posts in the Department of Field Support, which are in the process of being filled); challenges were faced in filling some specialist posts in the integrated operational teams, which are being addressed (see para. 15 below); and the full impact of the strengthening of the Office of Military Affairs is yet to be realized, as recruitment is ongoing (as at 28 February, 49 posts were vacant of a total of 132 approved new posts for 2008/09). Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that prior to restructuring, the overall staffing of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations included 679 posts (62 regular budget posts and 617 support account posts). Current overall staffing (after restructuring) includes 453 posts for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (28 regular budget and 425 support account) and 454 posts for the Department of Field Support (30 regular budget and 424 support account). The Committee notes that some of the key posts remain vacant and that personnel movements, especially in key leadership posts, could hamper the restructuring process. The Committee has pointed out the importance of stability in the personnel structure in order to ensure continuity and efficient performance, and urges the prompt recruitment and appointment of staff. 8. As to the unity of command and integration of efforts, the Secretary-General indicates that a policy on authority, command and control has been issued clarifying arrangements and providing comprehensive directives for senior leadership positions. In addition, a number of joint decision-making forums have been established at the strategic, policy and operational levels for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support. Although the Advisory Committee was informed that the working relationship between the Under-Secretaries-General of the two Departments was smooth and seamless, in the Committee's view the report fails to fully address paragraph 58 of resolution 61/279. The Secretary-General indicates that the creation of shared resources in both Departments has facilitated integration, achieved economies of scale and enhanced the development and application of uniform standards and systems in the two Departments. A key benefit indicated is the emergence of areas of expertise, which has encouraged other departments to seek this expertise and support in such areas as mission support, rule of law and security institutions, military affairs and mission planning. Nevertheless, the Committee stresses that this should not lead to duplication and overlapping of resources. In this connection, the Committee notes that a service-level agreement between the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Field Support will be finalized in 2009. 9. In a related matter, the division of labour between the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is touched upon in paragraph 79 of the Secretary-General's report. As indicated, both Departments are refining a common set of principles for interdepartmental cooperation, to ensure unity of command, complementarity of effort and effective resort to the expertise resident in both Departments, which will be set forth in the Secretary-General's bulletins that are being finalized for each Department. Given the simultaneous active role in missions of both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, the Advisory Committee is of the opinion that the restructuring exercise should have been taken as an opportunity to reexamine what can be done more effectively and efficiently by each Department and to explore how best to organize the political functions of the Secretariat to enhance efficiency and effectiveness through possible consolidation, bearing in mind their respective mandates. 10. In paragraphs 29 to 49 of his report, the Secretary-General elaborates on guidance and support enhancements. While the Advisory Committee questions the assertion that all of these are a direct result of the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the creation of the Department of Field Support, it is still worth noting the strengthening of different capacities, improvements developed or being developed and issues requiring attention. 11. The Advisory Committee was informed that it was envisaged that the draft Secretary-General's bulletins on the organization and functions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support would be finalized by the two Departments in May 2009 and submitted to the Department of Management to go through the normal formal review process prior to promulgation by the Secretary-General. It is therefore envisaged that that they will be approved and issued by August 2009. The Committee emphasizes the importance of timely issuance of all guidance materials that are crucial to the attainment of the goal of strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations. 12. According to the Secretary-General, one of the early benefits indicated from the restructuring is the emergence of the Department of Field Support as a key strategic and operational enabler, with a sharper focus on support issues and strengthened capacity in support of good offices, mediation, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. As the Secretary-General indicates in his report, the Department of Field Support is currently leading the development of a comprehensive support strategy for delivery of services, on the basis of a quality of support survey of all field operations conducted in August 2008 and a workshop for directors and chiefs, held in November 2008. The Advisory Committee was informed that some of the main areas of that strategy include identifying ways to improve (a) the delivery of support services to field operations through the entire life cycle of a mission (through better use of technology, shared support elements between missions and use of regional locations to provide support services to multiple missions), placing particular focus on the start-up phase but seeking to transform the overall support approach to a "global support operation" from a "collection of missions to be supported"; (b) the means to ensure the best human resources to deliver support services to field operations (through a culture of service, training and development of core internal experts, deployment of technical experts, partnerships and subcontracting, and internal and external standing capacities); (c) the means to strengthen the support organization in the longer term through use of management systems, benchmarks and greater delegation of authority; and (d) the means to optimize the impact on local environments (through local procurement, hiring of local professionals and staff, and partnerships with local institutions). 13. Furthermore, the Advisory Committee was informed that, in developing the support strategy, the following assumptions were taken into consideration: the pressure for efficiency in the management of staffing and non-staffing resources as a result of the effects of the financial crisis; environmental concerns, which impact policies regarding operations and equipment; safety and security concerns; the need for increased oversight, accountability and risk management; the need for practical frameworks for the implementation of joint operations, programmes and activities; and troop contributors' requirements for support and equipment. The Committee notes that some elements of the strategy were reflected in the peacekeeping budgets and the support account budget for 2009/10, and welcomes measures to improve the support functions. It expects that the information on the fully articulated strategy will be provided to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-fourth session. 14. The Advisory Committee notes that the Secretary-General has launched a New Horizon Study to provide the basis for a clear articulation of future strategic and policy goals for United Nations peacekeeping, identifying approaches to minimize risk and maximize effectiveness. With reference to questions referred to in paragraph 9 above, the Committee also notes analogous efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General in the area of mediation (Department of Political Affairs) and peacebuilding (Peacebuilding Support Office). 15. As regards operational guidance and support, the Secretary-General states that the value of integrated operational teams has been assessed as more evident during the planning phase for new missions, missions in transition and start-up phases of missions, but less tangible in supporting more stable ones. Some of the problems identified include inconsistent perception of reporting lines, as a result of the decision to staff and budget the team specialists within their functional areas, while locating the team structure in the Office of Operations; the lack of consistency in the functions, empowerment and authority of and delivery of work by the team officers, together with differing mechanisms between functional areas and teams in terms of ensuring effective matrix management; delays accrued in filling some specialist officer positions owing to the lack of prior United Nations experience, in particular for applicants for seconded military and police positions, leading to the provision of on-the-job training; and the decision to allow officers currently serving on secondment in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to apply for team positions for which they meet the requirements and to extend their period of service for one or two years. 16. According to the Secretary-General, the responses to the preliminary assessments of the functioning of integrated operational teams have included the development of guiding principles, definitions and a revised consolidated division of labour matrix between the teams and functional areas of both Departments. Recognition that "one size does not fit all" has led to enabling the Office of Operations to assign team specialists across missions, as needed, to meet operational requirements and to issue revised or new terms of reference, clarifying functions of team leaders, specialist officers and directors within the Office. 17. The Advisory Committee notes that, to date, seven integrated operational teams have been established, on the basis of three models (one team dedicated to one mission, two dedicated teams supporting more than one mission and four teams with shared specialists focusing on several missions), the composition of which is shown in organization charts contained in the present report (see annex I). In addition, a follow-up assessment on the functioning and impact of integrated operational teams will be undertaken by June 2009. The Committee observes that some of the deficiencies identified highlight the need for greater structural flexibility, as initially recommended by the Committee (see A/61/937). It looks forward to the upcoming assessment and expects that, on that basis, further refinements will be implemented to address any shortcomings, in order to ensure better delivery of services and effectiveness in the operations of the integrated operational teams. 18. The Advisory Committee recalls its observations in paragraph 13 of its report (A/62/855). In that report, the Committee expressed its concern regarding the lack of budgetary transparency in the administrative arrangements for the integrated operational teams. Upon request, the Committee was provided with the guiding principles for the integrated operational teams, which state that integrated operational teams make recommendations to senior management in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support on strategic issues and receive specialist policy and technical advice from the two Departments. In the Committee's view, the proposed structure (see annex I) seems incompatible with the guidelines. The Committee expects that the foregoing factors will be clarified in the evaluation exercise referred to above and that refinements will be introduced, as appropriate. 19. Reference is made to the enhancement of institutional learning and improvement, in particular through training and evaluation (see A/63/702, paras. 5665). As indicated, a number of evaluations have been undertaken, or are planned to be undertaken, and recommendations have been fed into revised guidance, improvements or initiatives. The Advisory Committee notes that it is proposed to move the evaluation capacity from the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section to the Office of the Director of the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division to avoid conflict of interest and ensure independence (see para. 89 below). As regards training, a report on the progress of training in peacekeeping has been submitted by the Secretary-General (A/63/680). The Committee's comments and recommendations in this regard are contained in its general report on administrative and budgetary aspects of peacekeeping operations (A/63/746). 20. The Secretary-General summarizes improvements to administrative and management processes in paragraphs 66 to 78 of his report (A/63/702). These include business processes improvement initiatives undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support in partnership with the Department of Management, supported by the Lean Six Sigma methodology, to simplify workflows and optimize quality. The Advisory Committee was informed that three broad priority areas had been designated (planning, personnel and procurement), 11 projects had been approved for completion by March 2009 (phase I) and that phase II, to begin in April 2009, was intended to complete 20 additional projects. Other improvement initiatives include the creation of Abacus teams and the launching of a programme for an advanced compendium of trainees to change the approach to the budget preparation process and improve timeliness and quality of budget submissions (see A/63/746). Improvements related to human resources management include process improvements, such as the delegation of authority by the Department of Management to the Department of Field Support to make discretionary decisions regarding job classifications of field positions up to the D-1 level, the granting of authority to field missions for staffing table management, selection and on boarding and the rolling out of human resources action plans to the field, allowing the Field Personnel Division to concentrate on human resources capacity-building (see A/63/702, paras. 69-70). In the area of logistics, the report refers to the implementation of tenant units now operating at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (UNLB), to provide efficient and economical services to United Nations field missions (see A/63/702, para. 76). Other initiatives include measures to enhance field procurement by the Department of Field Support and the Department of Management, through improvement of internal control and processes, training of procurement staff and tools for tracking and monitoring field procurement delegation. 21. Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was provided with a compendium of initiatives for improvement of administrative and management processes, detailing the office responsible for implementing them, the status of implementation and time frames for completion (see annex II). The Committee has referred to some of these issues in its general report on the administrative and budgetary aspects of peacekeeping operations (see A/63/746). The Committee expects that the evolving process of these initiatives will be monitored and evaluated, and that the Secretary-General will be able to provide information on their impact and efficiency gains in the next support account budget submission. 22. The Secretary-General states that strengthening of United Nations police capacity, as well as the Chief of Staff position are identified as areas for further reform. The Advisory Committee notes that proposals regarding the police capacity, following the review undertaken in 2008, are presented in the support account budget for 2009/10. The Committee's recommendations are set out in paragraphs 75 to 81 below. It was originally envisaged by the Secretary-General that the functions of the Chief of Staff would primarily include overseeing the internal management of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, on behalf of the Under-Secretary-General, and ensuring effective integration of both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support. The Secretary-General states that the Chief of Staff has effectively served and supported both Under-Secretaries-General as a shared resource and will continue to do so, while also directing other shared resources of both Departments (Executive Office, Situation Centre, Information Management, the Registry). 23. Ongoing challenges for United Nations peacekeeping are touched upon in section VII of the Secretary-General's report (A/63/702). The Secretary-General cites difficulties in simultaneously managing the reform while mounting, adjusting and maintaining direction and support to new and existing missions, as well as in recruiting and retaining high-quality civilian staff, evidenced in the high vacancy and turnover rates. This situation is expected to improve and yield gains in view of the reform measures adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/250, the introduction of improved business processes and the introduction of the talent management and the enterprise resource planning systems. 24. Another major challenge indicated by the Secretary-General is the need to further streamline supply chain management, including procurement governance and processes. A joint and comprehensive exercise is currently ongoing with the Department of Management and the Department of Field Support to review the control framework, including delegation of procurement to the field and procurement oversight mechanisms. It is intended that the revised procurement governance system will be accompanied by a training and certification programme. In this connection, the Advisory Committee recalls the outstanding requests made by the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/246 and 61/279 on a comprehensive procurement governance report. 25. In addition, the Secretary-General indicates current capacity constraints for the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions as a further challenge and has included proposals for strengthening the capacity in the support account budget for 2009/10 (see paras. 74-87 below). 26. The Advisory Committee encourages the Secretariat to continue to improve the planning, guidance, management and support of peacekeeping operations, building upon the considerable increases and strengthening in staffing and non-staffing resources that have been provided in successive reforms. However, the Committee recommends that the current working structures should be kept under review in order to achieve further streamlining and rationalization of functions, thus avoiding duplication and overlap. The Secretary-General should be requested to continue to ensure a clear chain of command, accountability and coordination. Structural changes should allow for consolidation of past actions and the benefits of experience. The Committee recommends that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly, at its resumed sixty-fifth session, a report substantiating the strategic and operational benefits achieved through the restructuring, reform and business processes. Appropriation 2007/08 Expenditure 2007/08 Unencumbered balance Appropriation 2008/09 Projected expenditure 2008/09* Proposal by the Secretary-General 2009/10 (A/63/767) Recommendation of the Advisory Committee * As at 13 March 2009 (see annex III). A. Performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 27. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolutions 61/279, 62/232 A and 62/238, section XX, approved total support account resources in the amount of $230,509,900 for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, including 1,122 temporary posts (819 continuing and 303 new temporary posts) and related post and non-post requirements. The period in question reflects the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including the establishment of the Department of Field Support and the initial impact of substantive strengthening of the staff and non-staff resources in support of peacekeeping operations, as decided by the Assembly in its resolution 61/279. 28. As indicated in the Secretary-General's report (A/63/698), the expenditures for the period amounted to $222,450,800 gross ($200,386,600 net), resulting in an unencumbered balance of $8,059,100 gross ($8,845,600 net), or 3.6 per cent, in gross terms, of the approved resources for the period. A summary of resource performance by category and the related explanation is provided in the Secretary-General's report (see A/63/698, table 1, and paras. 6-11). The average vacancy rates for the reporting period were 17.8 per cent for Professional posts and 12.5 per cent for General Service posts. 29. The Advisory Committee notes that the unencumbered balance was attributable mainly to underexpenditures in respect of: (a) Post resources ($12,181,200, or 8.7 per cent) owing to recruitment delays in filling the approved posts, which resulted in higher than budgeted vacancy rates in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (22.0 per cent for Professional posts and 12.2 per cent for General Service posts) and in the Department of Management (13.6 per cent for Professsional posts and 10.2 per cent for General Service posts), as well as the suspension of recruitment of resident investigators in the Office of Internal Oversight Services owing to the review and proposed restructuring of the investigations function; (b) Facilities and infrastructure ($1,483,100, or 7.7 per cent), related to the acquisition of office furniture for the new posts in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, in view of the shortage of space and lack of storage capacity in the Secretariat; (c) Consultants ($491,400, or 11.6 per cent), information technology requirements ($481,400, or 2.6 per cent) and general temporary assistance ($40,000, or 0.2 per cent). 30. These underexpenditures were offset mainly by additional requirements in respect of: (a) Other services, supplies and equipment ($6,446,500, or 69.6 per cent) owing primarily to services provided by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management during a meeting of the Working Group on Contingent-owned Equipment, held at Headquarters in February 2008, for which no provision had been made in the budget, and after-service health insurance payments to peacekeeping retirees, provision of which had also been omitted in the budget; (b) Travel ($23,700, or 0.2 per cent) and medical requirements ($3,900, or 1.2 per cent). 31. The Advisory Committee emphasizes the need for a specific account of actual achievements, as described in the results-based-budgeting framework, and actual expenditure in the performance reports, ensuring that budgetary allocations are adhered to. 32. The Advisory Committee notes that during the period under review, "tiger teams" were deployed to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for staffing selection. In addition, the Committee notes the use of "tiger teams" for career development and their contribution towards placing staff from downsizing/closing missions to existing and/or expanding ones (four teams were deployed to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)). The Committee was informed that that had had a positive impact in addressing recruitment, administrative and technical human resources management in the missions visited (see also A/63/698/Add.1, Department of Field Support, Office of Field Administrative Support, Field Personnel Division, expected accomplishment 3). The Committee expects that future performance reports will reflect more details on the activities and impact of the "tiger teams" in their respective functional areas. 33. With particular reference to the indicator of achievement related to expected accomplishment 1 of the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts in the performance report (A/63/698), the Advisory Committee draws attention to the fact that the Board of Auditors issued a modified audit opinion with two emphases of matter on the Organization's financial statement for the third time in a row, as reflected in chapter II of the Board's report (see A/63/5). The Committee notes that the Secretary-General has indicated that the Administration/Secretariat is in the process of reviewing this with the Board. Bearing in mind the significance of the Board's emphasis of matter, the Committee recommends that the Secretary-General be requested to strive to achieve an unqualified audit with no emphasis of matter in the next financial statement. 34. The Advisory Committee's comments on the information contained in the performance report on individual objects of expenditure can be found, where relevant, in the discussion of the proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 in section III below. 35. The actions proposed by the Secretary-General in section IV of the performance report (A/63/698), are referred to in paragraph 203 below. B. Updated financial information in respect of the current period 36. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolutions 62/250 and 63/262, approved an amount of $282,401,900 gross ($256,180,700 net) for support account post and non-post resources for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, and a total staffing establishment of 1,220 support account temporary posts. 37. Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that, as at 13 March 2009, projected expenditure for the period ending 30 June 2009 was estimated at $260,161,200 (see annex III). This would result in an unencumbered balance of $22,240,700, or 7.9 per cent of the total appropriation at the end of the financial period. 38. Of the 1,220 currently approved posts (816 Professional, 401 General Service and 3 Security Service posts), a total of 1,060 were encumbered as at 28 February 2009 (697 Professional, 360 General Service and 3 Security posts), indicating vacancy rates of 15 per cent for Professional posts and 10 per cent for General Service and related posts. C. Proposed cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 1. Format and presentation 39. The Advisory Committee is of the opinion that efforts should continue to be made towards improving and streamlining the presentation of the support account budget. In particular, the requests for new posts in many cases include lengthy descriptions more akin to a vacancy announcement than a justification of the functions proposed. For transparency and ease of reference, in order to allow the General Assembly to decide on staffing requirements, requests for new posts should justify in a concise manner the need for new or expanded functions to be performed, with a brief description of existing capacity, providing evidence that the added capacity is required and that redeployment has been considered. 40. In addition, non-post resources in many cases merely provide lists of actions or activities without indicating what is expected to be achieved, changes as compared to previous requests or reasons for the related variances. Objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement should constitute the principal reference point and linkage justifying the resources proposed. Initiatives for organizational change, elimination of backlogs, preparation of guidelines and standard operational procedures should include a time frame for completion and clearly stated efficiency gains. The Advisory Committee also recommends that the use of tables, graphs and charts showing changes in resources, workload indicators and quantitative data be a standard for all departments. Departmental organizational charts should form part of the budget document, including grade levels of posts and sources of funding, differentiating between new or existing posts, as well as redeployments. 2. Evolution of the support account 41. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolution 62/250 reiterated the request made in its resolution 61/279 for the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the evolution of the support account at the second part of its sixty-third session, within the context of the budget proposal for the support account for 2009/10. As indicated in the proposed budget (see A/63/767), the Secretary-General commissioned a study on the evolution of the support account by external management consultants, the results of which were submitted in February 2009. A summary of the areas analysed and the conclusions are contained in paragraphs 54 to 62 of the proposed budget report. As indicated by the Secretary-General, the study sought to identify the key drivers of the historical growth of the support account budget and, on the basis of a statistical regression analysis conducted, concluded that its evolution is correlated with the increased complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the significant increase in the deployment of peacekeeping personnel to the field. 42. The study also noted that, over time, the core role of the support account has changed from backstopping to a centre of support services, as the nature of the missions and the demands placed on peacekeeping personnel have evolved, but that in spite of an overall increase in support account posts over time, posts have not kept pace with increases in the volume and complexity in transactions. Moreover, the study noted minor opportunities for efficiency and economy improvements from better use of information technology, revised delegation of authority and other enhancements, which could be better utilized to meet increasing demand rather than capturing expense reductions. 43. As regards staffing, the study proposed the determination of staffing requirements on the basis of three tiers of roles: core (multi-year, multimission, adjusted when new capacities or enhancement of capacities is required), transactional (tied to missions or mission-related transactions, regularly reviewed and adjusted according to workload indicators) and temporary (utilized and adjusted in response to sudden increases in the volume of transaction owing to extra ordinary circumstances). However, the study pointed out that this approach is only conceptual, requiring further analysis to define, classify and detail current posts which, given the short duration of the study, was not possible, thus requiring considerable follow-up to be fully actionable. In paragraph 61 of the proposed budget, it is stated that, while the Secretariat sees merit in the conceptual staffing model proposed, its implementation would require the engagement of independent external management expertise, which would require approval by the General Assembly. The Secretariat further indicates that the current approach is in compliance with Assembly requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee. However, the Secretariat plans to rejustify the totality of support account staffing requirements in the context of the 2010/11 support account budget, for consideration by the Assembly. 44. The Advisory Committee sees some justification for growth in the support account as the result of the establishment of new and/or the expansion of existing mandates, such as rule of law and police. However, to a large degree the growth in the support account bears a linear relationship to growth in field personnel. The Committee emphasizes that the current pace of support account growth needs to be addressed through a different conceptual approach. Such an approach should be anchored in creating managerial capacity and structures that can handle multiple tasks and functions with greater efficiency and improved coordination at Headquarters. Concerned about the rate of growth in the support account, the Committee has sought analysis of the underlying factors. Nevertheless, it agrees with the Secretary-General that it might not be timely to initiate further work on a conceptual staffing model with the assistance of external consulting resources; rather, it would be beneficial for the Secretary-General first to conduct the comprehensive review of the support account staffing requirements, as well as the revised strategy for mission support referred to in paragraph 12 above, as the latter could have an impact on Headquarters backstopping. 45. In connection with the rejustification planned for 2010/11, the Advisory Committee requests that the Secretary-General clearly demonstrate and include the interaction of support account resources with regular budget resources, resources in field missions, other departments of the Secretariat and, where applicable, specialized agencies, funds and programmes. The justification of requests for the support account should contain an analysis of: (a) The distribution of responsibilities and functions at Headquarters and in the field; (b) Increases in civilian staff in field missions, including high-level posts; (c) The outcome of business process improvements; (d) The appropriate delegation of authority, taking into account risk management; (e) The impact of information technology and communications initiatives in enhancing productivity; (f) Conversions from general temporary assistance to posts, based on recent experience. 3. General 46. The Secretary-General, in his report (A/63/767), estimates support account resources for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 at $324,447,100 gross ($294,336,000 net), which would provide for the staffing of 1,362 temporary support account posts and non-post resources. 47. The amount proposed, in gross terms, represents an increase of $42,045,200, or 14.9 per cent ($38,155,300 net) over the total amount approved for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 of $282,401,900 gross ($256,180,700 net). The increase is due mainly to the additional requirements for posts ($35.3 million) in view of the increase in standard salary costs, the costing of posts approved in 2008/09 and 182 additional posts proposed, as well as an increase in non-post resources ($6.7 million) (see para. 53 below). 48. In paragraph 9 of his report (A/63/767), the Secretary-General argues that the expansion of MONUC, the deployment of a United Nations military component to MINURCAT, with the transfer of authority from the European Union Force (EUFOR) to the United Nations, the expressed intention of the Security Council to establish a peacekeeping operation in Somalia, as well as the continued deployment of UNAMID far outweigh the diminished Headquarters support requirements resulting from the end of the UNMEE mandate, the downsizing of UNMIN and the reconfiguration of UNMIK, leading to the request for additional resources in the proposed support account budget for 2009/10. He further indicates that the additional resources are therefore requested on that basis, reflecting the initiatives that are summarized in paragraphs 11 to 19 of the report. 49. The Advisory Committee notes that the proposed resources in the Secretary-General's aforementioned report include, for the first time, the support account requirements related to the Office of Information and Communications Technology, following the establishment of the Office by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/262, and the related transfer of support account staffing and information technology resources to the new Office (see para. 193 below). Also included are the resource requirements related to the peacekeeping share of the costs of the new system of administration of justice and to the after-service health insurance costs of peacekeeping retirees. As further indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the 2009/10 budget includes provisions for the ongoing development of enterprise information technology projects started during the 2008/09 budget period, but excludes provisions related to the enterprise resource planning project, pending consideration by the Assembly of the Secretary-General's report, to be submitted during the main part of its sixty-fourth session. 50. The related resource estimates for the 1,362 proposed posts amount to $210,225,400, reflecting an increase of $35,296,700, or 20.2 per cent over the resources appropriated for 2008/09. The support account proposal seeks 182 additional posts, of which 120 are new posts and 62 are positions, currently funded under general temporary assistance, proposed to be converted to posts. The additional posts proposed include: (a) Fifty-two posts in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including 36 new posts, 11 posts proposed to be converted from general temporary assistance funding and 5 posts proposed to be transferred from UNLB; (b) Twenty-two posts in the Department of Field Support, including 16 new posts and 6 posts proposed to be converted from general temporary assistance funding; (c) Forty-nine posts in the Department of Management, including 35 new posts and 14 posts proposed to be converted from general temporary assistance funding; (d) A net increase of 35 posts in the Office of Internal Oversight Services, including 18 new posts, 31 posts proposed to be converted from general temporary assistance funding and 14 posts proposed to be abolished; (e) A net increase of one post in the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman, including three new posts and the abolition of two existing posts; (f) Three posts in the Office of Legal Affairs; (g) Six posts in the Department of Safety and Security; (h) Three posts in the Office of Information and Communications Technology. The Advisory Committee's recommendations on those proposals are contained in its discussion of the organizational units to which they relate. 51. The Advisory Committee notes that, in costing requirements, vacancy rates of 7 per cent and 5.2 per cent have been applied to continuing posts in the Professional and General Service categories, respectively, on the basis of average actual rates over the past three budget periods, and delayed recruitment factors of 50 per cent and 35 per cent have been applied for new posts in the Professional and General Service categories, respectively. Standard salary costs for New York are applied to the posts at Headquarters and standard salary costs for Vienna and Nairobi are applied to the respective regional investigation hubs. Mission-specific costs are applied to the resident auditor posts. As for general temporary assistance positions of 12-months' duration, vacancy rates of 7 per cent and 5.2 per cent for Professional and General Service category positions, respectively, have been applied. 52. The Advisory Committee also notes that, in line with the request of the General Assembly in its resolution 62/250, information is provided on the full annual costs of the proposed additional posts for the subsequent budget, with the application of the projected 2009/10 period vacancy rates for continuing posts (7 per cent for Professional and 5.2 per cent for General Service staff). As indicated above, the full resource requirements for posts would amount to $224,013,300, representing $14 million more than the $210,225,400 budgeted for 2009/10. In view of performance in recent years, the Committee recommends the application for continuing posts of a vacancy rate of 12 per cent for Professional posts and of 7 per cent for General Service and related posts instead of the proposed rates, respectively, of 7 per cent and 5.2 per cent. The Committee also recommends that the vacancy rates for new general temporary assistance positions be adjusted to 25 per cent for Professional and 12.5 per cent for General Service and related positions. In view of information received regarding the need to contract additional space for new staff, the Committee further recommends that the delayed deployment factor for new posts be set at 65 per cent for Professional and 50 per cent for General Service posts. 53. Proposed non-post resources total $114,221,700, reflecting an increase of $6,748,500, or 6.3 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09, as shown in the table below: Category (approved) (proposed) Variance Percentage General temporary assistance Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Communications Information technology Medical Other supplies, services and equipment Total 54. A brief summary of the variances is included in paragraphs 20 to 31 of the support account budget (A/63/767) and the budget parameters used in the costing exercise are summarized in paragraphs 37 to 43. The Advisory Committee notes that most of the increase in non-post resources is due to additional proposed requirements for official travel ($3,656,100, or 26.5 per cent) owing to staff travel in support of peacekeeping missions, training of peacekeeping personnel, including increased travel requirements in the Office of Internal Oversight Services related to the travel of investigators to peacekeeping missions from the proposed regional hubs, information technology requirements ($3,321,600, or 12.0 per cent), attributable mainly to the provisions made for the newly established Office of Information and Communications Technology (see A/63/767, para. 15) and implementation of new projects by the Information and Communications Technology Division of the Department of Field Support (see A/63/767, para. 11 (f)), and facilities and infrastructure ($1,167,800, or 4.7 per cent) related to the office space required for the proposed new posts (offset in part by a decrease in the standard rental costs). 55. These increases are offset, inter alia, by a decrease in the resources proposed for general temporary assistance ($1,425,100, or 7.9 per cent), owing mainly to the proposed conversion to posts of general temporary assistance positions approved for the Investigations Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Department of Management, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Safety and Security. 56. In its report on the support account budget for 2008/09, the Advisory Committee indicated that the procedures for seeking general temporary assistance funding should be adhered to, namely, that it should be used in exceptional and/or peak workload circumstances or for replacement of staff on maternity or sick leave (A/62/855, para. 48). Although exceptions are sometimes made by the General Assembly or recommended by the Committee, general temporary assistance funding should not be sought for functions of a continuing nature, or for long periods, and requests should not be resubmitted repeatedly. Moreover, the recommendation for such types of funding during a specific budget period should not necessarily lead to the expectation of conversion to a post for the next budget period. 57. The Advisory Committee recalls that support account funds should be used for the sole purpose of financing staffing and non-staffing resource requirements for backstopping of peacekeeping operations at Headquarters, not for resources that should otherwise be requested and funded under the regular budget (see General Assembly resolution 62/250, para. 7, and para. 165 below). 58. The proposed resources for consultants in the amount of $6,562,100 reflect a decrease of $249,500. The resources relate primarily to requirements for the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts ($1,183,300), the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions ($1,000,000), the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division ($944,400), the Ethics Office ($732,500) and the Office of Human Resources Management ($612,000). An analysis and summary of the requirements for consultants is provided in paragraphs 33 to 35 of the Secretary-General's report (A/63/767). 59. The Advisory Committee's recommendations on post and non-post requirements with respect to specific offices are contained in paragraphs 60 to 199 below. The Committee notes that its recommendations regarding the proposed posts also have an impact on operational costs, which is indicated in paragraph 201 below. 4. Detailed recommendations (a) Department of Peacekeeping Operations 60. The overall requirements of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations proposed for 2009/10 in the amount of $90,959,400 reflect an increase of $14,056,900 over the resources approved for 2008/09. The increase is attributable mainly to the additional requirements for posts owing to the delayed impact of previously approved posts, as well as the proposed establishment of 47 additional posts for the 2009/10 period. 61. The number of support account posts proposed for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for 2009/10 is 450 (350 Professional and 100 General Service posts). Forty-seven additional posts are proposed (2 D-1, 3 P-5, 16 P-4, 14 P-3, and 12 General Service (2 Principal level, 10 Other level)) for the Department. Eleven of these, previously funded under general temporary assistance, are now proposed for conversion to posts. In addition, five posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P3) are proposed to be transferred from UNLB. 62. Increases are also proposed under non-post resources, in particular consultants ($1,198,400) and official travel ($1,639,400), which are offset primarily by a reduction under general temporary assistance ($958,200). 63. The Advisory Committee notes that additional requirements in the amount of $7,394,900 (38.9 per cent) relate to the Office of Military Affairs, owing to the delayed impact of the costing of the 44 new posts approved in 2008/09; additional resources of $3,289,000 (25 per cent) are requested for the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division, including 12 additional posts proposed and additional resources related to travel; additional requirements in the amount of $1,261,300 (9.1 per cent) are proposed for the Office of Operations in view of an increase in the requirements for posts; an increase of $647,900 (6.2 per cent) is proposed for the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and additional requirements in the amount of $808,500 (4.4 per cent) are proposed for the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, including proposals for strengthening the police capacity with 26 additional posts, offset by the transfer of the Standing Police Capacity (27 posts) to UNLB. (i) Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Posts 64. Two new posts in the General Service (Other level) category are proposed for the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for an Information Management Assistant in the Information Management Unit and a Research Assistant in the Situation Centre (see A/63/767, paras. 64-69). The Information Management Assistant is requested to provide support to the Chief of the Peacekeeping Information Management Unit and its officers, and to assist and coordinate maintenance, user training and support of various information databases, tools and resources developed in support of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support information management strategy. The Research Assistant is requested to enhance the effectiveness of the Research Liaison Unit of the Situation Centre in researching relevant data, organizing data collection and storage for analysis and interpretation, and maintenance of databases. The Advisory Committee is not convinced of the need for the two additional General Service (Other level) posts proposed, given the capacity existing in the Office. Non-post resources 65. The non-post resources proposed in the amount of $746,500, a decrease of $294,900 compared to the resources appropriated for 2008/09, reflect reduced requirements under all budget categories. An amount of $169,100 is requested for general temporary assistance to provide funding for an Information Management Officer position at the P-3 level for 12 months to support in the development and enhancement of the integrated operational teams' collaboration websites, coordinate with the Integrated Training Service on the use of the Intranet as a delivery mechanism for training materials and develop standardized Intranet templates for field missions to facilitate delivery and sharing of mission information (see A/63/767, paras. 71-73). The Advisory Committee recommends against the P-3 position for the Information Management Unit; the function should be provided from within existing resources and in coordination with the Department of Public Information. (ii) Office of Operations 66. The resources proposed for the Office of Operations for 2009/10 in the amount of $15,105,900 reflect an increase of $1,278,300 over the resources approved for 2008/09. This is due mainly to additional requirements for posts ($1,475,700, or 12 per cent, compared to the apportionment for 2008/09) in view of increased standard costs, the proposed reclassification of one post from the P-5 to the D-1 level and the proposed conversion to posts of three positions funded under general temporary assistance. These are offset by a decrease in non-post resources of $197,400 (see para. 70 below). 67. The post of the leader of the Middle East and Western Sahara integrated operational team at the P-5 level is proposed to be upgraded to the D-1 level, in view of the expansion of responsibilities and the need for leadership, coordination and political and operational oversight (see A/63/767, paras. 80-82). The Advisory Committee was informed that the reclassification was meant to bring parity of leadership to all integrated operational teams. The Committee is not convinced by the argument that the reclassification of the post at a higher level adds value to the functions or that each integrated operational team structure should be led at the same level. Moreover, an evaluation of the integrated operational teams is yet to be conducted (see para. 17 above). The Committee recommends against the upgrade of the post to the D-1 level. 68. An Administrative Assistant position (General Service (Other Level)) in the Asia and Middle East team is requested to support the D-1 post referred to in paragraph 67 above (A/63/767, para. 83). In view of the foregoing, the Advisory Committee recommends against approval of this post. 69. Three positions (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 General Service (Other level)), which make up the African Union Peacekeeping Support Team component in New York currently funded under general temporary assistance, are proposed to be converted to posts, in view of the continuing and long-term requirement in support of the implementation of the recommendations of the African Union-United Nations Panel (see A/63/767, paras. 84-86). The Advisory Committee recalls that following the submission of the report on modalities to support African Union peacekeeping operations of the African Union-United Nations Panel (see A/63/666-S/2008/813), the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a report no later than 18 September 2009 on practical ways to provide effective support to the African Union, including a detailed assessment of the recommendations contained in the report, in particular those on financing and on the establishment of a joint African Union-United Nations team (see S/PRST/2009/3; see also A/63/746). The Committee recommends continuation of general temporary assistance funding of the positions of the African Union Peacekeeping Support Team component in New York for 12 months, pending the outcome of the relevant review. 70. The non-post resources in the amount of $1,383,100 (a decrease of $197,400 compared to the amount appropriated for 2008/09) primarily reflect a reduction in the requirements for general temporary assistance ($310,900) owing to the proposed conversion to posts, offset by additional requirements for travel ($130,000). The Advisory Committee notes that resources are requested for 12 person-months for one Policy Officer at the P-3 level to work on the Integration Mission Planning Process training modules, in response to recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services, as well as support the guidance and training capacity for members of the integrated operational teams and political affairs components in field operations backstopped by the Office (see A/63/767, paras. 88-89). The Committee recommends against the position proposed; the functions should be provided through existing capacity. 71. The provision of $1,197,000 for travel (an increase of $130,000 over the appropriation for 2008/09) is related mainly to the official travel of the members of the integrated operational teams. The Advisory Committee recommends a reduction of $50,000; the activities indicated in paragraphs 92 and 93 of the Secretary-General's report (A/63/767) could be carried out at a lower level. (iii) Office of Military Affairs 72. The requirements for the Office of Military Affairs for 2009/10 amount to $26,409,100. The increase in the resources ($7,394,900, compared to the appropriation for 2008/09) is related mainly to the requirements for posts, taking into account the full costing of 44 additional posts approved in 2008/09, following a comprehensive analysis and review of the Office, the increase in standard costs and three proposed new posts. 73. Three additional Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level) posts are requested (see A/63/767, paras. 95-102) to support the Office of the Military Adviser, the Current Military Operations Service and the Military Planning Service. The Advisory Committee recalls that 92 additional posts were proposed by the Secretary-General in his report (A/62/752), including 8 additional General Service support posts not approved by the General Assembly. Given the low number of General Service posts in the Division (16 General Service posts compared to 116 Professional posts), the Committee recommends acceptance of the three posts proposed. (iv) Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions 74. The resources proposed for 2009/10 in the amount of $19,037,400 (a net increase of $808,500, or 4.4 per cent over the resources approved for 2008/09) reflect a reduction in the requirements for posts of $385,900 and an increase in the requirements for non-posts of $1,194,400. The Advisory Committee notes that the requirements reflect the proposal to strengthen the Police Division, following the review of the functions and structure of the Division undertaken from August to December 2008, the proposal to provide strategic direction and leadership to the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Service, as well as the decision to create a Security Sector Reform Section within the Office. The requirements also reflect the proposal to move the Standing Police Capacity from Headquarters in New York to UNLB. Police Division 75. Paragraphs 113 to 120 of the proposed support account budget refer to the increase and changes in the demand for police activity in the past few years, the problems faced by the Division given insufficient capacity and areas requiring urgent attention, identified in the comprehensive analysis conducted by a review team comprised of members from the Police Division and other components in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. On that basis, it is therefore proposed, as a matter of priority, to strengthen the recruitment and planning capacities of the Police Division to perform its mandated tasks more effectively and efficiently, thus enhancing the impact of the Organization in the area of policing through the establishment of 26 new posts. An organization chart of the Police Division, as at 1 July 2009, including existing and proposed posts is contained in annex IV. In paragraphs 76-78 below, the Advisory Committee is recommending acceptance of 18 posts for the Police Division. The Committee expects that the incumbents of the posts will be recruited and that the posts will be filled expeditiously. 76. Four new posts are proposed in the Office of the Police Adviser as follows: :: A Police Standards Compliance and Audit Officer (P-4) to assist in the development of proper compliance and audit guidance, ensure their implementation, recommend precise courses of action and provide follow-up to recommendations and evaluations (see A/63/767, paras. 123-124) :: A Police Technical Adviser (P-4) to provide expertise and capacity, currently lacking, in imparting technical advice, develop guidance and standard operational procedures for the Division and field missions and provide assistance regarding technical agreements and other frameworks (see A/63/767, paras. 125-126) :: An Administrative Management Officer (P-3) to carry out human resources activities, ensuring institutional knowledge with regard to United Nations administrative and human resources policies and procedures (see A/63/767, paras. 127-128) :: An Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to provide administrative and secretarial support to the Office (see A/63/767, para. 129). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Police Standards Compliance and Audit Officer (P-4), the Police Technical Adviser (P-4) and the Administrative Management Officer (P-3) posts. The Committee recommends against approval of the Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post. 77. As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the absence of dedicated planning capacity in the Police Division limits the identification of critical planning assumptions, leading to disjointed planning frameworks or inconsistencies in balancing needs and available capabilities, as well as failures in analysing and capitalizing on planning best practices. It is therefore proposed to establish a dedicated planning capacity or planning unit, within the Strategic Policy and Development Section, to focus on all strategic planning aspects of the police component of peacekeeping operations and special political missions. Seven new posts are proposed in the Strategic Policy and Development Section: :: Four new Planning Officer (P-4) posts for the planning unit, the incumbents of which would cover the four regions, reflecting the arrangements of the Office of Operations and the Office of Military Affairs, and carry out all planning priorities of ongoing missions and prospective future ones, ensuring that all planning parameters are fully established, developed and adjusted, as necessary (see A/63/767, para. 132) :: One new Transnational and Organized Crime Expert (P-4) post for the Policy Development Unit, the incumbent of which would provide transnational and organized crime expertise, comprehensive analysis and advice, establish contacts and work in partnership with related entities, prepare guidance on short and long-term approaches and assist in the development of training in this thematic area (see A/63/767, paras. 133-134) :: A new Police Information Analysis Officer (P-4) post for the Policy Development Unit, the incumbent of which would collate and analyse police-related information, issue assessments of the situation on the ground, interacting with respective focal points in field missions and related components within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (see A/63/767, para. 135) :: An Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to provide administrative and secretarial support to the planning unit (see A/63/767, para. 136). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the four Planning Officer (P-4) posts proposed and the Administrative Assistant (General Service) post. The Committee recommends against the Transnational and Organized Crime Expert (P-4) post in view of existing capacity within the United Nations system, in particular, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The Committee is not convinced of the need for the Police Information Analysis Officer (P-4) post and recommends against its approval. 78. A police selection and recruitment unit is proposed to be established in the Mission Management and Support Section, which would be responsible for the selection and recruitment of candidates for United Nations police positions, deployment, rotations and repatriations of police personnel, including the formed police units. Fifteen additional posts are requested as follows: :: One Police Selection and Recruitment Officer (P-5) to coordinate overall selection and recruitment activities and, among other responsibilities, focus on developing police selection strategies, oversee and coordinate all related issues, develop administrative and operational guidelines and provide evaluation analysis (see A/63/767, para. 140) :: Thirteen Police Selection and Recruitment Officers (5 P-4, 8 P-3) who would be in charge of the selection, recruitment and rotation of police personnel, including formed police units, including participation in selection assistance teams (see A/63/767, paras. 141-143). The Advisory Committee was informed that on the basis of the current number of police officers (15,000, including 53 formed police units), workload and expected activity, it was estimated that an equivalent of 21.1 staff members would be required to carry out related tasks :: One Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to provide administrative and secretarial support to the unit, maintain databases and coordinate travel requests and other documentation (see A/63/767, para. 144). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Police Selection and Recruitment Officer (P-5), eight Police Selection and Recruitment Officers (3 P-4 and 5 P-3 of the 5 P-4 and 8 P-3 posts requested) and one Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) posts, in order to strengthen the Division's police selection and recruitment capacity. A full account of the impact of the resources provided for these functions should be included in the next budget submission. 79. As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the Standing Police Capacity was initially located at Headquarters, following its establishment, in order to cement its knowledge base through direct interface between assignments with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other actors in the Secretariat. Its strength currently consists of 27 personnel (1 D-1, 2 P-5, 14 P-4, 8 P-3, 2 General Service (Other level)). As indicated in the report, it is now proposed to expand and move the Capacity to UNLB in order to maximize its overall effectiveness and efficiency, reflecting its field focus. 80. The Advisory Committee notes that the intention to relocate the Standing Police Capacity to UNLB was reflected in the Secretary-General's report to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/62/627 and Add.1), in which it was indicated that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was continuing plans for its redeployment to UNLB by early 2009. In its subsequent report, the Special Committee took note of the Secretary-General's intention and looked forward to the consideration of the matter by the Fifth Committee in accordance with established procedures (A/62/19, para. 78). 81. The Advisory Committee was not provided with sufficient information to make a definite recommendation on this issue. Questions that require further clarification include the operational benefits and the associated costs, as well as the rationale for the relocation in a period of fundamental restructuring. Furthermore, lessons learned should be drawn from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, including the Integrated Training Service experience. If available, this information should be provided to the General Assembly. Security Sector Reform Section 82. An additional Security Sector Reform Programme Officer (P-3) post is proposed for security sector reform. It is proposed that the current Unit, within the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General, which has a staffing capacity of 5 posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level)), should become a section. The additional post is requested to assist national related efforts in MONUC and the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), as well as provide research and guidance development functions and assistance to teams in field missions in the area of monitoring and evaluating security sector reform programmes and projects (see A/63/797, paras. 146-150). For the reasons provided in the Secretary-General's report, the Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Security Sector Reform Programme Officer (P-3) post. Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Section 83. The Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Section supports the activities related to the three main components of the rule of law (strengthening the legal, judicial, and prison systems) in 11 peace operations at present. It currently includes 11 posts (1 P-5, 6 P-4, 2 P-3, 2 General Service (Other level)). Three new posts are requested for the Section for 2009/10: :: A Chief of Service (D-1) post to provide leadership and management, focusing on priorities of a cross-cutting nature, thus allowing the current head (P-5) to manage and oversee the work of the judicial officers (see A/63/767, para. 151) :: A Corrections Section Chief (P-5) post to lead the corrections team, ensuring coherence and consistency and facilitating the Department's support to corrections matters within the United Nations system as a whole (see A/63/767, para. 153) :: An Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post to provide administrative support to the Section (see A/63/767, para. 154). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Chief of Service (D-1) post to provide required leadership and management. The Committee does not see the efficiency of the division of the structure of the potential service into two components and therefore recommends against the additional P-5 and General Service (Other level) posts proposed. 84. In addition, the Service is seeking to upgrade a Judicial Affairs Officer post (P3) to the P-4 level by exchanging an existing P-3 post with a P-4 post from the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions (see A/63/767, paras. 110 and 152). The Judicial Affairs Officer (P-4) would therefore support dissemination of judicial and legal system guidance, promoting the use of comprehensive training materials, best practices and lessons learned. The Advisory Committee has no objection to the proposed transfer. Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section 85. A Policy and Planning Officer (P-3) general temporary assistance position is proposed to be converted to a post in the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section for support of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration operations carried out in the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and setting up those in UNAMID; policy development functions; and establishment of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration monitoring and evaluation capacity (see A/63/767, paras. 155-157). The Advisory Committee recommends against the proposed conversion and recommends that the functions continue to be provided under general temporary assistance funding. 86. A Public Information Officer (P-4) position is requested under general temporary assistance funding for 12 months in the Office of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions to provide public information services in order to raise awareness of the significance of rule of law initiatives in peacekeeping contexts. The Advisory Committee is of the opinion that the functions should be provided from existing capacity in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in coordination with the Department of Public Information, and recommends against its acceptance. 87. The resources for consultants ($1,000,000) provide for the requirements to ensure implementation of the United Nations Rule of Law Indicators. As indicated in the budget document (see A/63/767, para. 161), the development of the indicators is an initiative undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in coordination with other United Nations stakeholders and the Work Bank, initiated in June 2008 to identify strengths and challenges in the rule of law sector in a given country. The tool is expected to be completed by November 2009 after testing in Haiti and Liberia. The provision covers the consultancy funds for implementation in five countries with peacekeeping operations starting on 1 January 2010. (v) Policy, Evaluation and Training Division 88. The proposed resources for the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division for 2009/10 amount to $16,459,900, reflecting an increase of $3,289,000, or 25 per cent, compared to the resources approved for 2008/09. Most of the increase is related to staff requirements ($2,849,000) owing to the proposed conversion to posts of seven positions currently funded under general temporary assistance provisions, as well as an increase in non-staff resources ($440,000), including additional resources proposed for travel ($1,108,500), relating mainly to activities of the Integrated Training Services. 89. The evaluation capacity, currently in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section, is proposed to be moved to the Office of the Director of the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division in order to deter potential conflicts of interest between the Section, which is responsible for developing or coordinating policy processes, and the capacity, which focuses on assessing policy design and sufficiency, as well as to conform with the guidance provided by the Office of Internal Oversight Services regarding the independent location of evaluation from other management functions, with direct access to the appropriate level of decision-making. The Advisory Committee has no objection to the proposed transfer. 90. Seven additional posts are requested for conversion from general temporary assistance funding as follows: :: Three positions in the Partnerships Section for the Senior Partnership Adviser (P-5), a Coordination Officer (P-4) and an Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)), to enable continuation of the work, building up on the frameworks and operational arrangements that have been concluded (see A/63/767, paras. 166-172) :: Two positions in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section for Coordination Officers (2 P-3) to continue work on guidance development carried out by a team that includes three other posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2), related to both the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support (see A/63/767, paras. 174-178) :: Two positions in the Integrated Training Service for a Programme Manager (P4) and a Policy Officer (P-3) to provide additional support in relation to the Senior Mission Administrative and Resource Training (SMART) programme (see A/63/767, paras. 179-185). The Advisory Committee is of the opinion that the functions proposed should have a limited time frame; it is therefore of the opinion that there is not enough justification for the conversion. With regard to the positions related to the SMART programme, the Committee is of the opinion that existing capacity should be used. The functions for all seven positions should continue to be funded under general temporary assistance until the rejustification of all posts proposed for the 2010/11 budget period (see A/63/767, para. 63). 91. The training team currently located at UNLB includes 10 posts (1 P-5, 3 P-4, 4 P-3, 2 local training assistants) which were approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/267, endorsing the recommendation of the Advisory Committee (see A/60/787). Five posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P-3) are proposed to be transferred to Headquarters as, it is argued, the team's seconded military and police personnel, working directly with the Office of Military Affairs, the Police Division and the military and police advisers in permanent missions in New York, would bolster training activities, while making it more effective and economical (see A/63/767, paras. 186-191). The rest of the team will continue at UNLB, as it is required for the delivery of civilian predeployment training, which will continue to be held there. The Advisory Committee has no objection to the proposed transfer of the five posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P-3) of the training team to Headquarters. 92. The non-post resources proposed for the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division in the amount of $5,828,900 reflect a net increase of $440,000, or 8.2 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09. The increase is due mainly to additional resources proposed for official travel (an increase of $1,108,500 compared to the amount of $2,521,600 approved for 2008/09), offset by reduced requirements for general temporary assistance (a decrease of $913,500 compared to the resources of $1,287,300 approved for 2008/09). 93. The resources proposed for general temporary assistance reflect the proposed conversion of seven positions to posts indicated in paragraph 90 above. They also include a request for a Coordination Officer (P-3) position to support the Integration Steering Group and the continuation of a Child Protection Officer (P-4) position for the development and implementation of a coherent strategy throughout missions as well as monitoring and assessment of its impact (see A/63/767, paras. 193-197). The Advisory Committee recommends the continuation of the Child Protection Officer (P-4) position under general temporary assistance. However, the functions proposed for the Coordination Officer (P-3) position should be provided from existing capacity or internal redeployment; the Committee recommends against the acceptance of this position. (b) Department of Field Support 94. The overall resources proposed for the Department of Field Support in the amount of $90,200,300 reflect an increase of $11,217,200, or 14.2 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09. Most of the increase relates to posts ($7,356,100), owing to the computation of the requirements for the posts approved in the 2008/09 period (turnover factors of 7 per cent for Professional staff and 5.2 per cent for General Service staff are applied for continuing posts, instead of the factors of 50 per cent and 35 per cent applied, respectively, for new posts) and a total of 22 additional posts proposed; general temporary assistance ($2,969,900) in view of additional requirements proposed in large part for the Field Personnel Division; and information technology requirements ($934,400) of the Information and Communications Technology Division for the acquisition of specialized information technology services and equipment to support the peacekeeping information technology infrastructure. 95. A Senior Human Resources Assistant (General Service (Principal level)) post is requested to strengthen the Senior Leadership Appointments Section in developing tracking and reporting tools, supporting all aspects of human resources management work and providing support to the maintenance and updating of a centralized database (see A/63/767, paras. 209-211). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the post. The Committee expects that the additional capacity will enhance the work of the Section in ensuring that senior-level posts are filled in a timely manner. 96. A new post for a Disciplinary Officer (P-3) is requested for the Conduct and Discipline Unit to support the work of the Unit in responding to and in processing cases of misconduct (see A/63/767, paras. 212-213). Given existing capacity at Headquarters and in field missions for these functions, the Advisory Committee recommends against the approval of this post. (ii) Field Budget and Finance Division 97. The resources proposed for the Field Budget and Finance Division amount to $12,070,800, reflecting an increase of $1,631,200 over the resources approved for 2008/09. Most of the increase relates to the requirements for 75 continuing posts and 4 new posts proposed. 98. Four new posts are proposed for the Budget and Performance Reporting Service: :: Two Finance and Budget Officer (P-4) posts to support the Abacus teams (see A/63/767, paras. 223-224) :: One Finance Officer (P-4) post, proposed to be converted from general temporary assistance funding, to strengthen operational support in field finance and budget areas, in particular to update field guidelines, develop and update training materials and provide training sessions (see A/63/767, para. 226) :: One Administrative and Finance Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post to support the work of the Service (see A/63/767, para. 225). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of one of the two requested Finance and Budget Officer (P-4) posts to support the work of the Service. The Committee has previously made comments on the budget process (see A/62/781, paras. 13-21) and is of the opinion that the working relationship between the Budget and Performance Reporting Service (Department of Field Support) and the Peacekeeping Financing Division (Department of Management) could be further improved to result in efficiency gains and enable the completion of assigned tasks within the prescribed time frame. The Committee has also referred to this matter in its report on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of peacekeeping operations (see A/63/746). Therefore, it is not convinced of the need to convert the Finance Officer (P-4) post at this time and recommends that the functions continue to be provided under general temporary assistance funding. The Committee also recommends against the Administrative Assistant post proposed. (iii) Field Personnel Division 99. The resources in the amount of $21,205,700 proposed reflect an increase of $4,483,200, or 26.8 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09. The increase is due primarily to additional requirements proposed for general temporary assistance ($2,923,300) in support of the implementation of the talent management system, in particular the new approach to rostering, as well as an increase under post requirements ($1,521,100), resulting from the delayed impact of the posts approved in 2008/09 and three new posts proposed. 100. Paragraphs 232 and 233 of the Secretary-General's report (A/63/767) indicate that during 2009/10, the Field Personnel Division will shift its day-to-day administrative backstopping focus to the design, recruitment, development and management of a high-quality civilian workforce, proposed to be accomplished through decentralization of administrative processes, training and certification of specialists, delegation of appropriate levels of authority to field missions and strengthening of the capacity to attract, recruit and manage a high-quality, geographically diverse and gender-balanced pool of candidates in the different occupational specialties employed in field missions (see paras. 104-105 below and A/63/746). 101. Three additional Human Resources Officer (P-3) posts are requested for the Quality Assurance Unit in the Quality Assurance and Information Management Section, for conversion of three positions currently funded under general temporary assistance (see A/63/767, paras. 236-247). Current capacity also includes five posts (1 P-4, 2 P-3, 2 General Service (Other level)). The proposed posts are sought to address the need for human resources performance management and self-monitoring of delegated authority, appropriate training guidance and certification in the performance of delegated human resources functions, and the implementation and monitoring of human resources action plans. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of two of the three proposed Human Resources Officer (P-3) posts for the Quality Assurance Unit. 102. Non-post resources in the amount of $4,784,400 requested for 2009/10 reflect an increase of $2,962,100 over the resources of $1,822,300 approved for 2008/09. The increase is attributable to additional resources of $2,923,300 for general temporary assistance funding for 32 positions proposed. 103. Two positions for a Human Resources Officer (P-3) and a Human Resources Assistant (General Service (Other level)) are proposed to support the work of the Field Central Review Bodies for 12 months for backstopping functions and assistance in reviewing cases (see A/63/767, para. 252-257). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the general temporary assistance resources (1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level)) requested for the Field Central Review Bodies. 104. A total of 30 positions are proposed for Human Resources Officers (15 P-3) and Human Resources Assistants (15 General Service (Other level)) for the Recruitment and Outreach Unit to establish pre-screened and vetted rosters of qualified candidates from which field missions can select candidates to rapidly fill their vacancies (see A/63/767, paras. 258-264). Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the selection process proposed would streamline and markedly improve the selection process by centralizing the screening, evaluation and assessment, alleviating the workload in the field associated with the recruitment process and expediting the filling of vacancies, as programme managers in the field would be able to make their selection from rosters of fully evaluated candidates after completion of the competitive process reviewed by a central review body, therefore increasing operational effectiveness and efficiency. 105. The Advisory Committee notes that the request for 30 positions for the centralization of the rostering process is made on the basis of the identification of 22 occupational groups, which would be allocated to 15 Occupational Group Managers at the P-3 level, assisted by 15 Recruitment Assistants at the General Service (Other level). The Committee recalls that the peacekeeping roster was already in place before the General Assembly adopted its resolution 63/250 and that rostered candidates will be reviewed by Field Central Review Bodies. The Committee notes that the approach put forward by the SecretaryGeneral does not properly reflect the differences in the numbers of applicants for each occupational group and that it is also based on the premise of a minimum of three rostered candidates per vacancy. While this may ultimately be desirable, a more realistic approach should be adopted. On this basis, the Committee is recommending a more gradual approach and that general temporary assistance funding equivalent to seven Professional and seven General Service positions be approved. Additional capacity should be provided through temporary redeployment. (iv) Logistics Support Division 106. Resources amounting to $26,863,600 are proposed for 2009/10. The increase of $3,233,400, or 13.7 per cent, is due mainly to additional requirements for posts ($3,180,300) resulting from the delayed impact of the posts approved in 2008/09 and a total of 12 new posts proposed. Operational Support Service 107. An additional Senior Budget and Finance Assistant (General Service (Principal level)) post is proposed for the Strategic Deployment Stocks Unit to provide support in the coordination and monitoring of the financial aspects of the replenishment of the strategic deployment stocks equipment, assisting in ensuring compliance with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, once implemented, and overseeing migration of data to the future enterprise resource planning system (see A/63/767, paras. 276-281). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the post. Specialist Support Service 108. A Property Management Officer (P-4) post is requested to strengthen the Property Management Unit of the Contingent-owned Equipment and Property Management Section (see A/63/767, paras. 282-284). The Advisory Committee notes that the Board of Auditors has expressed its concerns and made recommendations on this matter (see A/63/5 and A/63/746). Given the importance of the planning, management, monitoring and technical oversight functions related to the United Nations global inventory of contingent-owned equipment, the Committee recommends acceptance of the Property Management Officer (P-4) post. 109. An additional Medical Logistics Officer (P-4) post is requested for the Medical Support Section to focus on medical asset acquisition planning for missions, budget formulation and execution, deployment and management of medical assets, supply chain management and other medical logistics-related requirements (see A/63/767, paras. 285-290). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the post proposed. 110. An additional Engineering Operations Officer (P-3) post is proposed for the Engineering Section to provide engineering operational support to various missions, including planning and coordination of military engineering tasks, and input to memorandums of understanding and negotiations with troop-contributing countries, among other tasks (see A/63/767, paras. 291-295). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the P-3 post proposed for the Engineering Section. 111. Two Supply Officer (P-3) posts are requested for the Supply Section. One Officer would carry out functions to improve the quality of support for missions, management oversight and accountability in the Rations Unit; the other Officer for the Fuel Operations Unit, would develop, implement and oversee fuel quality assurance and ensure integrity of technical standards and training (see A/63/767, paras. 296-307). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the two posts at the P-3 level proposed for a Rations Supply Officer and a Fuel Supply Officer. Transportation and Movement Service 112. A Chief (P-4) post is requested for the Movement Control Section to accommodate additional workload in connection with the management of maritime task force letters of assist related to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the management of passenger aircraft on long-term charter. It is further proposed to split the Section into two units, an operations unit and a mission support unit, which would be headed by the incumbent of the new post proposed (see A/63/767, para. 315). The Advisory Committee is not convinced of the efficiency of the split in the structure of the Section. Furthermore, in view of current capacity (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 7 P-3, 3 General Service (Other level)), the Committee recommends against the P-4 post proposed. 113. Five additional posts and one reclassification are proposed for the Air Transport Section in support of the increase in the missions' aviation activities and new contracts resulting from the growth of the fleet, as follows: :: One additional Air Transport Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post, proposed for conversion from general temporary assistance funding, and the upgrade of an existing P-3 post to the P-4 level for an Air Transport Officer in the Aircraft Management and Contracts Unit (see A/63/767, paras. 319-320) :: Two additional posts in the Aviation Quality Assurance and Standards Unit for an Air Transport Officer (P-3) to conduct pre-qualifications for registration, ensure compliance with the Organization's aviation requirements, undertake flight service vendor inspections and quality assurance visits, review performance evaluations and initiate corrective actions; and an Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to provide essential administrative support (see A/63/767, paras. 321-330) :: Two additional posts for a Chief (P-4) and an Air Transport Officer (P-3) in the Airfields and Air Terminals Unit (see A/63/767, paras. 331-336). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Air Transport Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) and the upgrade to the P-4 level of the post of the Air Transport Officer in the Aircraft Management and Contracts Unit. The Committee also recommends approval of the two posts proposed for the Aviation Quality Assurance and Standards Unit (1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level)). It is of the opinion that the systematic and ongoing involvement in the financing of airport infrastructure should be closely monitored, as it is, generally, the responsibility of the host Government. Moreover, the Committee is not convinced that a standing capacity is required in the Secretariat for this purpose. It has referred to this matter in its general report on administrative and budgetary aspects of peacekeeping operations (A/63/746). It therefore recommends against the approval of the two new posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3) proposed for the Airfields and Air Terminals Unit and recommends that the functions be provided under general temporary assistance for 12 months. 114. The resources proposed for general temporary assistance in the amount of $507,300 cover the requirements for three positions: :: Continuation of a Civil Engineer Water Specialist at the P-3 level (12 months), to provide mission water planning support for UNAMID, MINURCAT and the potential mission in Somalia (see A/63/767, paras. 339-340) :: Continuation of an Engineering Assets Material Manager at the P-3 level (12 months), for the management of assets with respect to UNAMID, MINURCAT and the potential mission in Somalia (see A/63/767, paras. 341-342) :: A new Surface Transport Resources Officer at the P-3 level (12 months), to undertake a review of armoured vehicle and mine-protected vehicle contracts (see A/63/767, paras. 343-344). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the continuation of the general temporary assistance positions proposed. The Committee recommends against the provision of general temporary assistance funding for a Surface Transport Resources (P-3) Officer, as the functions should be provided from within existing capacity. (v) Information and Communications Technology Division 115. The resources proposed for the Information and Communications Technology Division for 2009/10 amount to $17,188,100. The resources for posts ($5,520,500) provide for the continuation of 34 posts and 1 proposed new post. The Advisory Committee recalls that, in accordance with resolution 63/262, an amount of $5,017,500 was transferred to the Office of Information and Communications Technology, with effect from 1 January 2009, which included $760,000 in post resources related to the transfer of 10 posts (3 P-4, 4 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 General Service (Other level)) and non-post resources of $4,255,500 ($5,000 related to communications and $4,252,500 related to information technology activities). 116. A post of Senior Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity Officer at the P-5 level is resubmitted for approval to provide managerial oversight for the disaster recovery and business continuity services in field missions from United Nations Headquarters (see A/63/767, paras. 357-359). In its report (see A/63/487, paras. 93-94 and Corr.2), the Advisory Committee recommended that the functions of the proposed post be accommodated from within the existing staffing capacity approved under the support account for 2008/09 and indicated that it would consider the establishment of the post in the context of the support account budget for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. 117. The Advisory Committee believes that an Organization-wide approach to disaster recovery and business continuity, with consistent standards, is necessary. It emphasizes that a unified approach to disaster recovery and business continuity should utilize all available infrastructure in order to achieve economies of scale and cost efficiencies (see also resolution A/63/262, part. IV, paras. 5 and 6). In view of the above, as well as the Committee's comments on the requirements of the Office of Information and Communications Technology in paragraph 195 below, the Committee recommends against approval of the Senior Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity Officer post. 118. The non-post resources proposed in the amount of $11,667,600 include a provision of $348,500 for general temporary assistance, which would provide for the following (see A/63/767, paras. 362-367): :: Continuation of a Project Manager position at the P-3 level (8 months) to complete phase II of the air transport management system :: A new Project Manager position at the P-3 level (9 months) to complete the strategic reporting system :: A new Project Manager position at the P-3 level (9 months) to develop an operational activity tracking system. The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the continuation of the position at the P-3 level for eight months in order to complete the air transport management system. The functions proposed for the two other Project Manager positions (P-3) should be provided from within existing capacity in the Field Communications and Information Technology Operations Service. 119. The resources proposed for information technology of $10,144,800 reflect an increase of $1,261,700, or 14.2 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09. Of the total proposed, an amount of $2,074,500 relates to the acquisition of information technology software and applications, $7,890,300 relate to contractual services and $180,000 to software licences and fees. Information thereon is provided in paragraphs 372 to 388 of the Secretary-General's report (A/63/767). Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support: centrally administered costs 120. The centrally administered costs of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, which are administered by the Executive Office of the former, include resources for general temporary assistance for maternity and sick leave ($260,600), facilities and infrastructure ($1,563,800), communications ($1,336,400), information technology ($2,622,600), and official travel related to the ongoing staff exchange programme ($146,900) (see A/63/767, paras. 389-395). Most of the increases relate to the additional posts and general temporary assistance positions proposed. The Advisory Committee recommends that the relevant provisions under those objects of expenditure be adjusted taking into account the recommendations of the Committee on the proposed posts and positions. (c) Department of Management 121. The overall resources proposed for the Department of Management in the amount of $86,044,700, reflect an increase of $9,568,000, or 12.5 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09. Most of the increase ($7,402,900) relates to additional requirements for the full costing of the posts approved in 2008/09 as well as the 49 additional proposed posts, and additional requirements for general temporary assistance funding ($1,245,300). (i) Office of the Under-Secretary-General 122. One additional post for an Associate Administrative Officer (P-2) in the Executive Office is requested to cope with the workload related to peacekeeping-funded activities in the Department of Management, including administration of support account posts, preparation of support account budget proposals, processing of financial transactions and monitoring, analysing and reporting on expenditures (see A/63/767, paras. 396-397). The Advisory Committee is of the view that the functions of that post could be accommodated from within existing capacity and recommends against acceptance of this proposal. 123. One additional post is requested for a Senior Capacity Development Officer (P-5) for the Headquarters Committee on Contracts (see A/63/767, paras. 398-400) to coordinate the implementation of the capacity development strategy, including policy development, planning and conducting training activities in peacekeeping missions, monitoring Local Committees on Contracts and conducting field assessment missions. The Advisory Committee notes that four Headquarters Committee on Contract posts (1 D-1, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)) are currently financed from the support account budget (see A/63/767, paras. 398-400). The Committee recalls that the Secretary-General has yet to submit the report on procurement governance requested by the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/246, 61/276 and 62/269. While the Committee recognizes the importance of the tasks proposed, it is of the opinion that there is room for further rationalization. For example, the Advisory Committee believes that training activities should be built not solely on travel, but imparted through other tools as well, such as online training. The Committee therefore recommends against a new post and proposes that the functions be provided through general temporary assistance at the P-4 level. 124. One additional post for a Training and Analysis Assistant (General Service (Other level)) is requested for the Headquarters Committee on Contracts/Headquarters Property Survey Board secretariat to provide support to the Senior Capacity Development Officer and the Training and Analysis Officer (see A/63/767, para. 401). This function is currently provided through general temporary assistance. The Advisory Committee is of the view that the functions should continue to be provided under general temporary assistance funding. 125. Non-post resources of $10,507,200 are proposed for the Office of the Under-Secretary-General reflecting a net decrease of $371,100 (3.4 per cent) resulting from the combined effect of reduced requirements under general temporary assistance, official travel and other supplies, services and equipment, offset by an increase under consultants. The Advisory Committee notes that the provision of $345,000 for consultants is related to enhancements to the electronic-Headquarters Committee on Contract system and improvements to work processes and procedures through the Lean Six Sigma methodology (see A/63/767, paras. 404-408). The Committee also commented on this subject in the context of its general report on peacekeeping operations (A/63/746). 126. The resources proposed for general temporary assistance of $482,600 (a decrease of $175,100, or 26.6 percent, as compared with the resources approved for 2008/09) would provide for: (a) one position at the P-4 level for six months in the Headquarters Committee on Contracts/Headquarters Property Survey Board secretariat to review bid protests from unsuccessful vendors; (b) one General Service (Principal level) position for six months in the Management Support Service; and (c) 18 months General Service (Other level) temporary assistance and 14 months general temporary assistance at the P-3 level to cover peak workload period requirements in the Department of Management (see A/63/767, para. 403). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the general temporary assistance requirements for the Office of the Under-Secretary-General. (ii) Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts 127. The resources proposed for the Office amount to $19,602,800, an increase of $2,210,500 (12.7 percent) over the resources approved for 2008/09 largely to provide for 16 additional support account posts (1 P-5, 4 P-4, 4 P-3, 7 General Service (Other level)), bringing the total proposed support account posts to 103 (53 Professional and 50 General Service), including two reclassifications. Office of the Controller 128. One additional post is requested for an Administrative Assistant in the Office of the Controller (General Service (Other level)) to deal with the increased workload related to monitoring and logging of correspondence concerning the financial management of peacekeeping resources, including financial clearance of staff, delegations of authority and audit recommendations (A/63/767, para. 418). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the proposed Administrative Assistant post. Accounts Division 129. Three P-4, one P-3 and three General Service (Other level) positions are proposed for conversion to posts in the Peacekeeping Accounts Section (see A/63/767, paras. 419-422) in view of the ongoing and continuing nature of the underlying functions, as follows: :: One Policy Guidance and Training Officer position (P-4) to improve internal controls in peacekeeping operations (para. 420) :: One Strategic Deployment Stocks Officer position (P-4), the incumbent of which would be responsible for the accurate accounting for strategic deployment stocks transactions and review of the related accounting guidelines (para. 420) :: One Finance Officer position (P-4) to respond to the increases in workload from the start-up and expansion of missions (para. 420) :: One Strategic Deployment Stocks Officer position (P-3) (para. 421) :: Three Finance Assistant positions (General Service (Other level)) (para. 421). The Advisory Committee questions whether the functions of those positions are of a continuing nature and recommends against the conversion to posts at this time. It also expects that the tasks related to positions such as the Policy Guidance and Training Officer (P-4) and the Strategic Deployment Stocks Officer (P-3) will be completed during the coming period. Accordingly, the Committee recommends continuation of general temporary assistance funding for the seven positions in the Accounts Division for 2009/10, in the expectation that the functions of those positions would be re-examined in the light of the existing workload and capacity of the Accounts Division. The revised requirements should be reflected in the context of the budget proposals for the support account for the period 2010/11. 130. One Finance Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) is proposed for the Payroll and Disbursements Section to meet the increased payroll workload during 2009/10, in view of the currently projected increase of 864 peacekeeping staff (12 per cent) during 2008/09 and a further addition of 810 staff (10 per cent) in 2009/10 (see A/63/767, paras. 423-425). The Advisory Committee recalls that two additional Finance Assistant posts were approved in the context of the 2008/09 support account budget. The Committee therefore recommends against the approval of this post. 131. The posts of Chief of Unit (P-4) and a Benefits Assistant (General Service (Other level)) are requested to address the increased workload of the Health and Life Insurance Section resulting from the increased number of staff administered by Headquarters (see A/63/767, paras. 426-430). The Advisory Committee is not convinced of the need to create a new Unit for this purpose. However, given the increase in the Section's workload, it recommends the establishment of a post at the P-3 level and a General Service (Other level) post. Peacekeeping Financing Division 132. The post of the Budget Officer providing backstopping for UNAMID is proposed to be upgraded from the P-3 to the P-4 level owing to the complexity of the mission and the magnitude of its budget. The reclassification would also align the level of the post to that of the Finance and Budget Officers backstopping other large and complex missions (see A/63/767, paras. 434-435). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the reclassification proposed. 133. Four Finance and Budget Officer positions (P-3) approved by the General Assembly for the 2008/09 period are proposed to be converted to posts in view of the continuing and core nature of the functions of the positions, namely, provision of support to MINURCAT and UNMIT, as well as to strengthen the capacity of the Peacekeeping Financing Division to manage the support account and to further develop the funds monitoring tools (see A/63/767, paras. 436-444). Pending the reorganization and consolidation of the budget process and functions recommended by the Advisory Committee (see A/62/781, A/63/746 and para. 98 above), the Committee recommends against the establishment of four new Finance and Budget Officer posts (P-3); the functions of those positions should continue to be provided under general temporary assistance funding equivalent to four positions at the P-3 level for 12 months. Treasury 134. A Finance Officer post is proposed for reclassification from the P-4 to the P-5 level for the Chief, Banking Relations Section, in view of the increased complexity of the responsibilities involved, which require seniority and expertise in a variety of functions, such as negotiating competitive arrangements for banking services, monitoring banking arrangements at Headquarters and in field missions and ensuring coordination among United Nations agencies (see A/63/767, paras. 445-451). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the reclassification to the P-5 level of the post of the Chief, Banking Relations Section. 135. One Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) is proposed to provide administrative support to the Financial Information Operations Service (see A/63/767, paras. 452-454). The Advisory Committee recommends that the functions be provided from within existing resources. 136. The non-post resources proposed for the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts amount to $4,743,300, a decrease of $921,700 (16.3 per cent) over the current period. The decrease is the net result of reduced requirements for consultants and general temporary assistance, combined with higher resources for information technology ($503,900), official travel ($229,500) and other supplies, services and equipment ($79,000). 137. The resources requested for general temporary assistance of $1,938,700 reflect a decrease of $179,800 (8.5 percent) compared with the resources approved for 2008/09 (2,118,500). A total of 12 positions are requested as follows: :: Four positions (2 P-4 and 2 P-3) in the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Project Team are proposed to be continued for another 12-month period to support International Public Sector Accounting Standards implementation at peacekeeping missions (see A/63/767, paras. 456-458) :: A total of six positions are requested for 2009/10 in the Financial Information Operations Service, including the continuation of the positions of Project Manager (P-4) and Project Associate Officer (P-2) and a new request for an Information Systems Officer position at the P-3 level in relation to the enterprise budgeting application, to provide support for the system, in view of the fact that the consultants engaged to develop the system will no longer be available on an ongoing basis; one new Information Systems Officer position (P-3) for systems improvements; continuation of one Financial Information Operations Service Officer position (P-2) in relation to the implementation of an IMIS/OPICS/SWIFT interface; and the continuation of one Administrative Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) to assist in Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) data cleansing in order to ensure the transition to the enterprise resource planning system (see A/63/767, para. 459-467) :: Two new positions for a Finance Officer (P-3) and a Treasury Assistant (General Service (Other level)) are requested for the Treasury (see A/63/767, paras. 468-469). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the continuation of the funding under general temporary assistance of the four positions (2 P-4, 2 P-3) related to the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Project Team, the Project Manager (P-4) and Project Associate Officer (P-2) positions supporting implementation of the enterprise budgeting application, the Financial Information Operations Service Officer (P-2) for the second phase of the IMIS/OPICS/SWIFT interface and the Administrative Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) assisting in IMIS data cleansing. The Committee expects that as ongoing projects are completed, some of the additional capacity will no longer be needed and that the reduced requirements would be reflected in future budget submissions. The Committee further recommends against the two new Information Systems Officer positions (2 P-3) requested to support the enterprise budgeting application and Treasury operations, as well as against the two new positions (1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level)) requested for the Treasury Division. The functions of those positions should be performed using the existing capacities of the Office. (iii) Office of Human Resources Management 138. The resources proposed for the Office of Human Resources Management by the Secretary-General in his report (A/63/767) in the amount of $12,155,000 is almost double the amount of $6,569,100 approved for 2008/09, reflecting substantial increases under all objects of expenditure, in particular proposals for 18 new posts and 22 positions to be funded from general temporary assistance (which account for over 80 per cent of the increase), to allow the Office to address the shortcomings identified by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in its in-depth evaluation of the Office of Human Resources Management (see A/63/221). The Advisory Committee also notes that the increase is owing in large part to the last tranche of the development costs for the talent management system and the consolidation of its maintenance costs ($2.4 million), which were previously distributed among the Department of Management (Office of Human Resources Management), the Department of Field Support (Field Personnel Division) and peacekeeping missions, under the budget of the Department of Management (Office of Human Resources Management), as well as to an increase in the staffing of the Administrative Law Unit, which was proposed to address the chronic lack of capacity to respond to the volume of mission-related appeals and disciplinary matters ($1.5 million). 139. During its hearings, the Advisory Committee was informed that owing to the magnitude of the work currently under way to adapt current information technology systems to the new contractual framework, with effect from 1 July 2009, and to launch the talent management staffing tool, the Office would be postponing the development of a number of information technology projects to the 2010/11 budget period. This reprioritization implies a reduction in the non-staff resources proposed for the support account for 2009/10 for consultants ($244,500) and for other supplies, services and equipment ($113,500), or an overall reduction to the proposed budget of $358,000 (from $12,155,000 indicated by the Secretary-General in his report (see A/63/767) to a revised amount of $11,797,000, an increase of 79.6 per cent over the resources approved for 2008/09). 140. As to the talent management system, the Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolution 61/244, had approved the system, which is to enable the global secretariat (Headquarters and the field) to improve recruitment, succession planning and career development and to strengthen performance management and learning, as well as to provide a common technology platform that supports key human resources processes that would replace the patchwork of independent systems currently in place. The Committee was informed that the talent management system would be implemented in two phases. The first phase would begin in October 2009 and replace Galaxy and the field staffing management systems. In the second phase, scheduled to be deployed from the end of 2009, the electronic performance appraisal system would be replaced, and the staff development and learning management system would be introduced. 141. The Advisory Committee has pointed out that it expects the Department of Management (Office of Human Resources Management) to work closely with the Chief Information Technology Officer to ensure that new information technology initiatives are appropriately aligned with the future enterprise resource planning system (A/63/526, paras. 7-8 and 29). The Committee further expects clear timelines for the replacement of Galaxy and the field staff management system. 142. The Advisory Committee was informed that the total cost for the development of the system amounted to $6.1 million. In addition, projected annual maintenance costs, estimated at $1.6 million (from year two onwards), would be divided between the regular budget and the support account budget on a 80/20 per cent cost-sharing basis. As for the resources proposed under the support account budget for the 2009/10 period, the Committee notes that a total of $1.3 million is requested to complete and operationalize the performance management, staff development and learning management modules and that $1.1 million is requested to create a Centre of Excellence in the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), Bangkok, to support the implementation of PeopleSoft software, provide user support and training and maintain the operation of the system platform 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 143. The Advisory Committee was further informed that the main milestones set out in the 2009/10 budget period are: :: Implementation and roll-out of the talent management system for the processing of recruitment for vacancies at Headquarters, including recruitment by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of staff at Headquarters and in the field, seconded military officers and civilian police in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations :: Establishment of a Centre of Excellence, hosted by ESCAP (Bangkok), to support the recruitment process, including that of peacekeeping personnel, and provide business and application expertise to support the global implementation of PeopleSoft software for the talent management system :: Integration of the new talent management system with a new data warehouse and IMIS to provide a data foundation for reporting for all personnel as well as to provide human resources practitioners and programme managers throughout the global secretariat with self-service tools to analyse human resources information and support human resources management. 144. As to the decision to choose ESCAP to host the Centre of Excellence, the Advisory Committee was informed that the issue of cost efficiency had been taken into account, allowing an estimated savings of up to 30 to 40 per cent per year for the recruitment of human resources and lower daily subsistence allowance rates for consultants and contractors to be engaged during the next five years, as well as the lack of available space in New York. The Committee has no objection to the establishment of the Centre of Excellence. It requests that the savings realized in that regard be reported in the context of the performance report for the peacekeeping support account for the period 2009/10. Strategic Planning and Staffing Division 145. Two Human Resources Officer posts (P-3) are requested in the Planning, Monitoring and Reporting Section to strengthen monitoring, evaluation and implementation of oversight recommendations in connection with enhanced delegation of authority to the Department of Field Support in human resources management (see A/63/767, paras. 491-492). Given the importance of the monitoring and guidance functions, the Advisory Committee recommends approval of the proposed two Human Resources Officer posts at the P-3 level. 146. One Human Resources Officer position (P-4) is proposed for conversion to a temporary post in the Outreach Unit of the Division in support of the development and implementation of extensive outreach strategies to attract qualified candidates for positions throughout the Secretariat. The Committee notes that the Outreach Unit coordinates with the Recruitment and Outreach Unit in the Field Support Division in the Department of Field Support (see A/63/767, para. 493). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the post. 147. Three additional posts are proposed for two Human Resources Policy Officers (P-4 and P-3) and one Human Resources Assistant (General Service (Other level)) for the Policy Support Unit of the Human Resources Policy Service. The Advisory Committee notes that the Unit currently comprises one P-5, two P-4, one P-3 and four General Service (Other level) staff. The additional resources would strengthen the Unit's capacity for establishing human resources policies and guidelines, providing interpretation of regulations, rules and policies, supporting peacekeeping operations and meeting mission-specific needs adequately in a timely manner (see A/63/767, paras 494-503). The Committee recommends approval of the three posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level)) proposed for the Policy Support Unit. Administrative Law Unit 148. Eight additional posts are proposed for Legal Officers, four at the P-3 level, two at the P-2 level and two Legal Assistants (General Service (Other level)) to strengthen the existing capacity of the Administrative Law Unit (1 P-5, 3 P-4 and 3 General Service (Other level)) to address the increasing workload in terms of the number and complexity of cases processed (see A/63/767, paras. 504-513). The Advisory Committee notes that in the two-and-a-half year period from 1 July 2006 to November 2008, the number of appeals cases increased from 99 to 150, and that the number of disciplinary cases, which are also more complex and time-consuming, has quadrupled, from 123 cases to 500 cases. The Committee recommends approval of two Legal Officer posts (P-3) (out of 4 proposed), one Legal Officer (P-2) (out of 2 proposed) and one Legal Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) (out of 2 proposed) in order to strengthen the capacity of the Unit to respond to the volume of mission-related appeals and disciplinary matters. Learning, Development and Human Resources Services Division 149. The conversion to posts of two positions, one for a Human Resources Officer (P-4) and one for a Human Resources Assistant (General Service (Other level)) and the establishment of one Human Resources Assistant post (General Service (Principal level)) are proposed for the Human Resources Services. The proposed conversions and additional post would allow the Services to meet its increasing workload related to supporting the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support and peacekeeping missions in executing delegated functions, such as recruitment and extensions of appointment, as well as monitoring the implementation of delegated authority and performing functions not delegated to the Department of Field Support, such as agreed termination, disability and exceptions to the staff rules and regulations (see A/63/767, paras. 514-524). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the three posts proposed (1 P4, 1 General Service (Principal level), 1 General Service (Other level)). Medical Services Division 150. One Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) is proposed for the Staff Counsellor's Office to provide administrative assistance to the Staff Counsellor and coordinate training activities related to the mission support and mission readiness programme (see A/63/767, paras. 525-528). The Advisory Committee notes that the Counselling and Well-Being Unit, previously in the Learning and Development Division, was transferred to the Medical Services Division as the Staff Counsellor's Office in the context of the restructuring of the Office of Human Resources Management. The Committee recommends acceptance of the Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)). 151. The Advisory Committee notes that three posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level)) have been transferred from the Policy and Strategic Planning Division to the Human Resources Information Systems Section, thereby consolidating the provision of technical support to all divisions within the Office of Human Resources Management (see A/63/767, para. 529). The Committee has no objection to the transfer of the functions and resources. 152. Given the indication in paragraph 139 above to prioritize efforts, the resources of $612,000 for consultants proposed by the Secretary-General in his report (see A/63/767, paras. 559-567) should be revised downwards to $367,500. However, the provisions of $82,500 for the salary survey (para. 560), $90,000 for policy development (para. 562) and $72,000 for the integration of the Medical Services Division systems with the talent management system (para. 564) should not be reduced. On the other hand, the provision for other supplies, services and equipment of $258,000 (para. 575) for training and medical supplies, should be reduced to $144,500. 153. Resources requested under official travel would total $711,500, an increase of $211,500 (42.3 per cent) over those approved for 2008/09 (see A/63/767, paras. 568-572), and provide for travel related to mission monitoring visits ($140,000), training activities related to the roll-out of the talent management system to peacekeeping missions ($170,000), the conduct of a comprehensive salary survey ($238,900) and a variety of mission visits by the Medical Services Division ($162,600). 154. Requirements for general temporary assistance for the Office of Human Resources Management are estimated at $3,018,900, an increase of 387 per cent over the apportionment of $619,400 for 2008/09. Most of the resources relate to the support of the talent management system. The positions proposed to be funded are as follows: (a) Two Legal Officer positions (P-3 and P-2) are proposed to address the backlog of substantive cases handled by the Administrative Law Unit and other mission-related matters (see A/63/767, para. 531); (b) Four positions are proposed in the Learning, Development and Human Resources Services Division as follows: :: One Staff Development Officer position (P-3) to deal with the expected increase of workload in connection with improvements to be made to the performance appraisal system (paras. 532-534) :: One Human Resources Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) to assist in addressing the surge of recruitment activity resulting from the expansion of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support (para. 535) :: One Staff Development Officer (P-3) and one Human Resources Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) to strengthen the team for the development and implementation of occupational networks (paras. 536-537); (c) Two positions are proposed in the Strategic Planning and Staffing Division as follows: :: One Human Resources Officer position (P-4) is proposed for an 11-month period to provide substantive support in connection with the implementation of the talent management system and other human resources reforms (see A/63/767, paras. 538-539) :: One Human Resources Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) is proposed to provide support to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support in the recruitment of the General Service and related categories (see A/63/767, paras. 540-541); (d) A total of 11 positions are proposed for the Human Resources Information Systems Section in connection with the implementation of the talent management system. The Advisory Committee notes that it is proposed to establish a Centre of Excellence for talent management in Bangkok (ESCAP) (see paras. 143-144 above and A/63/767, paras. 546-548). The following positions are proposed at Headquarters and in Bangkok: :: One Business Analyst position (P-4), the incumbent of which would be responsible for incorporating industry best practices into the design of the system for all stages of the employee lifecycle, allowing the Senior Business Analyst to focus on coordination activities prior to the launch of the system in the third quarter of 2009/10 (see A/63/767, para. 543) :: One Technical Data Migration Lead position (P-4), the incumbent of which would be responsible for reviewing technical design documents, providing the necessary technology solutions and ensuring consistency with the architecture of the new system (see A/63/767, para. 545) :: One Chief (P-4), one Technical Configuration Analyst (P-3), one Associate Application Support Officer (P-2) and six Help Desk Customer Support Representatives (General Service (Other level)) positions for the talent management centre of excellence in Bangkok (see A/63/767, paras. 544 and 549-551); (e) A further four positions are proposed in the Human Resources Information Systems Section as follows: :: One Master Data Manager (P-4) and one Application Support Assistant (General Service (Other level)) positions are proposed in connection with the design, implementation, data management and support for a new data warehouse, which would provide a single integrated source for data on all personnel across the Organization. The Advisory Committee notes that the Office of Human Resources Management has started development of the data warehouse with the participation of the Department of Field Support and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (see A/63/767, para. 552-556) :: One Application Support Assistant (General Service (Other level)) position to provide support for the electronic performance appraisal system used at Headquarters and in peacekeeping missions (see A63/767, para. 557) :: One IMIS Help Desk Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) to provide technical support to users of the IMIS human resources management application at Headquarters and in the field (see A/63/767, para. 558). 155. The Advisory Committee recommends a reduction of $1 million in the resources requested by the Office of Human Resources Management under general temporary assistance. The Committee recognizes the range of initiatives currently being developed by the Office and recommends that it be authorized to utilize the resources at its own discretion, taking into account the relative priorities of the different projects. (iv) Office of Central Support Services 156. The resources proposed for the Office of Central Support Services of $16,477,900 reflect an increase of $714,300 (4.5 per cent) over the appropriation for 2008/09. Most of the increase relates to additional resources proposed for posts ($1,804,700) in view of the 12 additional posts proposed. Additional resources are also requested under consultants ($166,500) and official travel ($261,300), mostly offset by reduced requirements for general temporary assistance ($181,700) and information technology ($1,301,000). Office of the Assistant Secretary-General 157. One Administrative Officer post (P-3) is proposed in the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General to deal with the increased workload related to the growth in peacekeeping operations. The incumbent would provide assistance in the initial review of procurement matters relating to peacekeeping missions, in following up on recommendations of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts and the decisions of the Assistant Secretary-General, and in monitoring the use of delegations of authority (see A/63/767, paras. 576-578). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the proposed Administrative Officer post (P-3). Procurement Division 158. A total of 11 new posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 6 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 General Service (Principal level), 1 General Service (Other level)) are requested for the Procurement Division as follows: (a) One Chief of Section post (P-5) is requested for the Communications and Information Technology Equipment and Services Procurement Section. The incumbent would manage procurement activities for the acquisition of the information and communications technology goods and services for all peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions; lead and direct procurement teams; develop procurement policies and procedures; and provide advice on best practices and strategies for the implementation of procurement reform (see A/63/767, para. 580). The Advisory Committee recommends against approval of this post, given the current capacity in the Office, which includes a post at the P-4 level to lead the team; (b) One Procurement Officer post (P-4) is resubmitted for approval for the Peacekeeping Procurement Section to strengthen its capacity in managing the procurement of complex logistical support services and assisting the Chief of Section (P-5) (see A/63/767, paras. 581-582). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the post at the P-4 level for the Peacekeeping Procurement Section; (c) Three Procurement Officer posts (P-3) are requested for the Field Supply Team, which manages procurement programmes for food rations, fuel, security services, medical and pharmaceutical items, and general supply items. The Advisory Committee notes that the Team currently comprises a Team Leader (P-4) and four Procurement Officers (P-3) (see A/63/767, paras. 583-585). The Committee recommends acceptance of two Procurement Officer posts (P-3) out of the three requested to provide the additional capacity required in the procurement of fuel operations and the broad range of other supplies and services; (d) One Training Coordinator post (P-3) is requested for the Policy and Compliance Monitoring Section to lead procurement training initiatives for peacekeeping staff (see A/63/767, para. 586). Current capacity includes four posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 General Service (Principal level)). The Advisory Committee recommends against the approval of the post, the functions of which should be covered through existing capacity; (e) Three additional posts are requested for the Logistics and Transportation Section as follows: :: One Procurement Officer post (P-3) to strengthen the Long-term Air Charter Team in connection with the significant growth of long-term air charter requirements and the expansion of the scope of related activities (see A/63/767, paras. 587-588) :: One Procurement Officer post (P-3) to support the procurement of airfield management services relating to ongoing requirements at MONUC and in anticipation of increased demand for airfield management activities in new missions (see A/63/767, para. 589) :: One Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Principal level)) is requested to assist the Chief and Team Leaders of the Section as well as to perform administrative functions, coordinate long-term air charter activities and supervise the work of the Section's procurement support staff (see A/63/767, para. 590). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Procurement Officer post (P-3) requested to strengthen the work of the Long-term Air Charter Team, given the considerable increase in workload, and of the Procurement Officer post (P-3) requested for procurement activities related to MONUC air operations and airfield management services in other missions. The Committee recommends against the General Service post proposed at this time; (f) One Associate Best Practices Officer post (P-2) is requested for the Policy and Best Practices Unit to act as the focal point for the coordination and tracking of the projects conducted by the Unit, which currently includes two posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4), edit the United Nations Procurement Manual and provide support to the senior officers of the Unit (see A/63/767, paras. 591-592). The Advisory Committee is not convinced of the need for the post; (g) One Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) is requested in the Procurement Management Section in connection with the implementation of additional internal controls and the increasing number of bid proposals. The incumbent would perform the functions of a Bid Opening Official and supervise the two existing support staff performing bid opening functions (see A/63/767, paras. 593-594). Given the current capacity (6 support staff) in the Procurement Management Section, the Advisory Committee is not convinced of the need for the post. 159. Non-post resources proposed for the Office of Central Support Services amount to $3,971,500, reflecting a reduction of $1,090,400 (21.5 per cent) as compared with the appropriation for 2008/09, largely attributable to the transfer of the Information Technology Services Division resource requirements, which were previously included in the budget of the Office of Central Support Services, to the proposed budget of the Office of Information and Communications Technology, following its establishment. The Advisory Committee has also commented on this subject in its general report on peacekeeping operations (see A/63/746). 160. Resources requested for consultants amount to $466,500, reflecting an increase of $166,500 (55.5 per cent) over the resources approved for 2008/09 (see A/63/767, paras. 614-622). The Advisory Committee notes that the resources would provide for studies related to business process improvements in the Procurement Division, as well as for outsourcing the cataloguing and digitization of peacekeeping archives by the Archives and Records Management Section. 161. A provision of $946,200 is indicated under general temporary assistance, reflecting reduced requirements of $181,700 (16.1 per cent) compared with the appropriation for 2008/09, owing to the transfer of the Information and Technology Services Division to the Office of Information and Communications Technology. 162. A total of six positions are requested for the Procurement Division in connection with preparations for the implementation of the enterprise resource planning system as follows: :: Five positions (General Service (Other level)) (3 continuing and 2 new) are requested for the Vendor Registration Team to update and cleanse the vendor database before the data can be migrated to the enterprise resource planning system (see A/63/767, paras. 596-597) :: One Systems Analyst post at the P-3 level is proposed in the Procurement Management Section to map best practices into the procurement business workflow and analyse the impact of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards on procurement practices and processes (see A/63/767, para. 598) The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the continuation of three of the five General Service positions requested for the Vendor Registration Team. It also recommends approval of the position at the P-3 level requested for the integration of the procurement process workflow into the enterprise resource planning system. 163. Two positions (1 P-2, 1 General Service (Other level)) are proposed for the Archives and Records Management Section (12 months each) to process records from peacekeeping operations, clearing the existing backlog and ensure accessibility to digitized peacekeeping archives (see A/63/767, paras. 599-600). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the resources requested for archiving and records management. 164. A general temporary assistance provision of $419,000 is requested for the Facilities and Commercial Services Division to deal with the increased workload related to the management of assets and office space resulting from the high turnover rates and growth of peacekeeping staff, as well as the fit-out of additional office space to accommodate some 400 staff currently housed in temporary offices (see A/63/767, paras. 601-613). The resources requested would provide funding for the following positions: :: An Office Space Planning Officer position (P-3) to manage new office space (para. 606) :: A Project Management Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) to provide administrative support to the Office Space Planning Officer (paras. 607-608) :: A Public Information Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) to update the global contact directory and prepare the telephone directory (para. 609) :: An Inventory Management Assistant position (General Service (Other level)) (for 6 months) to assist in tracking and recording furnishings and assets related to support account funded posts (paras. 610-611) :: A Property Management Officer position (P-3) (for 6 months) to review and provide advice on the simplification of property management procedures with the aim of revising delegation of authority to field missions (para. 612). 165. The Advisory Committee questions the appropriateness of most of the requests for the Facilities and Commercial Services Division under the support account budget, as many of those functions relate to the needs of the Organization as a whole and should be provided centrally through the Office of Central Support Services (see para. 57 above). The Committee recommends against approval of the positions proposed, with the exception of one Office Space Planning Officer position (P-3) to deal with office space requirements. Department of Management: centrally administered costs 166. Centrally administered costs in the Department of Management include resources for facilities and infrastructure ($23,982,400), communications ($532,000) and information technology ($3,143,100) (see A/63/767, paras. 637-639). The Committee notes that the estimates provide for the 200 continuing and 92 proposed new posts and general temporary assistance positions. 167. The Advisory Committee recommends that the provisions under those objects of expenditure be adjusted taking into account the recommendations of the Committee (see para. 201 below). (d) Office of Internal Oversight Services 168. The support account resources proposed for 2009/10 of $25,411,000, reflect a decrease of $1,468,200 (or 5.5 per cent), compared with the resources approved for 2008/09. The decrease is the net result of additional requirements under posts ($5,730,300), offset by a reduction related to non-post resources ($7,189,500). 169. The Advisory Committee notes that the Independent Audit Advisory Committee, in accordance with paragraph 2 (d) of its terms of reference (see General Assembly resolution 61/275, annex), submitted a report on its review of the proposed budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 (see A/63/703). The Advisory Committee met with the members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee and exchanged views on their endorsement of the proposals of the Office of Internal Oversight Services outlined in paragraph 31 of A/63/703. 170. The proposed resources for posts of $19,221,900 (an increase of $5,730,300 over the resources approved for 2008/09), provide for a total of 144 support account posts, a net increase of 35 posts (the result of 49 additional posts and 14 posts proposed to be abolished). Internal Audit Division and pool of Resident Auditors 171. Current support account staffing includes a total of 92 posts, of which 18 are in New York (1 D-1, 2 P-5, 7 P-4, 4 P-3, 4 General Service (Other level)) and 74 comprise the pool of Resident Auditors (8 P-5, 26 P-4, 18 P-3, 12 Field Service, 5 General Service (Other level), 5 national General Service) in peacekeeping missions. The changes proposed for 2009/10 include the abolishment of three posts (1 P-4, 1 Field Service, 1 national General Service), in view of the termination of the mandate of UNMEE with effect from 31 July 2009, and the establishment of two additional posts proposed, as follows: :: A Chief Resident Auditor post (P-5) to strengthen the resident auditor establishment in MINURCAT, in view of the expansion of the mission, the increase in its budget and the complex nature of the mandate covering two countries; current staffing includes three posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 Field Service) (see A/63/767, para. 640) :: One Audit Assistant post (Field Service) to ensure adequate support to the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and to provide additional support in view of the increase in risk associated with the procurement, supply chain management and staff entitlements (see A/63/767, para. 641) The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Secretary-General's proposals for the Internal Audit Division. Inspection and Evaluation Division 172. Four new posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)) are proposed for the Inspection and Evaluation Division to strengthen its in-depth and thematic evaluation function and increase the scope and coverage of evaluation of peacekeeping activities. Current capacity consists of one Programme Officer position (P-4) which, as indicated in the report, constrains the ability of the Division to deliver one or two evaluation and inspection reports annually (see A/63/767, para. 645). The additional resources would enable the Division to carry out a minimum of six peacekeeping evaluations and inspections annually. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of two additional posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3) to strengthen the capacity of the Inspection and Evaluation Division. Investigation Division 173. The requirements for the Investigation Division reflect the restructuring initiatives outlined by the Secretary-General in his report on strengthening investigations (A/62/582 and Corr.1). The Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolutions 62/247 and 63/250, endorsed the recommendations of the Advisory Committee contained in its report (A/62/7/Add.35), requesting that a complete analysis and justification for the envisaged restructuring be provided, including the impact that the team/unit concept and the relocation of investigators from peacekeeping missions would have on staff. The Advisory Committee notes that the proposals for 2009/10 address its concerns as well those voiced by the Independent Audit Advisory Committee (see A/62/814/Add.1). The Office of Internal Oversight Services emphasizes the challenges of the current structure with regard to the quality and timeliness of completing investigations and reporting. On the basis of an analysis of past and current workload and operational investigative needs, the Office proposes a reduction and redistribution of posts and existing general temporary assistance in order to enable it to increase effectiveness and quality of work. 174. The problems related to the current approach, summarized in paragraph 660 of the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/767), include difficulties in attracting and retaining qualified investigators to serve as resident investigators in missions; obstacles to effective management and administration as a result of the presence of small teams in many missions; and the impossibility to uphold relevant expertise in missions, including the lack of experience to address financial misconduct and shortcomings arising from extended absences of investigators owing to official leave provisions in missions. 175. It is therefore proposed to redeploy staffing resources from peacekeeping missions to three adequately staffed centres (New York, Vienna and Nairobi), while maintaining transitional resources in the largest missions, which would be evaluated and measured against the caseload and other requirements. As indicated in the report, the proposed structure reflects the objective of ensuring qualified and skilled investigators specializing in the two distinct types of cases within the Office, namely sexual exploitation and abuse cases and financial, economic and administrative cases. The Advisory Committee agrees with the proposals for the restructuring of the Investigation Division, as set out by the Secretary-General in his report (see A/63/767, paras. 702-718) and endorsed by the Independent Audit Advisory Committee in its report (A/63/703). The Committee is of the view that those proposals address its concerns and those of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee and recommends that the Office of Internal Oversight Services monitor the performance of the model and the efficiency of the use of resources in responding to the caseload. 176. The advantages of the new specialized structure indicated include: the ability to attract qualified staff; critical mass capacity to ensure quality and eliminate the weaknesses and inflexibility of the field structure; increased productivity and higher number of working hours; more efficient management and monitoring of investigations; and global and efficient case management through the assignment of cases to teams according to requirements instead of a particular mission. 177. The Advisory Committee notes that the new structure is proposed to include a total of 54 posts and positions (44 posts and 10 general temporary assistance positions), compared with the current number of 75 (12 posts and 63 general temporary assistance positions), a reduction of 21 positions and posts. It also notes that the structure proposed and reorganization of resources reflect the current caseload and trend, which includes a reduction in sexual exploitation and abuse cases in missions, the shift of responsibilities of investigations from the Office of Internal Oversight Services to troop-contributing countries, as reflected in the revision of the memorandum of understanding with troop-contributing countries (see A/61/19, Part III, annex), and the increased caseload for qualified white-collar offences resulting from the transfer of cases from the Procurement Task Force. It is therefore proposed that the Investigation Division in New York have the overall responsibility for financial, economic and administrative-related investigations, the Investigation Division in Nairobi would have operational responsibility for sexual exploitation and abuse investigations, as well as some capacity for financial, economic and administrative investigations, and the Investigation Division in Vienna would have teams for both types of investigation, for rapid deployment as needed to European duty stations and operations in the Middle East (see A/63/767, paras. 688-700). 178. A total of 43 posts (1 D-1, 2 P-5, 12 P-4, 17 P-3, 1 General Service (Principal level), 10 General Service (Other level)), including the 26 general temporary assistance positions proposed to be converted to posts and 6 new posts, would be distributed in the three regional hubs (see A/63/767, paras. 702-703 and 708-718). Ten general temporary assistance positions and one post (Field Service) would be allocated to the three largest missions (MONUC, UNMIL and UNMIS) (see para. 179 below). The Advisory Committee was concerned with respect to the pace of reduction in the number of resident investigators, in particular at MONUC, given the high caseload of the Mission. Upon enquiry, the Committee was informed that the Office of Internal Oversight Services intended to service the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo from the Investigation Division in Nairobi. The Committee recommends that the capacity provided continue to be monitored. The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the staffing resources proposed for the Investigation Division. 179. The proposed non-post resources of $6,189,100 reflect a decrease of $7,189,500, which is due mostly to reduced requirements for general temporary assistance ($6,195,700) in view of the proposed conversion of 26 posts for the Investigation Division and for other supplies, services and equipment ($2,012,600) owing to the discontinuation of the provision for the Procurement Task Force. Those reductions are mostly offset by additional resources proposed for facilities and infrastructure ($405,200), in view of the increase in rental costs in connection with the relocation of staff of the Investigation Division to Nairobi and Vienna; information technology ($432,300), owing to special equipment for case management required for the Investigation Division; communications ($108,600), in view of the increase in usage of commercial communications and the satellite communication needs of the Investigation Division; and official travel ($139,200), in view of an increase in travel requirements for investigators. 180. The resources proposed for general temporary assistance of $1,547,800 (a decrease of $6,195,700) include funding for 10 positions which, as part of its proposals for restructuring of the Investigation Division, would be located in the three largest peacekeeping missions: MONUC (1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 national General Service); UNMIS (1 P-4, 2 P-3); and UNMIL (1 P-4, 2 P-3, 1 national General Service), funding for a total of nine months at the P-4 level for the short-term engagement of three investigators for three months each in each of the regional hubs to ensure full coverage of any additional requirements that may arise, and 21 months of support at the General Service (Other level). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the non-post resources proposed for the Office of Internal Oversight Services. (e) Office of the United Nations Ombudsman 181. The support account provision of $1,527,300 proposed for the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman for the period 2009/10 reflects an increase of $222,600, or 17.7 per cent, over the resources approved for 2008/09. The Advisory Committee notes that most of the increase is owing to additional requirements for posts ($215,600), in view of the proposed establishment of three new posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 General Service (Other level)). The Committee recalls that the current staffing of the Office that is financed under the support account includes six posts deployed to the field, namely, MONUC (1 P-5, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)) and UNMIS (1 P-5, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)), as well as two posts (1 P-4, 1 General Service (Other level)) at Headquarters, which will be discontinued after 30 June 2009, once the new system of administration of justice comes into effect. 182. In his report, the Secretary-General indicated that the discontinuation of the posts was expected to have an adverse effect, given the significant decentralization process which would require additional oversight, coordination and analysis of systemic trends in the field, as well as the increase in the client base (see A/63/767, para. 750). Three new posts were therefore proposed to address these concerns as follows: :: A Senior Conflict Resolution Officer post (P-5), the incumbent of which would undertake a cross-cutting review of 400 anticipated cases, as a result of the establishment of regional Ombudsmen branches in Kinshasa and Khartoum, with a view to providing an analysis of systemic trends (see A/63/767, paras. 751-753) :: A Case Officer post (P-4), the incumbent of which would handle cases originating from peacekeeping personnel, in particular those related to UNMIT, the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), MINUSTAH, the United Nations Operation in Cte d'Ivoire, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, UNMIK, the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, not covered by the branches in Kinshasa and Khartoum (A/63/767, paras. 754-757) :: An Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)), the incumbent of which would provide administrative support, assist in generating reports, help to maintain the database and assist in the intake and tracking of cases (see A/63/767, para. 758). The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the Senior Conflict Resolution Officer post (P-5), in view of the importance and cross-cutting nature of the functions, and of the Administrative Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) proposed. The Committee believes that experience should be gained with the implementation of the new structure and caseload before approving the Case Officer post (P-4); it therefore recommends against its approval at this time. (f) Ethics Office 183. The proposed resources of $1,047,800 from the support account provide for non-post resources of the Office, as its staffing (6 Professional and 3 General Service posts) is funded under the regular budget. The provision for general temporary assistance of $260,600 reflects an increase of $89,900 over the resources approved for 2008/09 in view of the continuation of two positions for an Ethics Officer (P-3) and an Office Assistant (General Service (Other level)), for which delayed recruitment factors of 50 and 35 per cent were applied in 2008/09. The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the resources proposed for general temporary assistance. 184. An amount of $732,500 is proposed for consultancy, including the services of a consultant (for 6 months) for the design and delivery of ethics-related training at Headquarters and field missions and for services related to the review of staff files in connection with the financial disclosure programme. The Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the resources proposed for consultants at this time. However, the Committee is of the opinion that the Secretariat should explore other possibilities in order to handle the functions internally in a more cost-efficient way. (g) Office of Legal Affairs 185. The provision of $3,545,200 proposed for the Office of Legal Affairs under the support account budget for the period 2009/10 reflects an increase of $1,118,600 over the resources approved for 2008/09. The increase is owing mostly to additional resources for posts ($542,600), general temporary assistance ($409,400) and consultants ($75,000). The Advisory Committee recalls that the staffing of the Office currently includes 13 posts funded from the support account (4 P-5, 5 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2 and 2 General Service (Other level)). 186. The increase in resources for posts includes the delayed deployment costing of two posts approved for 2008/09 as well as three additional posts proposed for 2009/10: :: One Legal Officer post (P-4) in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the incumbent of which would provide support in the coordination of legal services for peacekeeping operations and activities, assist the Legal Counsel in carrying out responsibilities with the network of field legal officers for peacekeeping missions, and provide liaison functions with different departments and offices on the legal implications of peacekeeping (see A/63/767, paras. 781-783) :: Two Legal Officer posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4) for the Office of the Legal Counsel (A/63/767, para. 793). The Office currently has three posts funded from the support account (1 P-4, 1 P-2, 1 General Service (Other level)) which, as indicated by the Secretary-General in his report, are insufficient to adequately respond to the demands for legal advice and assistance with regard to peacekeeping matters. The posts are sought not only to enhance the capacity of the Office in response to the increased workload and backstop Legal Officers in field missions, but also to participate in institutionalized training programmes for field legal officers to be developed in consultation with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. For the reasons provided by the Secretary-General in his report, the Advisory Committee recommends approval of the two Legal Officer posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4) requested for the Office of the Legal Counsel. The Committee is of the view that the functions of the Legal Officer post (P-4) proposed for the Office of the Under-Secretary-General could be accommodated from within existing capacity and recommends against its approval. 187. Resources amounting to $409,400 are requested to provide general temporary assistance funding for two Legal Officer posts (P-4) in the General Legal Division to deal with the increase in requests for legal advice and assistance related to investigations by the Office of Internal Oversight Services on allegations of fraud, mismanagement or abuse of authority in peacekeeping operations and in support of technical clearance requested by the Department of Field Support for candidates applying for Legal Officer positions in field missions. Given the current workload in this regard, the Advisory Committee recommends acceptance of the resources requested for general temporary assistance funding equivalent to two Legal Officer positions (P-4) for the General Legal Division. (h) Department of Public Information 188. Support account resources of $752,800 are requested for the Department of Public Information, reflecting an increase of $42,800, or 6 per cent. The increase is owing mostly to the increased standard costs of four continuing posts (2 P-4, 1 P-2, 1 General Service (Other level)) funded from the support account. An amount of $18,000 is requested for consultancy services to conduct training courses for peacekeeping missions and Headquarters personnel selected for deployment in peacekeeping missions. The Advisory Committee recommends against the resources proposed for consultants for the Department of Public Information. The Committee is of the opinion that internal capacity should be used for that purpose. (i) Department of Safety and Security 189. The support account resources of $5,179,000 proposed for the Department of Safety and Security for the period 2009/10 reflect an increase of $1,667,000 over the provision approved for 2008/09. The increase reflects additional resources for posts ($688,100) owing to the 6 additional posts proposed as well as additional non-post resources ($978,900) resulting from the proposed increase in the requirements for official travel ($466,900) and other supplies, services and equipment ($408,700). 190. The six additional posts requested for the Department of Safety and Security are the following: :: Five additional posts for the Training and Development Section for three Training Instructors (Security Service) and two Close Protection Training Officers (P-3) in support of the general training requirements resulting from the increase in security staff and to address the specialized security training and certification of Close Protection Officers provided by the Mission Support Unit (see A/63/767 and Corr.1, paras. 818-829) :: An additional Security Coordination Officer post (P-3) for the Protection Coordination Unit of the Safety and Security Service in order to address close protection requirements and coordinate operations within field missions, develop policy framework and standard operating procedures (see A/63/767, paras. 830-832). The Advisory Committee recognizes the importance of the training and coordination functions. However, it is also of the view that the question of strengthening security arrangements for the United Nations should be dealt with in an integrated manner. In its report on the strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations (A/63/769, para. 5), the Committee recommended that a comprehensive report on a safety and security policy framework of the United Nations be submitted to the General Assembly early in the main part of its sixty-fourth session to permit its consideration in conjunction with the proposed programme budget for 2010-2011, taking into account the outcome of the management review recommended by the Independent Panel on Safety and Security of United Nations Personnel and Premises Worldwide. The Committee therefore recommends that the training and coordination functions envisaged be performed from within existing capacity at this time. 191. The resources of $1,086,900 proposed for travel reflect an increase of $466,900, or 75.3 per cent, over the amount approved for 2008/09. The Advisory Committee recommends that the resources requested for travel be reduced by $100,000. 192. The requirements under other supplies, services and equipment of $523,500 include a provision of $435,800 for the acquisition of firearms and ammunition supplies to be utilized in the close protection training programme (see A/63/767, para. 853). The Advisory Committee notes that this constitutes a one-time cost; the ammunition requirements for future close protection courses would be provided by charging course fees to the peacekeeping missions. (j) Office of Information and Communications Technology 193. The support account budget includes a first-time provision of $18,726,800 for the Office of Information and Communications Technology. The Advisory Committee recalls that the Office was established by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/262. With effect from 1 January 2009, support account resources of $13,496,600 were allocated to the Office (including $5,017,500 from the Information and Communications Technology Division of the Department of Field Support and $8,479,100 approved for the enterprise resource planning project and new primary data centre on the North Lawn). The redeployment includes 10 posts (3 P-4, 4 P-3, 2 P-2/1, 1 General Service (Other level)) transferred from the Information and Communications Technology Division of the Department of Field Support and two posts (1 P-2, 1 General Service (Principal level)) approved for the Information Technology Services Division. 194. The support account resources proposed for 2009/10 amount to $18,726,800. The resources for posts in the amount of $2,261,200 include the 12-month costs of the 12 continuing posts (as compared with the previous allocation of 6 months) and of three additional posts proposed. Non-post resources of $16,465,600 are also proposed. 195. The three additional posts proposed for the Office of Information and Communications Technology are the following: :: A post of Chief of the Field Systems Service at the P-5 level to oversee, monitor and guide implementation of the enterprise systems for peacekeeping operations in the field (see A/63/767, paras. 860-866) :: Two posts at the P-4 level for the Strategic Management Service, one for an Information Systems Officer, the incumbent of which would provide assistance to staff in peacekeeping operations in preparation of project business cases, project management methodology tools, and the other for a Customer Support Analyst to set up a dedicated client services team that would provide support for peacekeeping operations (see A/63/767, paras. 867-871). The Advisory Committee recalls that in its resolution 63/262 on information and communications technology (ICT), the General Assembly decided to establish the Office of Information and Communications Technology and also took a number of decisions on ICT strategy and governance, enterprise resource planning, and security, disaster recovery and business continuity. The Committee does not believe that it is reasonable to request additional resources so short a time after such major decisions on the Organization's ICT strategy, structures and programmes have been taken. In this connection, the Committee points out that the Office of Information and Communications Technology expects to complete a first phase of structural reviews of Secretariat-wide ICT units with a view to rationalizing and harmonizing ICT operations and structures, as well as reducing duplications and optimizing use of resources. The Committee has referred to this matter in its report on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of peacekeeping operations (see A/63/746). Upon enquiry, the Committee was provided with a revised organization chart for the Office of Information and Communications Technology, which is attached as annex V to the present report. The Advisory Committee is of the opinion that the Office of Information and Communications Technology should consolidate its structures before requesting additional resources. In view of the above considerations, the Committee recommends against the establishment of the additional posts at this time. 196. Resources amounting to $1,647,600 are proposed for general temporary assistance as follows (see A/63/767, paras. 873-879): :: Two positions (1 P-5, 1 P-3 for 12 months each) to support enterprise content management system projects related to peacekeeping reporting and doctrine projects, automation, guidance content repository and share of costs :: Two positions (1 P-5, 1 P-3 for 12 months each) to support the customer relationship management system related to the management of services for reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment :: Two positions (1 P-4, 1 P-3 for 12 months each) to support the customer relationship management system related to the telecommunications billing service management project :: Continuation of one position (P-3 for 10 months) to perform functions of project management leadership, oversight of specialized technical resources related to the enterprise identity management system :: Continuation of one position (P-3 for 10 months) to ensure inclusion of specialized fuel hardware and establish integration with the proposed enterprise resource planning system, and addition of one new position (P-4 for 10 months) to perform the functions of project management, including oversight of the Fuel Management system. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of one position (P-5 for 12 months) proposed for the peacekeeping reporting project, the two positions (1 P-5, 1 P-3 for 12 months each) proposed in relation with the management of troop contributions, one position (P-3 for 12 months) proposed for the telecommunications billing project, continuation of the position (P-3 for 10 months) related to the enterprise identity management system, continuation of the position (P-3 for 10 months) for fuel management and the new position (P-4 for 10 months) proposed for project management of the fuel management system. The P-3 level functions for reporting and the P-4 level functions related to the telecommunications billing should be provided through internal capacity. 197. In a separate communication, the Committee was informed that seven general temporary assistance positions, the incumbents of which are currently performing functions and will be required to continue providing essential functions in 2009/10, in connection with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Data Centre in New York, had been inadvertently excluded from the support account resources proposed for the Office of the Chief Information Technology Officer for 2009/10. The seven general temporary assistance positions (5 P-3 and 2 General Service (Other level)), formerly under the management of the Information Technology Service Division of the Department of Management, were transferred to the Office of Information and Communications Technology pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/262. Upon enquiry, the Committee was informed that the related resources amounted to $1,028,000 and are proposed to be absorbed. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the continuation of the functions provided under general temporary assistance funding and that the related resources be included in the performance report for the support account for the period 2009/10. 198. The resources of $13,973,900 proposed for information technology would cover, in large part, the acquisition of specialized information technology services and equipment (A/63/767, paras. 889-905). The Advisory Committee notes that, of this total, $8,542,000 relates to acquisition of software, $2,242,000 relates to software licences and fees and $3,115,700 relates to contractual services. In terms of the broad programme groups, $10,834,700 is attributed to the three new projects: the customer relationship management system, the enterprise content management system (enterprise systems are to be managed centrally for the organizations described in A/62/510/Rev.1) and a global warden system that would provide a harmonized approach to support safety and security of peacekeeping personnel in the field; $3,065,000 is attributable to continuing requirements related to six field systems transferred from the Department of Field Support -- the enterprise identity management system, the portfolio management system, Galaxy and the management systems for fuel and rations; and $74,200 related to the acquisition, repair and maintenance of information technology equipment and infrastructure costs (for which standard costs for continuing and newly proposed staff are applied) (see A/63/767, paras. 901-905). 199. The Advisory Committee recommends a 5 per cent reduction in the resources proposed for information technology, to be utilized by the Office at its own discretion, taking into account the relative priorities of the different projects. 5. Conclusion 200. In the present report, of the 182 additional posts proposed by the Secretary-General in his report on the budget for the support account (A/63/767 and Corr.1), the Advisory Committee has recommended approval of a total of 106 posts. 201. The recommendations of the Advisory Committee involve reductions totalling $19,817,800 gross ($17,913,100 net), as follows: Post reductions (gross) Non-post reductions (gross) Executive Office of the Secretary-General 202. Accordingly, the Advisory Committee recommends that the General Assembly approve the staffing and non-staffing resources of $304,629,300 gross ($276,422,900 net) for the support account for the 12-month period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. 203. With regard to the proposal of the Secretary-General in paragraph 64 of the performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 (A/63/698), the Advisory Committee recommends that the General Assembly decide to apply the total amount of $15,056,300, comprising the unencumbered balance of $8,059,100 in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, and the total amount of $6,997,200, comprising interest income ($3,248,500), other income ($245,900) and cancellation of prior-period obligations ($3,502,800), to the support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. 204. The Advisory Committee recommends that the excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 in the amount of $7,322,600 be applied to the support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. 205. The Advisory Committee further recommends that the amount of $62,800, representing the excess of the appropriation for the support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, be applied to the support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. :: General Assembly resolutions 61/279 and 62/250 :: Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 and proposed budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 (A/62/855) :: Report of the Board of Auditors on United Nations peacekeeping operations (A/63/5 (Vol.II), chap. II) :: Report of the Secretary-General: overview of the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 and budget for the period from 1 July to 30 June 2010 (A/63/696) :: Performance report on the budget of the support account for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 (A/63/698 and Add.1) :: Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations (A/63/702 and Corr.1) :: Report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the budget for the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 (A/63/703) :: Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations (A/63/746) :: Budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 (A/63/767 and Corr.1) Annex I Proposed staffing of the Office of Operations, Department of Peacekeeping Operations, for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Organization charts A. Africa I Division B. Africa II Division C. Asia and Middle East Division D. Europe and Latin America Division Annex II Summary of improvements to administrative and management processes (A/63/702, section E) Initiatives Improvements Responsible office Status/time frame Business process improvement initiative Business process improvement initiative, Lean Six Sigma programme 11 process improvement projects in the broad areas of planning, procurement, personnel and business continuity Office of the Chief of Staff First phase: 9 projects completed in March 2009, 2 projects completed in April 2009 Mission leadership Joint review by DPKO/DFS/DPA of existing vacancy management and succession planning for senior appointments Standardized operating procedures regarding roles and responsibilities, mechanisms for information-sharing, and improved processing of senior appointments Senior Leadership Appointments Section, Office of the Under-Secretary-General Current process has been reviewed within the business process improvement initiative in 2008/09. Implementation of improvements and monitoring ongoing Human resources management Greater delegation of authority to field missions - Fewer recruitment cases handled at Headquarters - Fewer National Professional Officer, individual contractor and consultant cases handled at Headquarters - More strategic functions at Headquarters (recruitment, outreach, career development) - More efficient screening of applicants for field missions Following authorities have been delegated to field missions as of March 2009: :: Delegation of authority to recruit and administer locally recruited staff :: Delegation of recruitment authority up to the D-1 level to 5 missions (UNMIT, UNAMID, UNMIS, MINURCAT and UNAMA) :: Delegation of technical clearance authority :: Delegation of authority to hire national professional officers, individual contractors and consultants :: Delegation of authority to manage mission staffing resources Introduction of central review mechanism and occupational group management - Faster deployment to field missions, especially start-up or expanding missions - Increased transparency and consistency in the selection processes - Increased opportunities for mobility for staff in peace operations - Improved quality of rosters including gender and geographic representation Field Central Review Board fully established and trained as of March 2009 Programme for an advanced compendium of trainees (PACT) Reduction of the vacancy rate for human resources officers positions in field missions PACT I completed in June 2008. PACT II is ongoing and scheduled for completion in June 2009 Development of people module of SMART Programme - Increased level of knowledge, competence and accountability in field missions - Better performance of administrative functions in missions Field Personnel Division/SMART Team - In 2008, 40 participants completed the SMART pilot project - Another class of 40 participants has been enrolled as of end of March 2009 Development of detailed standard operating procedures on staffing table management Greater authority of missions to manage their resources Standard operating procedures and delegation of authority promulgated to all missions effective April 2008 Roll-out of human resources action plan in the field - Improved quality of the data in strategic human resources areas - Increased level of understanding of the role and accountability of senior mission leadership in human resources management - Improved identification of areas requiring strengthened Headquarters support Ongoing. Mid-point reviews to take place on 31 December 2009 for missions funded through the peacekeeping budget, and 30 June 2010 for special political missions funded through the regular budget. Baseline data are being integrated into the system for monitoring purposes Conduct and discipline A new misconduct tracking system launched in July 2008 - Uniform and standardized reporting on allegations of misconduct - Enhanced real-time communication between the Conduct and Discipline Unit at Headquarters and mission conduct and discipline teams Conduct and Discipline Unit Ongoing. A new misconduct tracking system was launched in July 2008. Approximately 2,100 cases have been entered in the tracking system, covering 2007 and 2008 data Anti-prostitution campaigns in 6 missions Increased awareness of host populations on the United Nations zero-tolerance policy Campaign activities will be completed by June 2009 Finalization of training module for middle to senior managers on the prevention of sexual abuse and exploitation - Enhanced abilities of managers to fulfil responsibilities on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse - Updated and streamlined training materials Training modules were finalized and disseminated to mission conduct and discipline teams in April 2008 Financial management Abacus - Reduction in DPKO/DFS final budget submission review time for missions that receive an Abacus visit from approximately 3 weeks to 1 day - Timely submission of budget Ongoing. The Abacus visits will continue for the 2010-2011 budget cycle PACT Reduction of the vacancy rate for budget officers positions in field missions Ongoing. First class of six mission budget officer trainees completed the programme in June 2008. Second class of mission finance and budget officer trainees will complete the programme during April-June 2009 Logistics Strategic partnership in cartography - Support the geographic information needs in missions - Eased process in acquiring cartographic data for field operations Ongoing. Partnerships established with the European Commission Joint Research Centre; the Bureau gographique interarmes; the Ministry of Defence of France; the European Union Satellite Centre Implementation of Tenant Units at UNLB - Organizational cost savings due to proximity to missions - Provision of engineering and geographic information resources and services to missions Ongoing. The following Logistics Support Division tenant units are established: Geographic Information System Centre; Strategic Air Operations Centre; Regional Aviation Safety Office; Engineering Standardization and Design Centre Designation of the strategic air operations centre Improved monitoring and tracking of aircraft and cargo movement for inter-mission operations The current phase of the implementation of regional and global concept methodology started in July 2008. Full implementation is expected by the second quarter of 2010 Regionalization of air safety office Cost effective provision of safety oversight Ongoing. Safety oversight is provided for UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNFICYP, UNIFIL and UNAMI. DFS remains committed to the establishment of a regional aviation safety office for missions in West Africa Procurement Joint review of procurement governance structure by DM and DFS Procurement governance paper Department of Management and the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support Paper currently being drafted by DM and DFS Update of Procurement manual Ongoing updates Increase in the delegation of field procurement authority from $200,000 to $500,000 Implemented in October 2008 Expansion of training for peacekeeping staff Ongoing. A training needs assessment has been completed and DFS has proposed that a joint DFS/DM working group be established to determine the most appropriate course of action Record-keeping of field delegations Implemented. DFS and DM issued field procurement delegations Information and communications technology Light footprint initiatives Centralization of ICT personnel and infrastructure at UNLB and Entebbe, with the expected efficiency of significantly reducing power and space requirements and ICT specialists in individual missions Ongoing. Service delivery outputs and efficiencies may be measured during the course of the next two budget cycles ICT management certification programme Enhancement of the quality of ICT services in field missions Ongoing. Quality of ICT services survey to be conducted during the course of the next two budget cycles Abbreviations: DPKO, Department of Peacekeeping Operations; DFS, Department of Field Support; DPA, Department of Political Affairs; DM, Department of Management; UNMIT, United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste; UNAMID, African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; UNMIS, United Nations Mission in the Sudan; MINURCAT, United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad; UNAMA, United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; SMART, senior mission administrative and resource training; ICT, information and communications technology; UNLB, United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy; UNMIK, United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo; UNOMIG, United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia; UNFICYP, United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; UNIFIL, United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon; UNAMI, United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Current and projected expenditure of the support account for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 (as at 13 March 2009) (United States dollars) 1 July 2008 to 13 March 2009 Projected 14 March to 30 June 2009 Apportionmenta Total expenditure Projected expenditure Total expenditure, including projected Estimated unencumbered balance as at Variance (percentage) Post resources International staff Subtotal Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements a Reflects funds approved for the enterprise resource planning project and new primary data centre on the North Lawn, in the amount of $8,479,100, with effect from 1 January 2009, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/262. Annex IV Organization chart Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, Police Division (proposed staffing as of 1 July 2009) Abbreviations: RB, regular budget; SA, support account; GS, General Service; OL, Other level; IOT, Integrated Operations Team; UNLB, United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy. a Proposed new posts. Office of Information and Communications Technology (proposed as of 1 July 2009) Abbreviations: RB, regular budget; XB, extrabudgetary; ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS, General Service; PL, Principal Level; OL, Other level. * New posts. a Posts funded from the peacekeeping support account. b Posts funded from the telecommunications support account. c Posts funded from reimbursement for support to extrabudgetary administrative structures. 