%%%DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS|EL SALVADOR|CUBA|

Sixty-third session Agenda item 20 The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development Letter dated 3 August 2009 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 17 July 2009 (see annex) from His Excellency Mr. Hugo Roger Martínez Bonilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador, informing you that within the framework of the inauguration of His Excellency Mr. Carlos Mauricio Funes Cartagena as Constitutional President of the Republic of El Salvador on 1 June 2009, the Government of the Republic of El Salvador and the Government of the Republic of Cuba have decided to announce the restoration of full diplomatic relations between their countries. I attach herewith a copy of the joint communiqué on the restoration of diplomatic relations between the Republic of El Salvador and the Republic of Cuba (see enclosure), signed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador, His Excellency Mr. Hugo Roger Martínez Bonilla, and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Alejandro González Galeano, and request that you should have it circulated as a document of the General Assembly. (Signed) Carlos Enrique García González Minister Plenipotentiary Chargé d'affaires a.i. 17 July 2009 I have the honour to inform you that on 10 June 2009, within the framework of the inauguration of His Excellency Mr. Carlos Mauricio Funes Cartagena as Constitutional President of the Republic of El Salvador on 1 June 2009, the Government of the Republic of El Salvador and the Government of the Republic of Cuba decided to announce the restoration of full diplomatic relations between their countries. In that connection, I have the pleasure to transmit herewith a copy of the joint communiqué signed by me, in my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of El Salvador, and Mr. Alejandro González Galeano, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba (see enclosure). (Signed) Hugo Roger Martínez Bonilla Minister for Foreign Affairs Agreement between the Government of the Republic of El Salvador and the Government of the Republic of Cuba for the restoration of diplomatic relations The Government of the Republic of El Salvador and the Government of the Republic of Cuba, hereinafter referred to as the "Parties", Desiring to promote relations of friendship and cooperation between their respective peoples and countries, Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and especially those of respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and noninterference in the internal affairs of States, and Based on their common interests and desire to develop relations of friendship and cooperation, Agree as follows: Article 1 The Parties shall restore full diplomatic relations at the embassy level in accordance with the United Nations Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April 1961. Article 2 The two Parties shall appoint ambassadors and shall afford each other the necessary assistance with a view to the establishment and functioning of the embassies in their respective capitals. Article 3 This Agreement shall enter into force on the date on which it is signed. Done at San Salvador, El Salvador, on 1 June 2009 in two original copies in the Spanish language, both texts being equally authentic. For the Government of the Republic of Cuba: (Signed) Alejandro González Galeano Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs For the Government of the Republic of El Salvador: 