%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|REPUBLIC OF KOREA|TERRORISM|

Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 106 Measures to eliminate international terrorism Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Republic of Korea 1. The Republic of Korea reported that it was a party to 12 international counter-terrorism conventions and protocols and had signed the International Convention for the Suppression of Nuclear Terrorism. 2. The Republic of Korea reported that it has frozen funds and other financial assets of individuals and entities designated by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). 3. The Republic of Korea indicated that it had concluded extradition treaties with 24 States, as well as treaties on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters with 19 States. It has also cooperated with 15 States on counter-terrorism through bilateral consultations, with a view to sharing information and knowledge and considering measures for capacity-building and mutual assistance in emergency situations. 4. During the reporting period, the Government of the Republic of Korea had strengthened its domestic counter-terrorism capacity through the consolidation of domestic legal arrangements and the national emergency response system. It had revised the National Anti-Terror Action Directive (Presidential Directive No. 47), which is the main legal basis of the national counter-terrorism system. In December 2008, the Prohibition of Financing for Offences of Public Intimidation Act had entered into force, with the main objective to implement the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The National Assembly was further reviewing an anti-terrorism bill. 5. The Government had also launched the Centre for National Crisis Management, which functions as a key centre in the case of emergency situations. 6. The Republic of Korea provided a list of counter-terrorism activities, including seminars and trainings, undertaken at the regional level within the framework of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum, the Asia-Europe Meeting, ASEAN+3 and the Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation. 