%%%PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|INFORMATION POLICY|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|INFORMATION MANAGEMENT|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|MULTILINGUALISM|DIGITAL DIVIDE|INFORMATION CENTRES|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|MASS MEDIA|WEBSITES|LIBRARY INFORMATION SERVICES|INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION|

United Nations Report of the Committee on Information Thirty-first session (4-15 May 2009) General Assembly Official Records Sixty-fourth Session Supplement No. 21 United Nations * New York, 2009 Report of the Committee on Information ISSN 0255-190X Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. [21 May 2009] Contents Chapter Page Introduction Organizational questions Opening of the session Election of officers Adoption of the agenda and programme of work Observers General debate Preparation and adoption of the report of the Committee to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session Chapter I 1. Currently the Committee is composed of the following Member States: Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cape Verde Chile China Colombia Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia Finland France Gabon Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guinea Guyana Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Lebanon Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Luxembourg Madagascar Malta Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Nepal Netherlands Niger Nigeria Pakistan Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Saudi Arabia Senegal Singapore Slovakia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Thailand Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe A. Opening of the session 2. The organizational meeting of the thirty-first session of the Committee on Information was held on 4 May 2009 at United Nations Headquarters. The session was opened by the Acting Chairman of the Committee, Marc Emilian Morar (Romania). B. Election of officers 3. In accordance with the principle of geographical rotation, the Committee held elections for a new Bureau for a two-year term. Upon his nomination by the representative of the Group of African States, Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde) was elected Chairman by acclamation. Upon their nomination by the representatives of the Group of Asian States, the Group of Eastern European States and the Group of Western European and Other States, respectively, Amir Hossein Hosseini (Islamic Republic of Iran), Irakli Chikovani (Georgia) and Stéphane Crouzat (France) were elected Vice-Chairmen by acclamation. Upon her nomination by the representative of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, Sheree Chambers (Jamaica) was elected Rapporteur, also by acclamation. The officers of the Committee on Information for the period 2009-2010 are thus as follows: Chairman: Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima (Cape Verde) Vice-Chairmen: Amir Hossein Hosseini (Islamic Republic of Iran) Irakli Chikovani (Georgia) Stéphane Crouzat (France) Rapporteur: Sheree Chambers (Jamaica) C. Adoption of the agenda and programme of work 4. At its organizational meeting on 4 May, the Committee adopted the following agenda and programme of work (A/AC.198/2009/1): 1. Opening of the session. 2. Election of officers. 3. Adoption of the agenda and programme of work. 4. Admission of new members. 5. Statement by the Chairperson. 6. Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Communications and Public Information. 7. General debate. 8. Consideration of reports submitted by the Secretary-General. 9. Open-ended working group of the Committee on Information. 10. Consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session. 5. The Committee held its general debate from 4 to 7 May 2009. On 4 May, in the afternoon, the Department of Public Information, led by its Under-Secretary-General, held an interactive dialogue with representatives of Member States. 6. For its consideration of agenda item 8, the Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public Information: strategic communications services (A/AC.198/2009/2); (b) Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public Information: news services (A/AC.198/2009/3); (c) Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public Information: outreach services (A/AC.198/2009/4). D. Observers 7. The following Member States took part in the session as observers: Cameroon, Fiji, Malaysia, Panama, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Slovenia. The Holy See and Palestine also participated in the session as observers. 8. Statements in the general debate were made by the following States members of the Committee on Information: Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brazil, Burkina Faso (on behalf of Chad, Mali and Niger), Cape Verde, China, the Congo, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech Republic (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Rio Group), Pakistan, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, the United States of America, Yemen and Zambia. Palestine, in its capacity as observer, also made a statement. 9. The general debate was preceded by statements made by the Chairman of the Committee and the Under-Secretary-General for Communications and Public Information of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat. 10. In taking up the substantive questions before the Committee, speakers emphasized the central role of the United Nations in global affairs and of the Department of Public Information as its public voice. One speaker, addressing the Committee on behalf of a large group, said that his group believed that continued improvement of the partnership between the Department of Public Information and the Committee on Information was essential in promoting the work of the United Nations and issues of importance to the international community. It was critical, he noted, for the Department to continuously project United Nations ideals and accomplishments, intensify outreach and transmit the Organization's message to all peoples around the world. 11. Another speaker, also addressing the Committee on behalf of a large group, said that the role of the Department of Public Information was to reach the international public with information on the challenges and corresponding measures agreed upon by all Member States. Speaking on behalf of another large group, one speaker praised the new format of the reports of the Department, along with its dissemination of information on a wide variety of priority United Nations issues. In promoting the ad hoc thematic debates held by the General Assembly, the group called for the maintaining of objectivity in conveying its messages and for the undertaking of future media campaigns on the energy and ecological crises and their impact on poverty. Another speaker noted that public information at the United Nations should be dedicated to transparency, which in turn should be assured by increasingly precise, impartial and coherent strategic communications. In order for the Department to perform that noble task, the speaker noted, it needed adequate funds and a clear mandate, which she hoped would be forthcoming through consensus. 12. One speaker, representing a large group, expressed satisfaction with the work of the Department of Public Information in promoting better understanding of various thematic issues, and commended such new initiatives as "UN4U", the first United Nations Book Day, the "txt4peace" website, United Nations Member States wiki and the new website unyearbook.un.org. Another speaker, also representing a large group, called for further enhancing the effectiveness of the Department's work within a limited budget through the introduction of benchmarks and clear criteria. Another speaker argued that the Department should always commit itself to reaching out to the widest possible audiences and to providing accurate, relevant, impartial, balanced and timely information on the Organization's work. Its efforts in addressing such important issues as United Nations reform, the Millennium Development Goals, sustainable development, the dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace were commendable, he noted. It was also important for the Department to help the international community better understand emerging issues such as the influenza A (H1N1) virus outbreak and the food crisis, he said. Another speaker encouraged the Department to identify ways to improve the coordination, efficiency and integration of its activities throughout the United Nations system, so as to achieve "the greatest public impact with the greatest efficiency". 13. Another speaker, citing the global financial crisis, called for greater emphasis on development. He noted that the downturn had hit developing countries hardest, creating difficulties for them in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The United Nations was duty-bound to protect their interests, and the Department of Public Information should enlighten the international media and public opinion alike by highlighting their difficulties. It should also call on the global community to fulfil aid commitments, he said. Another speaker, while commending the Department for its focus on development, human rights and peace and security as its principal information and communications priorities, asked the Department to pay more attention to covering the Organization's role in addressing the world financial crisis. 14. Several speakers called for more vigorous intervention from the United Nations in bridging the "digital divide". One speaker observed that the people in the global South needed greater access to information technology and that the Department of Public Information should ensure that the Digital Solidarity Fund was better known. Another speaker said it was of crucial importance to change a situation in which the developing world lacked access to new information technology and therefore a large portion of the information flow, as well as control over the content of the information disseminated. The United Nations had a key role to play in enabling the rational use and more social appropriation of information technology, he said. Another speaker noted that there was a need for continued openness to the use of new information technology, including further improvements in use of the Internet. In that light, the speaker commended the creation of the Member State portal, deleGate. 15. Striking a cautionary note, another speaker said that despite substantial progress in the field of information and communications technology, which had contributed to a rapprochement between peoples and cultures, there would be a continued need for the written press in respect of promoting United Nations products and goals. Another speaker, while applauding the creative use of modern technology, stressed that the use of more traditional technologies and the bridging of the digital divide were critical to audiences in developing countries. The view was expressed that while the Internet would be a primary driver of communications in the coming years, the most relevant media for people in Asia, Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean were traditional, including print and radio. In this regard, the speaker welcomed the efforts of the Department of Public Information to disseminate programmes directly to broadcasting stations. 16. Several speakers discussed the importance of achieving linguistic parity in the work of the Department of Public Information. One speaker, advocating further strengthening of multilingualism, noted that the Department should work to close the gap between the number of web pages offered in English and those in other languages. Another speaker, reflecting the view of a large group of Member States, noted that more resources should be allocated for achieving full parity of languages and bridging the gap among websites in the Organization's six official languages. One speaker noted that he was concerned about various language disparities. For example, the Arabic language page needed improvement. Another speaker, noting progress in enhancing the Department's Russian web service, called for a balanced allocation of resources among all official languages for website maintenance. 17. A number of speakers referred to the importance of intercultural and interreligious dialogue and asked the Department of Public Information to play a more vigorous role in promoting the dialogue among civilizations. One speaker noted that efforts to disseminate information in support of inter-civilizational dialogue and to condemn attacks on religion were designed to promote "respect for the other", and also noted that the United Nations had a pioneering role to play in that regard. Another speaker said that his Government looked forward to more progress in enhancing the Organization's image and promoting both dialogue and understanding among civilizations. 18. Several speakers lauded the continued cooperation of the Department of Public Information with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support. One speaker encouraged the Department of Public Information to continue working with those two Departments as it was important for Member States and the public to receive up-to-date information on United Nations peacekeeping. He also supported the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy on acts of sexual exploitation and abuse and was pleased to learn of the work of the Department with the Conduct and Discipline Unit on a web-based database of cases involving such acts. 19. Several speakers commented on the special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Public Information. One speaker noted, on behalf of a large group, the usefulness of the annual training programme for Palestinian media professionals designed to assist them in developing their media capacity and skills. These and other activities undertaken by the Department in this regard should be strengthened, he said. Another speaker noted that his country appreciated the Department's work on the question of Palestine and considered sensitization of public opinion important for fostering a grass-roots peace initiative in the Middle East. Another speaker, underlining the importance of the special information programme on the question of Palestine, lauded the Department's annual international media seminar on the question of Palestine and reaffirmed the importance of digitizing materials on the history of the Palestine question. However, another speaker said that he was concerned about the information programme on Palestine, which was the only thematic issue covered by the Department that was focused on a specific conflict and that offered a one-sided and misleading narrative of events in the region of the Middle East. 20. Several speakers commented on the outreach programmes of the Department of Public Information and lauded its work with students and youth. One speaker expressed support for the further strengthening of cooperation with civil society organizations and increasing the visibility of information in the area of violence against women. One speaker called attention to the possibility of exploring further partnerships between the United Nations and the private sector to enhance the visibility of the Organization's activities. A number of speakers applauded the Department for its outreach programme on the Holocaust. Speakers also lauded the Department for its efforts to mark the first International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. Stressing the importance of commemorating the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade, one speaker called for adequate funding for annual commemorations of the event, as well as for all other activities under the Department's mandate. 21. One speaker commended the work of the Department of Public Information in commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Identifying climate change as a priority area, one speaker said that his Government was interested in learning how other small developing countries were confronting that challenge. He asked the Department to make greater efforts to highlight the effects of global warming by producing user-friendly publicity materials that could be broadcast over national media. The same speaker asked the Department to support the promotion of International Mother Language Day. While expressing pleasure at the efforts of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to publicize the Day, he regretted that the Department had done little in that regard. 22. Several speakers commented on the proposal of the Department of Public Information to replace the publication UN Chronicle with a news magazine UN Affairs. One speaker, on behalf of a large group, said that his group was of the view that the Department should continue the publication of the UN Chronicle and consider ways of improving it, while taking into account "educational outreach, core audiences and parity of languages". Another speaker, also representing a large group, supported the transformation of the UN Chronicle into UN Affairs in order to reach out more effectively to scholars and policy shapers and end the stagnation and decline in respect of subscriptions. In that light, he noted that the effort to issue UN Affairs in more languages through partnerships with universities and to create a platform for wider perspectives on pressing challenges in the United Nations agenda was commendable. 23. Another speaker commended the Department of Public Information for providing information on the draft of a new publication that would replace the UN Chronicle. At the same time, he noted, any shortcomings were due to the fact that it had not adapted to readers' tastes, adding that the focus should be placed on efforts to modernize it. There was no incongruity, he underlined, between continuing to publish the UN Chronicle and providing in-depth analysis of the issues on the agenda of the Organization. 24. The work and activities of the network of United Nations information centres were commented on by several speakers. A speaker, addressing the Committee on behalf of a large group, urged that all possible measures be taken to strengthen the United Nations information centres. The centres, he said, were a vital source for the flow of information as they help bridge the gap between the developed and developing countries in terms of access of information and communications technologies. The speaker said that any decision to reorganize the United Nations information centres must be made in close consultation with the host countries, stressing that it must take into account the geographical, linguistic and technological characters and needs of different regions. 25. Another speaker, also representing a large group, noted that regional and local information centres continued to be an important tool in the service of the mission of the Department of Public Information. The centres, he noted, provided the most direct means of communication with the world public and needed to be a step ahead on topical issues. Referring to a recent report on United Nations information centres by the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the speaker noted that an important tool for raising the efficiency of the centres in the context of their resource and capacity constraints would be the attainment of comparable evaluation of performance of individual centres, both regional and local, which would invite further "competitive" sharing of lessons learned and best practices among them. Another speaker argued that the Department needed to continuously review the allocation of staff and financial resources to centres in developing countries, while providing necessary budgetary resources. Speaking on behalf of several countries, one speaker noted that the centre in Ouagadougou played an important role in Africa and was supported by the countries in the region, but that the Department must do more to help it, especially by nominating a director. 26. A number of speakers referred to the proposal for a centre in Luanda for Portuguese-speaking countries in Africa. One speaker regretted that, despite the offer by the Government of Angola to host and to provide rent- and maintenance-free premises for an information centre in Luanda, no progress had been made towards creating such a centre. Another speaker noted that while her Government commended the United Nations Regional Information Centre in Brussels for supplying information to Portuguese-speaking countries, the urgent and specific needs of Portuguese-speaking countries in Africa were not being met. She called upon the Department of Public Information to make the centre in Angola "feasible and a reality". 27. Several speakers commended the work being carried out by United Nations information centres in their countries. Others referred to specific issues requiring attention. For example, one speaker noted that it was regrettable that the Department of Public Information had not appointed a director for the United Nations information centre in Sanaa, which was of special importance as it was located in one of the world's least developed countries. Another speaker pointed out that the United Nations information centre in Dhaka had been without a full-time director for almost 25 years, while commending the national staff at the centre for making the best use of its meagre resources in promoting the Millennium Development Goals and the country's role in United Nations peacekeeping. 28. In connection with the observance of World Press Freedom Day, several speakers referred to the importance of freedom of expression and freedom of the press. On behalf of a large group, one speaker observed that, given that journalists in pursuit of important tasks continued to be killed, his group underlined the importance of the day in raising the awareness of Governments regarding the duty to respect and uphold the right to freedom of expression. Calling attention to World Press Freedom Day, another speaker pointed out that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirmed the right of everyone to full freedom of expression, including "freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers". Also in connection with the observance of the day, another speaker paid tribute to the "family of professionals" who continued to make known the work of the United Nations. 29. The Committee endorsed an agreement reached between the Group of 77 and China and the European Union, as well as other members of the Committee, to form a task force to undertake the work of streamlining the resolution on questions relating to information and to produce a revised text at least two weeks before the opening of the thirty-second session of the Committee. The Committee also endorsed the application of Sierra Leone to become a member of the Committee. Once approved by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, Sierra Leone will become the 113th member of the Committee. 30. At its 5th plenary meeting, the Committee on Information proceeded to adopt its draft report, including two draft resolutions and a draft decision, by consensus. A text, submitted by the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, formed the basis of negotiations for a draft resolution, which involved two negotiating groups, the Group of 77 and China and the European Union, as well as other Member States. Questions relating to information Draft resolution A Information in the service of humanity The General Assembly, Taking note of the comprehensive and important report of the Committee on Information, Also taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on questions relating to information, Urges all countries, organizations of the United Nations system as a whole and all others concerned, reaffirming their commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of freedom of the press and freedom of information, as well as to those of the independence, pluralism and diversity of the media, deeply concerned by the disparities existing between developed and developing countries and the consequences of every kind arising from those disparities that affect the capability of the public, private or other media and individuals in developing countries to disseminate information and communicate their views and their cultural and ethical values through endogenous cultural production, as well as to ensure the diversity of sources and their free access to information, and recognizing the call in this context for what in the United Nations and at various international forums has been termed "a new world information and communication order, seen as an evolving and continuous process": (a) To cooperate and interact with a view to reducing existing disparities in information flows at all levels by increasing assistance for the development of communications infrastructures and capabilities in developing countries, with due regard for their needs and the priorities attached to such areas by those countries, and in order to enable them and the public, private or other media in developing countries to develop their own information and communications policies freely and independently and increase the participation of media and individuals in the communication process, and to ensure a free flow of information at all levels; (b) To ensure for journalists the free and effective performance of their professional tasks and condemn resolutely all attacks against them; (c) To provide support for the continuation and strengthening of practical training programmes for broadcasters and journalists from public, private and other media in developing countries; (d) To enhance regional efforts and cooperation among developing countries, as well as cooperation between developed and developing countries, to strengthen communications capacities and to improve the media infrastructure and communications technology in the developing countries, especially in the areas of training and dissemination of information; (e) To aim at, in addition to bilateral cooperation, providing all possible support and assistance to the developing countries and their media, public, private or other, with due regard to their interests and needs in the field of information and to action already adopted within the United Nations system, including: (i) The development of the human and technical resources that are indispensable for the improvement of information and communications systems in developing countries and support for the continuation and strengthening of practical training programmes, such as those already operating under both public and private auspices throughout the developing world; (ii) The creation of conditions that will enable developing countries and their media, public, private or other, to have, by using their national and regional resources, the communications technology suited to their national needs, as well as the necessary programme material, especially for radio and television broadcasting; (iii) Assistance in establishing and promoting telecommunication links at the subregional, regional and interregional levels, especially among developing countries; (iv) The facilitation, as appropriate, of access by the developing countries to advanced communications technology available on the open market; (f) To provide full support for the International Programme for the Development of Communication of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which should support both public and private media. Draft resolution B United Nations public information policies and activities Emphasizing the role of the Committee on Information as its main subsidiary body mandated to make recommendations to it relating to the work of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, Reaffirming its resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946, establishing the Department of Public Information, which states in paragraph 2 of annex I that "the activities of the Department should be so organized and directed as to promote to the greatest possible extent an informed understanding of the work and purposes of the United Nations among the peoples of the world", Emphasizing that the contents of public information and communications should be placed at the heart of the strategic management of the United Nations and that a culture of communications and transparency should permeate all levels of the Organization, as a means of fully informing the peoples of the world of the aims and activities of the United Nations, in accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in order to create broad-based global support for the United Nations, Stressing that the primary mission of the Department of Public Information is to provide, through its outreach activities, accurate, impartial, comprehensive, balanced, timely and relevant information to the public on the tasks and responsibilities of the United Nations in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization with the greatest transparency, Recalling the comprehensive review of the work of the Department of Public Information, requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001, as well as the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change" and Assembly resolutions 57/300 of 20 December 2002 and 60/109 B of 8 December 2005, which provided an opportunity to take due steps to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Department and to maximize the use of its resources, Expressing its concern that the gap in information and communications technology between the developed and the developing countries has continued to widen and that vast segments of the population in developing countries are not benefiting from the present information and communications technologies, and, in this regard, underlining the necessity of rectifying the imbalances in the present development of information and communications technologies in order to make it more just, equitable and effective, Recognizing that developments in information and communications technologies open vast new opportunities for economic growth and social development and can play an important role in the eradication of poverty in developing countries, and, at the same time, emphasizing that the development of these technologies poses challenges and risks and could lead to the further widening of disparities between and within countries, Recalling its resolution 61/266 of 16 May 2007 on multilingualism, and emphasizing the importance of making appropriate use of the official languages of the United Nations in the activities of the Department of Public Information, with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the five other official languages, Welcoming Sierra Leone to membership in the Committee on Information, I. Introduction 1. Reaffirms its resolution 13 (I), in which it established the Department of Public Information, and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly related to the activities of the Department, and requests the Secretary-General, in respect of the public information policies and activities of the United Nations, to continue to implement fully the recommendations contained in paragraph 2 of its resolution 48/44 B of 10 December 1993 and other mandates as established by the General Assembly; 2. Also reaffirms that the United Nations remains the indispensable foundation of a peaceful and just world and that its voice must be heard in a clear and effective manner, and emphasizes the essential role of the Department of Public Information in this context; 3. Stresses the importance of the clear, timely, accurate and comprehensive provision of information by the Secretariat to Member States, upon their request, within the framework of existing mandates and procedures; 4. Reaffirms the central role of the Committee on Information in United Nations public information policies and activities, including the prioritization of those activities, and decides that recommendations relating to the programme of the Department of Public Information shall originate, to the extent possible, in the Committee and shall be considered by the Committee; 5. Requests the Department of Public Information, following the priorities laid down by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/247 of 24 December 2008, and guided by the United Nations Millennium Declaration and reaffirming the 2005 World Summit Outcome, to pay particular attention to peace and security, development and human rights and to major issues such as the eradication of poverty, including the global food crisis, conflict prevention, sustainable development, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and the needs of the African continent; 6. Also requests the Department of Public Information to pay particular attention to progress in implementing the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and the outcomes of the major related United Nations summits and conferences in carrying out its activities; and calls upon the Department of Public Information to play an active role in raising public awareness of the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals; 7. Further requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres to play an active role in raising public awareness of the global challenge of climate change, and encourages the Department to pay particular attention to the actions taken in the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in accordance with the principles of common but differentiated responsibilities, especially in the context of the Conference of the Parties and of the Meetings of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol held in Poznan, Poland, from 1 to 12 December 2008, and to be held in Copenhagen from 7 to 18 December 2009; 8. Reaffirms the need to enhance the technological infrastructure of the Department of Public Information on a continuous basis in order to widen its outreach and to continue to improve the United Nations website; II. General activities of the Department of Public Information 9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public Information; 10. Requests the Department of Public Information to maintain its commitment to a culture of evaluation and to continue to evaluate its products and activities with the objective of enhancing their effectiveness, and to continue to cooperate and coordinate with Member States and the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat; 11. Reaffirms the importance of more effective coordination between the Department of Public Information and the Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure consistency in the messages of the Organization; 12. Notes the efforts of the Department of Public Information to continue to publicize the work and decisions of the General Assembly, and requests the Department to continue to enhance its working relationship with the Office of the President of the General Assembly; 13. Encourages continued collaboration between the Department of Public Information and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of culture and in the fields of education and communication, bridging the existing gap between the developed and the developing countries; 14. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Department of Public Information to work at the local level with other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to enhance the coordination of their communications activities, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-second session on progress achieved in this regard and on the activities of the United Nations Communications Group; 15. Reaffirms that the Department of Public Information must prioritize its work programme, while respecting existing mandates and in line with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, to focus its message and better concentrate its efforts and to match its programmes with the needs of its target audiences, on the basis of improved feedback and evaluation mechanisms; 16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to exert all efforts to ensure that publications and other information services of the Secretariat, including the United Nations website and the United Nations News Service, contain comprehensive, balanced, objective and equitable information in all official languages about the issues before the Organization and that they maintain editorial independence, impartiality, accuracy and full consistency with resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly; 17. Requests the Department of Public Information and content-providing offices of the Secretariat to ensure that United Nations publications are produced in a cost-effective and environmentally friendly manner and to continue to coordinate closely with all other entities, including all other departments of the Secretariat and funds and programmes of the United Nations system, in order to avoid duplication, within their respective mandates, in the issuance of United Nations publications; 18. Emphasizes that the Department of Public Information should maintain and improve its activities in the areas of special interest to developing countries and where appropriate, other countries with special needs, and that the activities of the Department should contribute to bridging the existing gap between the developing and the developed countries in the crucial field of public information and communications; 19. Notes the issuance of daily press releases, and reiterates its request to the Department of Public Information to continue to improve their production process and streamline their format, structure and length, keeping in mind the views of Member States, including their views on expanding them to the other official languages; Multilingualism and public information 20. Emphasizes the importance of making appropriate use and ensuring equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the activities of the Department of Public Information, including in presentations to the Committee on Information, with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the five other official languages; 21. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department of Public Information has appropriate staffing capacity in all the official languages of the United Nations to undertake all its activities and to include this aspect in future programme budget proposals for the Department, bearing in mind the principle of parity of all six official languages, while respecting the workload of each official language; 22. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Public Information to enhance multilingualism in all its activities, and stresses the importance of fully implementing its resolution 61/266 by ensuring that the texts of all new public documents in all six official languages and information materials of the United Nations are made available daily through the United Nations website and are accessible to Member States without delay; 23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue towards completion of the task of uploading all important older United Nations documents on the United Nations website in all six official languages on a priority basis, so that these archives are also available to Member States through that medium; Bridging the digital divide 24. Recalls with satisfaction its resolution 60/252 of 27 March 2006, in which it endorsed the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society, as adopted at the second phase of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005, and proclaimed 17 May annual World Information Society Day, recalls the adoption of the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action at the first phase of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003, and in this regard requests the Department of Public Information to contribute to the celebration of this event and to play a role in raising awareness of the possibilities that the use of the Internet and other information and communications technologies can bring to societies and economies, as well as of ways to bridge the digital divide; 25. Calls upon the Department of Public Information to contribute to raising the awareness of the international community of the importance of the implementation of the outcome documents of the World Summit on the Information Society; Network of United Nations information centres 26. Emphasizes the importance of the network of United Nations information centres in enhancing the public image of the United Nations and in disseminating messages on the United Nations to local populations, especially in developing countries; 27. Welcomes the work done by the network of United Nations information centres in favour of the publication of United Nations information materials and the translation of important documents in languages other than the official languages of the United Nations, encourages the network of United Nations information centres to continue to develop web pages in local languages, and the Department of Public Information to provide necessary resources and technical facilities, with a view to reaching the widest possible spectrum of audiences and extending the United Nations message to all the corners of the world in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization, and encourages the continuation of efforts in this regard; 28. Stresses the importance of rationalizing the network of United Nations information centres, and, in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to continue to make proposals in this direction, including through the redeployment of resources where necessary, and to report to the Committee on Information at its successive sessions; 29. Reaffirms that the rationalization of United Nations information centres must be carried out on a case-by-case basis in consultation with all concerned Member States in which existing information centres are located, the countries served by those information centres and other interested countries in the region, taking into consideration the distinctive characteristics of each region; 30. Recognizes that the network of United Nations information centres, especially in developing countries, should continue to enhance its impact and activities, including through strategic communications support, and calls upon the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of this approach to the Committee on Information at its successive sessions; 31. Encourages the Department of Public Information, through the information centres, to strengthen its cooperation with all other United Nations entities at the country level, in order to enhance coherence in communications and to avoid duplication of work; 32. Stresses the importance of taking into account the special needs and requirements of developing countries in the field of information and communications technology for the effective flow of information in those countries; 33. Also stresses that the Department of Public Information, through the network of United Nations information centres, should continue to promote public awareness of and mobilize support for the work of the United Nations at the local level, bearing in mind that information in local languages has the strongest impact on local populations; 34. Further stresses the importance of efforts to strengthen the outreach activities of the United Nations to those Member States remaining outside the network of United Nations information centres, and encourages the Secretary-General, within the context of rationalization, to extend the services of the network of United Nations information centres to those Member States; 35. Stresses that the Department of Public Information should continue to review the allocation of both staff and financial resources to the United Nations information centres in developing countries, emphasizing the needs of the least developed countries; 36. Takes note of the proposal by the Secretary-General to work closely with the Governments concerned to explore the possibility of identifying rent-free premises, while taking into account the economic condition of the host countries and bearing in mind that such support should not be a substitute for the full allocation of financial resources for the information centres in the context of the programme budget of the United Nations, and encourages host countries to respond to the needs of the United Nations information centres; 37. Also takes note of the strengthening of the information centres in Cairo, Mexico City and Pretoria, and encourages the Secretary-General to explore the strengthening of other centres, especially in Africa, in cooperation with the Member States concerned and within existing resources; 38. Recalls the offer made by the Government of Angola to host a United Nations information centre in Luanda to address the special needs of Portuguese-speaking African countries, through the provision of rent-free premises, regrets the lack of progress in this regard, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-second session, on the measures necessary, including the budgetary requirements, to accommodate those needs, as well as any proposal to move this process forward; 39. Encourages the Secretary-General, when appointing directors to the United Nations information centres, to fully consider, inter alia, the experience of candidates in the field of information and communications technology, as one of the highly desirable appointment criteria; III. Strategic communications services 40. Reaffirms the role of the strategic communications services in devising and disseminating United Nations messages by developing communications strategies, in close collaboration with the substantive departments, United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, in full compliance with their legislative mandates; Promotional campaigns 41. Appreciates the work of the Department of Public Information in promoting, through its campaigns, issues of importance to the international community, such as the United Nations Millennium Declaration and the progress made in implementing the internationally agreed development goals, United Nations reform, the eradication of poverty, conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, sustainable development, disarmament, decolonization, human rights, including the rights of women and children and of persons with disabilities, strategic coordination in humanitarian relief, especially in natural disasters and other crises, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases, the needs of the African continent and combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as well as dialogue among civilizations, the culture of peace and tolerance and the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, as well as prevention of genocide, and requests the Department to continue to carry out information activities on all these issues; 42. Commends the role of the Department of Public Information in observing the annual International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, and looks forward to its further work in promoting the establishment of the permanent memorial to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade; 43. Requests the Department, in this regard, in cooperation with the countries concerned and with the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to continue to take appropriate measures to enhance world public awareness of these and other important global issues; 44. Stresses the need to continue the renewed emphasis in support of Africa's development, in particular by the Department of Public Information, in order to promote awareness in the international community of the nature of the critical economic and social situation in Africa and of the priorities of the New Partnership for Africa's Development; 45. Recognizes the role of the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres in commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; Role of the Department of Public Information in United Nations peacekeeping operations 46. Commends the role of the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres in commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping; 47. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure the involvement of the Department of Public Information from the planning stage of future peacekeeping operations through interdepartmental consultations and coordination with other departments of the Secretariat, in particular with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support; 48. Requests the Department of Public Information, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support to continue their cooperation in raising awareness of the new realities, far-reaching successes and challenges faced by peacekeeping operations, especially multidimensional and complex ones, and the recent surge in United Nations peacekeeping activities, and welcomes efforts by the three Departments to develop and implement a comprehensive communications strategy on current challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping; 49. Stresses the importance of enhancing the public information capacity of the Department of Public Information in the field of peacekeeping operations and its role, in close cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, in the process of selecting public information staff for United Nations peacekeeping operations or missions, and, in this regard, invites the Department of Public Information to second public information staff who have the necessary skills to fulfil the tasks of the operations or missions, taking into account the principle of equitable geographical distribution in accordance with Chapter XV, Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, and to consider views expressed, especially by host countries, when appropriate, in this regard; 50. Emphasizes the importance of the peacekeeping gateway on the United Nations website, and requests the Department of Public Information to continue its efforts in supporting the peacekeeping missions to further develop their websites; 51. Requests the Department of Public Information and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to continue to cooperate in implementing an effective outreach programme to explain the zero-tolerance policy of the Organization regarding sexual exploitation and abuse and to inform the public of the outcome of all such cases involving peacekeeping personnel, including cases where allegations are ultimately found to be legally unproven, and also to inform the public of the adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and Related Personnel; Role of the Department of Public Information in strengthening dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace as means of enhancing understanding among nations 52. Recalls its resolutions on dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, requests the Department of Public Information, while ensuring the pertinence and relevance of subjects for promotional campaigns under this issue, to continue to provide the necessary support for the dissemination of information pertaining to dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, as well as the initiative on the Alliance of Civilizations, and to take due steps in fostering the culture of dialogue among civilizations and promoting cultural understanding, tolerance, respect for and freedom of religion or belief and effective enjoyment by all of all human rights and civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development; 53. Invites the United Nations system, especially the Department of Public Information, to continue to encourage and facilitate dialogue among civilizations and to formulate ways and means to promote dialogue among civilizations in the activities of the United Nations in various fields, taking into account the Programme of Action of the Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations, and in this regard, looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/4 of 20 October 2005; 54. Recognizes the achievements of the Alliance of Civilizations and the efforts made by the High Representative of the Secretary-General for the Alliance of Civilizations, takes note of the broad range of initiatives and partnerships in the areas of youth, education, the media and migration launched at the second Alliance of Civilizations Forum, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 6 and 7 April 2009, and welcomes the continued support of the Department of Public Information for the work of the Alliance of Civilization, including its ongoing projects; IV. News services 55. Stresses that the central objective of the news services implemented by the Department of Public Information is the timely delivery of accurate, objective and balanced news and information emanating from the United Nations system in all four mass media, namely, print, radio, television and the Internet, to the media and other audiences worldwide, with the overall emphasis on multilingualism, and reiterates its request to the Department to ensure that all news-breaking stories and news alerts are accurate, impartial and free of bias; 56. Emphasizes the importance of the Department of Public Information continuing to draw the attention of world media to stories that do not obtain prominent coverage, through the initiative entitled "10 Stories the World Should Hear More About" and through video and audio coverage by United Nations Television and United Nations Radio; Traditional means of communication 57. Welcomes the initiative of United Nations Radio, which remains one of the most effective and far-reaching traditional media available to the Department of Public Information and an important instrument in United Nations activities, to enhance its live radio broadcasting service by making more frequently updated reports in all six official languages and features available to broadcasters on a daily basis on all United Nations activities, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to achieve parity in the six official languages in United Nations Radio productions; 58. Notes the efforts being made by the Department of Public Information to disseminate programmes directly to broadcasting stations all over the world in the six official languages, with the addition of Portuguese and Kiswahili, as well as in other languages where possible; 59. Requests the Department of Public Information to continue building partnerships with local, national and regional broadcasters to extend the United Nations message to all the corners of the world in an accurate and impartial way, and requests the Radio and Television Service of the Department to continue to take full advantage of the technological infrastructure made available in recent years; United Nations website 60. Reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for the media, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, Member States and the general public, and, in this regard, reiterates the continued need for efforts by the Department of Public Information to maintain and improve it; 61. Recognizes the efforts made by the Department of Public Information to implement the basic accessibility requirements for persons with disabilities to access the United Nations website, and calls upon the Department to continue to work towards compliance with accessibility requirements on all new and updated pages of the website, with the aim of ensuring its accessibility for persons with different kinds of disabilities; 62. Takes note of the fact that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United Nations website has improved, and, in this regard, requests the Department of Public Information, in coordination with content-providing offices, to further improve the actions taken to achieve full parity among the six official languages on the United Nations website, and especially reiterates its request to ensure the adequate distribution of financial and human resources within the Department of Public Information allocated to the United Nations website among all official languages, taking into consideration the specificity of each official language; 63. Welcomes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Public Information with academic institutions to increase the number of web pages available in some official languages, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to extend those arrangements to all the official languages of the United Nations; 64. Recalls paragraph 74 of its resolution 60/109 B, and in this regard reiterates that all content-providing offices in the Secretariat should continue their efforts to translate into all official languages all English-language materials and databases posted on the United Nations website and to make them available on the respective language websites in the most practical, efficient and cost-effective manner; 65. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take full advantage of new developments in information technology in order to improve, in a cost-effective manner, the expeditious dissemination of information on the United Nations, in accordance with the priorities established by the General Assembly in its resolutions and taking into account the linguistic diversity of the Organization, welcomes the continuing growth in the popularity of the e-mail news alerts service provided by the Department of Public Information on the United Nations News Centre portal in English and French, and encourages the Department to consult with the Information Technology Services Division of the Department of Management and to explore, as a matter of priority, ways of upgrading the technical capabilities of the service and providing it in all official languages; 66. Recognizes that some official languages use non-Latin and bidirectional scripts and that technological infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations are based on Latin script, which leads to difficulties in processing non-Latin and bidirectional scripts, and urges the Information Technology Services Division of the Department of Management to further collaborate with the Department of Public Information and to continue its efforts to ensure that technological infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations fully support Latin, non-Latin and bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the equality of all official languages on the United Nations website; V. Library services 67. Calls upon the Department of Public Information to continue to lead the Steering Committee for the Modernization and Integrated Management of United Nations Libraries, and further commends the steps taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and the other member libraries of the Steering Committee to align their activities, services and outputs more closely with the goals, objectives and operational priorities of the Organization; 68. Reiterates the need to maintain a multilingual collection of books, periodicals and other materials in hard copy, accessible to Member States, ensuring that the Library continues to be a broadly accessible resource for information about the United Nations and its activities; 69. Calls upon the Department of Public Information, recognizing the importance of audio-visual archives in preserving our common heritage, to continue to examine its policies and activities regarding the durable preservation of its radio, television and photographic archives and to take action within existing resources in ensuring that such archives are preserved and are accessible, and encourages the Department to work further with all interested partners in order to reach that objective; 70. Takes note of the initiative taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library, in its capacity as the focal point, to expand the scope of the regional training and knowledge-sharing workshops organized for the depository libraries in developing countries to include outreach in their activities; 71. Acknowledges the role of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in enhancing knowledge-sharing and networking activities to ensure access to the vast store of United Nations knowledge for delegates, permanent missions of Member States, the Secretariat, researchers and depository libraries worldwide; 72. Notes with appreciation the Personal Knowledge Management initiative to assist representatives of Member States and Secretariat staff in the use of information products and tools as a complement to the traditional training programmes; 73. Encourages the Secretariat to develop and implement cost-neutral measures to provide Member States with secure access to the information currently accessible only on the Intranet of the Secretariat (iSeek), taking note that Member States have access to iSeek only through the facilities of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library; VI. Outreach services 74. Acknowledges that the outreach services provided by the Department of Public Information continue to work towards promoting awareness of the role and work of the United Nations; 75. Welcomes the educational outreach activities of the Department of Public Information, through the United Nations Works programme and the Global Teaching and Learning Project, to reach educators and young people worldwide via a range of multimedia platforms, and encourages the United Nations Works programme to continue to develop further its partnerships with global media networks and celebrity advocates and the Global Teaching and Learning Project to further expand its activities to teachers and students in primary, intermediate and secondary schools; 76. Notes the importance of the continued implementation by the Department of Public Information of the ongoing programme for broadcasters and journalists from developing countries and countries with economies in transition, as mandated by the General Assembly, and requests the Department to consider how best to maximize the benefits derived from the programme by extending, inter alia, its duration and the number of its participants; 77. Welcomes the movement towards educational outreach and the orientation of the UN Chronicle, both print and online editions, and, to this end, encourages the UN Chronicle to continue to develop co-publishing partnerships, collaborative educational activities and events, including the "Unlearning Intolerance" seminar series, with civil society organizations and institutions of higher learning; 78. Takes note of the report on "UN Affairs" contained in the annex of the report of the Secretary-General, and requests the Department of Public Information to continue the publication of the UN Chronicle, with a view to improving it further within existing resources, to report to the thirty-second session of the Committee on Information on progress on this matter and to submit options for publishing UN Chronicle in all six official languages; 79. Also takes note of the efforts undertaken by the Department of Public Information in organizing exhibitions on important United Nations-related issues within existing mandates at United Nations Headquarters and at other United Nations offices as a useful tool for reaching out to the general public, reaffirms the important role that guided tours play as a means of reaching out to the general public, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that the guided tours provided at United Nations Headquarters and other United Nations duty stations are consistently available, in accordance with their income-generating nature, in particular in all the United Nations official languages; 80. Requests the Department of Public Information to strengthen its role as a focal point for two-way interaction with civil society relating to those priorities and concerns of the Organization identified by Member States; 81. Commends, in a spirit of cooperation, the United Nations Correspondents Association for its ongoing activities and for its Dag Hammarskjöld Memorial Scholarship Fund, which sponsors journalists from developing countries to come to the United Nations Headquarters and report on the activities during the General Assembly, and further encourages the international community to continue its financial support for the Fund; 82. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and contribution of United Nations Messengers of Peace, Goodwill Ambassadors and other advocates to promote the work of the United Nations and to enhance international public awareness of its priorities and concerns, and calls upon the Department of Public Information to continue to involve them in its communications and media strategies and outreach activities; VII. Final remarks 83. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-second session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the activities of the Department of Public Information and on the implementation of all recommendations and requests contained in the present resolution; 84. Also requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure that the level of services provided by the Department of Public Information is maintained throughout the period of the implementation of the capital master plan; 85. Takes note of the initiative taken by the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with the Department of Safety and Security and the Protocol and Liaison Service, during the general debate of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly, to issue special identification stickers to press officers of Member States to enable them to escort media covering the visits of high-level officials to restricted areas, and strongly urges the Secretary-General to improve this practice by acceding to the request by Member States to provide the needed number of additional passes to press officers of Member States to allow their access to all areas that are deemed restricted, in order to effectively and comprehensively report on high-level meetings that include officials of delegations of Member States; 86. Requests the Committee on Information to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session; 87. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fifth session the item entitled "Questions relating to information". Increase in the membership of the Committee on Information The General Assembly decides to increase the membership of the Committee on Information from 112 to 113 and to appoint Sierra Leone as a member of the Committee on Information. 