%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND TECHNOLOGY|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|EMISSION INVENTORIES|LAND USE|FORESTRY|WORK ORGANIZATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBSTA/1998/9 22 December 1998 Original: ENGLISH SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE ON ITS NINTH SESSION BUENOS AIRES, 3-10 NOVEMBER 1998 CONTENTS Paragraphs Page OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) 1 - 3 3 ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS (Agenda item 2) 4 -11 3 Adoption of the agenda 4 - 5 3 Organization of work 6 - 9 4 Election of officers 10 - 11 5 MATTERS REFERRED TO THE SBSTA BY THE PLENARY OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES (Agenda item 3) 12 - 46 6 Development and transfer of technologies (decision 13/CP.1) 12 - 17 6 GE.98-64582 English Page FCCC/SBSTA/1998/9 English Activities implemented jointly: review ofprogress under the pilot phase (decision 5/CP.1) 18 - 21 7 Research and systematic observation (Articles 4.1(g)and 5 of the Convention) 22 - 26 7 Scientific and methodological aspects of thethe proposal by Brazil 27 - 29 8 Land-use change and forestry 30 - 34 9 Article 6, Article 12 and Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol 35 - 38 10 Impact of single projects on emissions in the commitment period 39 - 42 11 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6: preparationsfor the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol 43 - 46 11 OTHER MATTERS (Agenda item 4) 47 - 53 12 ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 54 - 55 14 (Agenda item 5) CLOSURE OF THE SESSION 56 15 Annex List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its ninth session 16 I. OPENING OF THE SESSION (Agenda item 1) The ninth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the Centro de exposiciones del Gobierno de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, from 3 to10 November 1998. The Chairman of the SBSTA, Mr. Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia), opened the session on 3 November 1998. He welcomed all delegates and observers to the session and thanked the Government of Argentina for its generous hospitality as the host of the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP). The Chairman noted that the task of the SBSTA at its ninth session was clear; it should aim to seek consensus among Parties in order to prepare draft decisions for adoption by the COP. The Chairman recalled that the COP had referred a number of items to the SBSTA for its consideration, consisting of both ongoing work under the Convention and matters arising from the Kyoto Protocol. He emphasized that the SBSTA should aim to strike an appropriate balance between these two areas of work. The Chairman observed that the SBSTA would need to work intensively to prepare draft decisions for the COP in a timely manner on the many issues before it. He expressed confidence, however, that delegates would rise to this challenge and work together in a spirit of cooperation to advance the Convention process. Also at the 1st meeting, on 3 November, a statement was made by Dr. Robert Watson, Chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In his statement, Dr. Watson focussed on the IPCC work programme and provided information on the status of preparation of information requested by the SBSTA, including on the special report on land-use, land-use change and forestry. II. ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS (Agenda item 2) A. Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 3 November, the SBSTA considered the provisional agenda contained in document FCCC/CP/1998/1, annex I. Statements were made by representatives of two Parties. At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted the following agenda: Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda;Organization of work;Election of officers. Matters referred to the SBSTA by the plenary of the Conference of the Parties. Other matters. Adoption of the report. B. Organization of work (Agenda item 2 (b)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 3 November. It had before it the tentative schedule of meetings contained in document FCCC/CP/1998/1/Add.1, annex III. The Chairman noted that the schedule should be used as a guide to the organization of work of the SBSTA, but that flexibility would be required to respond to the pace of progress. The Chairman underscored that the SBSTA should complete its work by 10 November, to enable him to present recommended draft decisions to the COP on 11 November. The Chairman recalled that the COP, at its 2nd plenary meeting the previous day, had referred a number of items to the SBSTA for its consideration. Some of these had been allocated to both the SBSTA and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) for their joint consideration. The Chairman drew the attention of the SBSTA to the items before it, which were listed as follows: Development and transfer of technologies (decision 13/CP.1)(COP agenda item 4 (c)); Activities implemented jointly: review of progress under the pilot phase (decision 5/CP.1) (to be considered jointly with the SBI) (COP agenda item 4 (f)); Research and systematic observation (Articles 4.1(g) and 5 of the Convention)(COP agenda item 4 (h) (i)); Scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil(COP agenda item 4 (h) (ii); Land-use change and forestry (COP, agenda item 5 (a) (i)); Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol (to be considered jointly with the SBI)(COP agenda item 5 (a) (ii)); Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol (to be considered jointly with the SBI)(COP agenda item 5 (a) (iii)); Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol (to be considered jointly with the SBI)(COP agenda item 5 (a) (iv)); Impact of single projects on emissions in the commitment period(COP agenda item 5 (a) (v)); Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6: preparations for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol (to be considered jointly with the SBI); (COP agenda item 5 (b)). The Chairman recalled that, at the request of the COP, he had agreed to consult the Chairman of the SBI on whether COP agenda item 4 (e), an item referred to the SBI, should also be considered by the SBSTA. Finally, the Chairman recalled that the COP, at its 2nd plenary meeting the previous day, had adopted a decision on the attendance of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations at contact groups (decision 18/CP.4).Document FCCC/CP/1998/L.1/Rev.1. He noted that the SBSTA would adhere to this decision in its work. C. Election of officers (Agenda item 2 (c)) The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 3 November. At that meeting, the Chairman informed the SBSTA that he would be conducting consultations with the regional groups with a view to securing the election of the remaining SBSTA officers as soon as possible. At the 8th plenary meeting of the COP, on 14 November, the President announced that agreement had been reached on the nomination of the remaining officers of the subsidiary bodies. On the invitation of the President, the COP elected Mr. Lambert Gnapelet (Central African Republic) and Mr. Andrej Kranjc (Slovenia) as Vice-Chairman and Rapporteur of the SBSTA, respectively. III. MATTERS REFERRED TO THE SBSTA BY THE PLENARY OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES (Agenda item 3) A. Development and transfer of technologies (decision 13/CP.1) (Agenda item 4 (c) of the Conference of the Parties) 1. Proceedings The SBSTA considered this matter at its 5th, 9th and 10th meetings, on 4 and 10 November, respectively. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/CP/1998/6, FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.5 and Add.1-3 and FCCC/TP/1998/1. Statements were made by representatives of 20 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, another speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the African Group and another speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. The representative of a non-governmental organization also made a statement. At the 5th meeting, on 4 November, a statement was made by the Chairman of the Climate Technology Initiative. Also at its 5th meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this matter by way of a contact group, co-chaired by Ms. Renate Christ (European Community) and Ms. Wanna Tanunchaiwatana (Thailand). A special event of relevance to this agenda item, organized by the secretariat, was held on 11 November. This event, a round table on overcoming barriers to the development and transfer of technology, was chaired by the Chairman of the SBSTA. 2. Conclusions At its 9th meeting, on 10 November, the SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its fourth session (FCCC/CP/1998/L.16). For the full text of the decision by the COP, see decision 4/CP.4.For the full text of decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its fourth session, see document FCCC/CP/1998/16/Add.1. B. Activities implemented jointly: review of progress under the pilot phase (decision 5/CP.1) (Agenda item 4 (f) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered this matter at its 3rd and 11th meetings, which were held jointly with the SBI, on 3 and 10 November, respectively. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/CP/1998/2, FCCC/CP/1998/INF.3 and FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7 and Add.1-4. Statements were made by representatives of 37 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the African Group, one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and another speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At the joint meeting on 3 November, the Chairmen of the SBSTA and the SBI invited Ms. Cornelia Quennet-Thielen (Germany) to assist them in conducting informal consultations on this matter. At its 11th meeting, held jointly with the SBI on 10 November, the SBSTA decided to forward a draft decision to the COP for further consideration (see FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.2). C. Research and systematic observation (Articles 4.1(g) and 5 of the Convention) (Agenda item 4 (h) (i) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered this matter at its 5th, 7th and 8th meetings, on 4, 5 and 9 November, respectively. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/CP/1998/7 and FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.2. Statements were made by representatives of 30 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Caribbean Community and another speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At the 5th meeting, on 4 November, the comprehensive report on the adequacy of the global observing systems, prepared in response to decision 8/CP.3, was presented to the SBSTA by a representative of the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS). Statements were also made by representatives of the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). At the 5th meeting, on 4 November, the Chairman invited Ms. Susan Barrell (Australia) and Mr. Mohamed Mhita (United Republic of Tanzania) to assist him in conducting informalconsultations on this matter. At its 8th meeting, on 9 November, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA took note of the report on the adequacy of the global observing systems for climate, prepared and coordinated by the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) Secretariat in the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) on behalf of organizations participating in the Climate Agenda, contained in document FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.2; The SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision on research and systematic observation for adoption by the COP at its fourth session;Document FCCC/CP/1998/L.4. For the full text of the decision by the COP, see decision 14/CP.4. The SBSTA invited the agencies participating in the Climate Agenda, in consultation with the Convention secretariat, to assess options for synthesizing national plans and programmes for systematic observation of the climate system, for example by drawing on the expertise of GCOS and/or using the roster of experts, and to report to the SBSTA at its eleventh session; The SBSTA, pursuant to its recommendation to the COP that it should invite the agencies participating in the Climate Agenda, through the GCOS secretariat, to initiate an intergovernmental process for addressing the priorities for action to improve the global observing systems for climate in relation to the needs of the Convention and, in consultation with the Convention secretariat and other relevant organizations, to identify immediate, medium-term and long-term options for financial support, decided to consider these issues at its tenth session. D. Scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil (Agenda item 4 (h) (ii) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered this matter at its 2nd and 8th meetings, on 3 and 9 November, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of eight Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 8th meeting, on 9 November, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions:The SBSTA noted the information provided by Brazil on recent scientific activities and on the workshop to be organized regarding the proposal presented by Brazil in document FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.3. The SBSTA also noted the potential contribution of other relevant analyses to increase understanding of the methodological and scientific aspects of this proposal. The SBSTA invited the delegation of Brazil to inform the SBSTA at its tenth session of the results of its workshop and provide it with other relevant information; The SBSTA decided to further consider at its tenth session the scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil. E. Land-use change and forestry (Agenda item 5 (a) (i) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered this matter at its 1st and 8th meetings, on 3 and 9 November, respectively. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/CP/1998/INF.4, FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.1 and Add.1 and 2 and FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.9 and Add.1 and 2. Statements were made by representatives of 20 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States and another speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. The representative of a non-governmental organization also made a statement. At the 1st meeting, on 3 November, Mr. Paul Maclons (South Africa), co-Chair with Mr. Maciej Sadowski (Poland) of the first SBSTA workshop on land-use, land-use change and forestry (Rome, 24-25 September 1998), presented a report to the SBSTA on that workshop on behalf of the Co-chairs. Also at that meeting, a statement was made by a representative of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). In addition, the Chairman recalled the information provided by the Chairman of the IPCC at the start of that meeting on the status of preparation of the special report on land-use, land-use change and forestry. At the same meeting, the Chairman invited Mr. Paul Maclons and Mr. Maciej Sadowski to assist him in conducting informal consultations on this sub-item. The SBSTA took note of the information provided by the secretariat on land-use, land-use change and forestry in documents FCCC/CP/1998/INF.4, FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.1 and Add.1 and 2, and FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.9 and Add.1 and 2; The SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its fourth session;Document FCCC/CP/1998/L.5. For the full text of the decision by the COP, see decision 9/CP.4. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize a second SBSTA workshopprior to its tenth session, with participation by experts, including those engaged in the IPCC process, to focus on issues related to Article 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol, such as methodologies, uncertainties, research and data needs, and those identified in document FCCC/SBSTA/1998/INF.1 and in submissions from Parties, and to further elaborate on issues arising from the first workshop. It further requested the secretariat to report on the second workshop at the tenth session of the SBSTA; The SBSTA welcomed the offer of the United States of America to provide avenue for the second workshop; The SBSTA invited Parties to provide submissions by 1 February 1999 on other issues to be considered at the workshop. F. Article 6, Article 12 and Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 5 (a) (ii)-(iv) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered these matters at its 4th and 11th meetings, which were held jointly with the SBI, on 4 and 10 November, respectively. It had before it the following documents: FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7 and Add.1-4. Statements were made by representatives of 36 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the African Group, another speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, another speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States and another speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At the joint meeting on 4 November, the SBSTA and the SBI agreed to consider this issue by way of a joint contact group, co-chaired by Mr. Yvo de Boer (Netherlands) and Mr. Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil). At its 11th meeting, held jointly with the SBI on 10 November, the SBSTA decided to forward a draft decision by the Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies and a draft proposal by the co-Chairs of the joint contact group on mechanisms to the COP for further consideration (see FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.3). G. Impact of single projects on emissions in the commitment period (Agenda item 5 (a) (v) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered this matter at its 2nd and 9th meetings, on 3 and 10 November, respectively. Statements were made by representatives of 11 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States and another speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. At its 2nd meeting, on 3 November, the Chairman invited Mr. Ole Plougmann (Denmark), Vice-President of the COP at its fourth session, to assist him in conducting informal consultations on this matter. At its 9th meeting, on 10 November, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions: The SBSTA took note of the information provided by the delegation of Iceland, including information provided during the session in response to questions from three Parties, one acting on behalf of the European Community and its member States and one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (see FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.11 and Add.1). It invited Parties to consider the responses of the delegation of Iceland and to submit their analyses of that information to the secretariat by 1 March 1999 for compilation into a miscellaneous document; The SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision on impacts of single projects on emissions in the commitment period for adoption by the COP at its fourth session;Document FCCC/CP/1998/L.8. For the full text of the decision by the COP, see decision 16/CP.4. The SBSTA decided to give further consideration to the issue of impacts of single projects on emissions in the commitment period at its tenth session. H. Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6: preparations for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 5(b) of the Conference of the Parties) The SBSTA considered this matter at its 6th and 11th meetings, held jointly with the SBI, on 5 and 10 November, respectively. It had before it document FCCC/CP/1998/3. Statements were made by representatives of 26 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. The representatives of an observer State and two non-governmental organizations also made statements. At the joint meeting on 5 November, the Chairmen of the SBSTA and the SBI invited Mr. Espen Ronneberg (Marshall Islands), Vice-President of the COP at its fourth session, to assist them in conducting informal consultations on this matter. At its 11th meeting, held jointly with the SBI on 10 November, the SBSTA decided to forward an informal proposal by the Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies to the COP for further consideration (see FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.4). IV. OTHER MATTERS (Agenda item 4) The SBSTA considered this item at its 7th, 8th and 9th meetings, on 5, 8 and 9 November, respectively. At the 7th meeting, the Chairman noted that a matter requiring the attention of the SBSTA under this agenda item was the question of methodological issues relating to national communications from Annex I Parties. On this matter, the SBSTA had before it the following documents: FCCC/SBSTA/1998/7, FCCC/SBSTA/1998/8 and FCCC/SBSTA/1998/MISC.6 and Add.1-2. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the representative of the UNEP Collaborating Centre at Risøe, Denmark. Statements were made on this issue by representatives of four Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States. Also at the 7th meeting, a Party raised a further matter under this agenda item, concerning available technologies to limit and reduce emissions of hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons and the relationship between the Kyoto Protocol and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. Statements were made on this issue by representatives of 12 Parties. At the 9th meeting, on 10 November, the SBSTA adopted the following conclusions on the question of methodological issues relating to national communications from Annex I Parties: The SBSTA took note of the information provided by the secretariat on the preparation of a workshop to be held in Bonn, from 9 to 11 December 1998, with theparticipation of methodological experts from the roster, as well as from other relevant organizations, to develop proposals to resolve the methodological issues identified by Parties and by the secretariat while processing greenhouse gas inventories included in second national communications (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/7 and FCCC/SBSTA/1998/8). It decided that the options set by the secretariat and the initial information submitted by Parties could serve as a starting point for consideration at the workshop; The SBSTA also took note of the information on a second workshop, to be organized in response to a request by the SBSTA at its eighth session, in Bonn during March 1999, with the participation of representatives of Parties, to consider clarifications, additions and amendments to the revised guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Annex I Parties (decision 9/CP.2); The SBSTA noted with appreciation the report provided by UNEP entitled Mitigation and Adaptation Cost Assessment: Concepts, Methods and Appropriate Use,Published by: UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environment, Risøe National Laboratory, Denmark, 1998. Available on request from: UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environment, Risøe National Laboratory, P.O. Box 49, DK 4000 Roskilde, Denmark. as a contribution to the SBSTA work programme on methodologies approved at the sixth session of the SBSTA; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to include the following topics on the agenda of the workshop mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) above namely: methods, reporting and implications for the review process and procedures. It noted that one objective could be the identification of priorities for consideration by the IPCC task force on national GHG inventories. Consideration of review procedures includes the review of the inventory data submitted annually by Parties; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a report, which addresses clarifications, additions and amendments to the revised guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Annex I Parties (decision 9/CP.2), particularly the GHG inventory section, taking into consideration information from both workshops, for its tenth session; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare an initial report on elements of a review process related to GHG inventories, including in-depth reviews, based on the issues identified at both workshops and submissions from Parties, for consideration at its tenth session, with a view to forwarding relevant information to the SBI. The SBSTA invited Parties to submit information related to elements of a review process by 1 March 1999; The SBSTA invited Parties to submit initial information related to the options addressed in document FCCC/SBSTA/1998/8 by 1 December 1998 and additional information by 1 March 1999, for compilation into a miscellaneous document;The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a work programme on methodological issues related to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol to be considered at the tenth session, taking into account the activities of the IPCC and other relevant organizations, and in accordance with decision 8/CP.4;Document FCCC/CP/1998/L.19. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to provide information to the SBSTA, at its tenth session, on emissions resulting from fuel sold to ships or aircraft engaged in international transport, taking into account the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). It took note of the information provided by ICAO and requested the secretariat to invite representatives of ICAO and IMO to report on their work to the SBSTA at its tenth session; The SBSTA encouraged the IPCC-OECD-IEA Programme for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories to make available to the SBSTA as soon as possible the results of the expert meetings on national feedback on the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines and on managing uncertainty in national GHG inventories; The SBSTA requested the secretariat to consult with the IPCC through the Joint Working Group on a comprehensive joint plan for the inventory programme covering scientific and operational aspects and including a clear division of responsibilities between the IPCC and the Convention secretariat. At the 8th meeting, on 9 November, the SBSTA decided to recommend a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its fourth session, on the relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues related to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons.Document FCCC/CP/1998/L.7. For the full text of the decision by the COP, see decision 13/CP.4. An objection was raised by the representative of the Russian Federation to paragraph 3 of this decision, on procedural grounds. V. ADOPTION OF THE REPORT (Agenda item 5) At its 9th meeting, on 10 November, the SBSTA considered the draft report on its ninth session (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.8). A statement was made by the representative of a Party. At the same meeting, the SBSTA authorized the Chairman, with the assistance of the secretariat, to complete the report on the session.VI. CLOSURE OF THE SESSION At its 9th meeting, on 10 November, after thanking all participants for their contribution to the success of the session, and having expressed particular appreciation to the host Government of Argentina, the Chairman declared the session closed.Annex List of documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its ninth session FCCC/CP/1998/1 and Add.1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/CP/1998/2 Activities implemented jointly: Review of progress under the pilot phase (decision 5/CP.1). Second synthesis report on activities implemented jointly FCCC/CP/1998/3 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6: Preparations for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol. Note by the Chairmen of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/CP/1998/6 Progress report on transfer of technology: draft work programme FCCC/CP/1998/7 Report on the development of the observational networks of the climate system FCCC/CP/1998/INF.3 Activities implemented jointly: review of progress under the pilot phase (decision 5/CP.1). Update on activities implemented jointly FCCC/CP/1998/INF.4 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5. Report on the initial SBSTA workshop on land-use, land-use change and forestry related to the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.1 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5. Land-use and Add.1 and 2 change and forestry. Submissions by Parties FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.2 Comprehensive report on the development of the observational networks of the climate system FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.5 Development and transfer of technologies and Add.1-3 (decision 13/CP.1). Submissions by Parties FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5. and Add.1-4 Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol. Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol. Activities implemented jointly. Compilation of submissions by Parties FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.9 and Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5. Add.1 and 2 Land-use change and forestry. Submissions by Parties FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.11 and Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5. Impact of Add.1 single projects on emissions in the commitment period FCCC/CP/1998/L.1/Rev.1 Participation in contact groups FCCC/CP/1998/L.4 Research and systematic observation: recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice FCCC/CP/1998/L.5 Land-use change and forestry: recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice FCCC/CP/1998/L.7 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice: recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice FCCC/CP/1998/L.8 Impact of single projects on emissions in the commitment period: recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice FCCC/CP/1998/L.16 Development and transfer of technologies (decision 13/CP.1): recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice FCCC/CP/1998/L.19 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6: preparations for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.2 Activities implemented jointly: review of progress under the pilot phase (decision 5/CP.1): joint recommendation of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.3 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5: Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol. Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol. Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol: draft decision by the Chairmen of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation and draft proposal by the co-Chairs of the contact group on mechanisms FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.4 Matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6: preparations for the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol FCCC/SBSTA/1998/5 Development and transfer of technologies: Progress report FCCC/SBSTA/1998/6 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on the work of its eighth session, Bonn, 2-12 June 1998 FCCC/SBSTA/1998/7 Methodological issues identified while processing second national communications: greenhouse gas inventories FCCC/SBSTA/1998/8 Methodological issues related to greenhouse gas inventories: summary of issues and related options FCCC/SBSTA/1998/INF.1 Methodological issues. Issues related to land-use change and forestry FCCC/SBSTA/1998/MISC.6 Approaches to resolving methodological issues related and Add.1 and 2 to national communications from Annex I Parties. Additional submissions by Parties FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.7 Scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.8 Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its ninth session FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.1 Development and transfer of technologies. Draft decisions for the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties proposed by the Group of 77 and China FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.6 Research and systematic observation (Articles 4.1(g) and 5 of the Convention) FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.7 Land-use change and forestry FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.8 Relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system: issues related to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.9 Impact of single projects on emissions in the commitment period FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.10 Methodological issues FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.11 Development and transfer of technologies (decision 13/CP.1) FCCC/SB/1998/MISC.1 Preparatory work needed for the fourth session of the and Add.1/Rev.1; Add.2; Conference of the Parties on the items listed in Add.3/Rev.1 and Add.4-6 decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5. Submissions by Parties FCCC/SB/1998/CRP.3 Activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.3 Implementation of the Berlin Mandate. Proposals from Parties FCCC/TP/1998/1 Technical paper on terms of transfer of technology and know-how. Barriers and opportunities related to the transfer of technology 